Life Cycle Cash Flows of Ventures
Shumiao Ouyang, Jiaheng Yu, and Ravi Jagannathan
NBER Working Paper No. 27690
August 2020, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. G0,G00,G1,G10,G12,G19

                                           ABSTRACT

We estimate the collective return to all investors in ventures in our sample over their life cycle.
The net present value per dollar invested in the first round of funding (NPV) is significantly
positive on average but comes down after 1999. The structural break follows the passage of the
National Securities Markets Improvement Act (NSMIA). We develop a model to understand the
effects of increased supply of capital due to NSMIA. Consistent with the model's predictions,
after NSMIA, ventures have lower NPVs, founders give up a smaller fraction of ownership to
more experienced VCs, but they continue to add value.


Shumiao Ouyang                                    Ravi Jagannathan
Princeton University                              Kellogg Graduate School of Management
souyang@princeton.edu                             Northwestern University
                                                  2001 Sheridan Road
Jiaheng Yu                                        Leverone/Anderson Complex
MIT Sloan School of Management                    Evanston, IL 60208-2001
Cambridge, MA 02139                               and NBER
yujh@mit.edu                                      rjaganna@kellogg.northwestern.edu
                 Life Cycle Cash Flows of Ventures
               Shumiao Ouyang, Jiaheng Yu, Ravi Jagannathan


                                    September 6, 2020



                                           Abstract

         We estimate the collective return to all investors in ventures in our sample over
      their life cycle. The net present value per dollar invested in the first round of
      funding (NPV) is significantly positive on average but comes down after 1999. The
      structural break follows the passage of the National Securities Markets Improvement
      Act (NSMIA). We develop a model to understand the effects of increased supply
      of capital due to NSMIA. Consistent with the model's predictions, after NSMIA,
      ventures have lower NPVs, founders give up a smaller fraction of ownership to more
      experienced VCs, but they continue to add value.




    We thank Marco Sammon, Morten Sorensen, and participants at the 2020 AFA Meeting for their
valuable comments. We thank Honghao Wang and Tiange Ye for excellent research assistance. We
thank Lintong Li for sharing his codes for analyzing the patent data. Shumiao Ouyang thanks the
Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy & Finance (JRCPPF) for funding. All errors are our own.
   
    Princeton University. Email: souyang@princeton.edu.
   
    MIT Sloan School of Management. Email: yujh@mit.edu.
   
    Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University and NBER, ISB, SAIF. Email: rja-
ganna@kellogg.northwestern.edu.
1       Introduction
Most studies in the literature that examine the profitability of investing in ventures have
focused on the return to limited partners in venture capital (VC) funds.1 There are fewer
articles that examine the return to individual ventures. In part this is due to missing
venture-level valuation information for many of the funding rounds in publicly available
databases. To address this issue, Korteweg and Nagel (2016) use data from Sand Hill
Econometrics, which employs proprietary valuation models to fill in the missing valuations
data (Hall and Woodward, 2010).2 While the study greatly enhanced our understanding
of the return to investing in ventures, there remains one limitation ­ the proprietary
valuation models are not easily accessible to general investors and researchers.
    In this paper, we propose a measure of the return to investing in individual ventures
that addresses the data limitations in a different manner. Our measure is the net present
value (NPV) of each individual venture's life-cycle cash flows, which represents the return
to a hypothetical representative investor who participates in all the funding rounds of
the venture. When discounting the cash flows to calculate the NPV, we use the Pub-
lic Market Equivalent Method proposed by Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and Generalized
Public Market Equivalent Method proposed by Korteweg and Nagel (2016). We apply
this measure to a large sample of US-based ventures in the SDC VentureXpert database,
involving data on 16,396 ventures and 57,884 funding rounds between 1980 and 2018,
and analyze the returns to investing in ventures over their life cycles.
    The advantage of our approach is that it circumvents many of the funding-round-level
data limitations, including sparse valuation data, selection bias, and infrequent cash flows.
Also, it avoids the need for analyzing the allocations of cash flow rights in each funding
round between founders and outside investors delineated by the complex VC contracts.
The shortcoming is that we only examine the return to all investors as a group instead
of investors in any particular funding round.
    Funding round-level valuation data is sparse in the widely used VC databases in the
literature. 3 Our approach takes advantage of the fact that some funding-round variables
are better recorded than others ­ in our sample, although the post-money valuation data
is missing for 76.3% of the rounds, amount raised data is missing for less than 3% of
the rounds (See Figure 1). Our NPV measure relies mainly on the amount raised data.
    1
     See Rin, Hellmann, and Puri (2013) for a survey of venture capital research.
    2
     See the white paper of Sand Hill Econometrics at link.
   3
     See Lerner (1995), Kaplan, Strmberg, and Sensoy (2002), and Maats, Metrick, Yasuda, Hinkes, and
Vershovski (2011).


                                                 1
The only valuation data used in the measure is the post-money valuation in the first
round. 4 Although the sample of ventures with first-round post-money valuation data
may be different from the rest, it represents a large and economically important sample of
ventures. 5 We split the ventures into two samples ­ those with and without first-round
post-money valuation data. While we focus on the sample with first-round valuation data,
separately for those without, we also provide their NPVs based on imputed valuations
using a statistical model.
    Sparsity of round-level valuation data is accompanied by a selection bias issue. The
selection bias ­ the fact that ventures performing better are more likely to report their
valuations, needs to be corrected in any consistent estimation of venture's risk and return.
On that front, Cochrane (2005) conjectures a selection function for venture valuation
disclosure, under the assumption that the probability of obtaining new financing smoothly
increases with the value of the venture, and uses the estimated selection function to
correct for the bias. Korteweg and Sorensen (2010) build a dynamic selection model, and
estimate the parameters as well as the unobserved valuations using Bayesian methods.
Our approach also addresses the selection bias issue, but without using a selection model.
Our NPV measure only requires the post-money valuation data of the first round. It is
not subject to selection bias in the later rounds when we focus on the sample of ventures
with the first-round post-money valuation data.
    Since cash flows are random and occur infrequently at random unknown times in
the future, when evaluating the returns, we cannot directly apply the standard linear
multi-factor based methods for risk adjustments such as the CAPM. We use both the
Public Market Equivalent (PME) method (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005) and the Generalized
Public Market Equivalent (GPME) method (Korteweg and Nagel, 2016) to compute the
risk-adjusted discount rate and overcome this issue. The PME method matches the VC
investments at each time period to an investment in the publicly traded market index
proxy portfolio, and use the realized market return to risk adjust the VC investment
return. 6 The GPME method nests PME, and ensures the modeled SDF can accurately
reflect risk-free rates and returns of public equity markets.
    Gornall and Strebulaev (2017) find that cash flow rights are allocated differently to
   4
      An example in Appendix A.2 shows how a small amount of missing valuation data could severely
affect the calculation of round-to-round return and round-to-exit return, but not our NPV measure.
    5
      24.3% of the first rounds have post-money valuation data, and they account for about 29.3% of the
total amount raised in the first rounds.
    6
      Sorensen and Jagannathan (2015) point out that using the PME is equivalent to discounting using
the stochastic discount factor (SDF) corresponding to the dynamic Rubinstein CAPM for a particular
choice of the wealth portfolio of the evaluator.


                                                  2
shares issued in different stages of the venture's life cycle. Ignoring this may lead to sig-
nificant biases in round-to-round and round-to-exit returns. Besides, Ewens, Gorbenko,
and Korteweg (2018a) find that the split of value between founders and VCs are usually
complex, heterogeneous, and generally not observable. Both findings imply that measur-
ing the return to a particular group of investors requires information on the financing
contract's terms, which is typically unavailable in common VC databases. Our NPV
measure represents the return to all the equity holders taken together as a group, includ-
ing the founders, thus avoids using information on the contracting details. Of course,
the obvious shortcoming is that it cannot measure the return to any specific group of
investors. However, the measure still offers a useful metric on venture returns, and as we
will see, reveals interesting patterns in the data.
    We apply the NPV measure to a large sample of US-based ventures in the SDC Ven-
tureXpert database. The NPV measure, as well as most other venture return measures,
requires data on the venture's exit events (whether through an IPO or an acquisition or
through bankruptcy) and the corresponding exit values. In order to improve the data cov-
erage on the exit events, we cross-checked the exit events of ventures using multiple data
sources like PitchBook, Bloomberg, NASDAQ, Crunchbase and other Internet sources.
We find that a large number of ventures with no recorded exit events in VentureXpert
experienced bankruptcies or were acquired according to the other data sources. Taking
into account these exit events improves the accuracy of our measure.
    We document several interesting patterns in the data. When we consider the portfolio
of all ventures that had their first funding round in a given calendar quarter, we find large
variation in the time to break-even. In particular, for the portfolio of ventures that had
their first funding round in a given quarter between 1992 and 2006, it takes between 5
to 60 quarters for the present value of cash flows to become positive, depending on the
quarter of the first round.7 Moreover, we find a structural break in the time series of
aggregate normalized NPVs ­ i.e., the NPV of all ventures that had their first rounds
in a given quarter normalized by that quarter's aggregate first-round amount raised, in
the second quarter of 1999. After the break, the aggregate normalized NPV drops from
significantly positive on average to weakly positive on average.
    The structural break follows the passage of the National Securities Markets Improve-
ment Act (NSMIA), which would have increased the supply of capital to ventures, ac-
   7
     Also, a hypothetical investor holding all ventures, regardless of the first funding round time, takes
approximately 5 years for the present value of cash flows to become positive. This is consistent with the
stylized facts in Ramsinghani (2014).



                                                    3
cording to a careful examination of the act's impact by Ewens and Farre-Mensa (2019).
They find that after NSMIA, the founders are using their increased bargaining power
vis-`
    a-vis investors to stay private longer. To understand the effects of NSMIA on venture
valuations, and the VC's role in a venture's success, we develop a model characterizing
the matching process of ventures and VCs and the how their relative bargaining power
affects the ownership given to the VCs. The model suggests that expected returns of
investing in ventures will decrease after the increased supply of capital. And consistent
with the model's predictions, we find that after the structural break in 1999, ventures
have lower NPVs ­ i.e., a lower expected return since we compute NPV per dollar in-
vested keeping the discount rate the same, and that the fraction of ownership founders
give up in the first round to experienced VCs relative to other VCs becomes smaller.
    We find that experienced VCs in general add value to the ventures in which they
participate. 8 Specifically, first round participation by more experienced VCs ­ i.e., those
who have invested in more ventures in the past, signals better performance of the venture
as measured by its NPV as well as the likelihood of successful exit. Such a relationship,
significantly weakens after the structural break in 1999 when performance is measured
by venture NPV, but remains similar when measured by the likelihood of successful exit.
Using quantile regressions, we find that the relationship between VC experience and the
venture's performance is especially strong for ventures with high realized NPVs. Finally,
we find that experienced VCs tend to invest in innovative ventures ­ ventures that have
more patent grants over their life cycle ­ in the first funding round both before and after
the structural break.

       Related Literature

   The literature on measuring risk adjusted returns to investing in ventures is large.
Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and Korteweg and Nagel (2016) develop methods for risk-
adjusting venture capital cash flows and returns based on the stochastic discount factor
framework. Cochrane (2005) and Korteweg and Sorensen (2010) study the selection bias
and information incompleteness in venture's disclosure. Driessen, Lin, and Phalippou
(2011) propose a modified internal rate of return method. Gupta, Stern, and Nieuwer-
burgh (2019) propose a "strip-by-strip" method for risk adjustment. Ang, Chen, Goetz-
mann, and Phalippou (2018) develop a Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo method for
   8
    VCs provide valuable services to investors in their funds. They identify the set of ventures that have
potential, monitor their performance over time, and participate in the high level management of the
ventures. Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend (2016) find that VC's involvement with their ventures leads
to an increase in both innovation and the likelihood of a successful exit.

                                                    4
private equity (PE) returns using cash flows accruing to limited partners and factor re-
turns from public capital markets. We build on Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and Korteweg
and Nagel (2016) to account for data limitations when using venture-level data. Our
NPV measure of venture-level returns to all the equity holders offers a computationally
simpler alternative to addressing the data limitations.
    Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003) find a return premium to investing in PE relative
to the public equity market, which potentially compensates for the illiquidity of PE
investments.9 Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2015) find that the performance of VC
funds varies over time, and VC funds that started when the venture sector received high
capital inflows had lower performance. Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2014a) show
that VC funds outperformed public equities in the 1990s, but under-performed in the
2000s. Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2013) find that VC-backed startups receiving initial
investment in hot markets are more likely to go bankrupt. Our NPV measure indicates
there is a risk-adjusted return premium to investing in ventures before the structural
break in 1999, which comes down afterwards, generally consistent with these findings in
the literature.
    There is some consensus in the literature that VC experience is related to the per-
formance of ventures (Sorensen, 2007).10 When considering the time variation in such a
relationship, Harris, Jenkinson, Kaplan, and Stucke (2014b) find evidence on the persis-
tence of VC fund performance both pre- and post-2000. Our finding that VC experience
matters before the structural break in 1999 but matters less afterwards, contributes to
this literature.
    Some caveats about our NPV measure should be mentioned. First, since we do not
take into account employee stocks and stock option grants, our measure of the return
to investors and founders may have an upward bias. Second, focusing on the subsample
of the ventures with non-missing first-round post-money valuations may also introduce a
selection bias ­ these ventures may have systematically better performance and growth op-
portunity. However, early-stage valuations of ventures are very unreliable (Kerr, Nanda,
and Rhodes-Kropf, 2014; Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf, 2018b).11 The first-round
valuation may not convey much information about the growth opportunity and overall
   9
     In contrast, Moskowitz and Vissing-Jrgensen (2002) find that the return to investing in PE is not
higher relative to the public equity.
  10
     Further, the age (Gompers, 1996; Ramsinghani, 2014) , network connections (Hochberg, Ljungqvist,
and Lu, 2007; Du and Hellmann, 2019), and reputation (Nahata, 2008; Hsu, 2004) of VCs, as well as
the active involvement of VCs (Bottazzi, Da Rin, and Hellmann, 2008; Bernstein et al., 2016; Akcigit,
Dinlersoz, Greenwood, and Penciakova, 2019) also matter for venture performance.
  11
     This is why the "spray and pray" investment approach is common among VCs in the early stages.


                                                  5
valuation of a venture. Hence we argue that this selection bias may be small, and im-
portantly, our measure is not subject to selection bias in any later rounds. Furthermore,
there is no forward-looking bias in our approach ­ the strategy of investing in the ventures
with non-missing first-round valuation is realizable for investors with access to ventures,
without the need of any future information. Finally, we assume that all convertible pre-
ferred shares used in the funding rounds automatically convert upon exit. While this is
generally true, there may be exceptions, and to that extent out measure has a downward
bias. Further, we consider ventures that had their first funding rounds in 2006 or earlier,
in order to capture the cash flows over the entire life cycle of ventures ­ most ventures
take as long as 12 years to exit. It is possible that cash flow characteristics have changed
for latter ventures.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the data we use
for analysis. Section 3 explains our NPV measure of the return to investing in ventures
and discusses the findings. Section 4 presents the model, the hypotheses and their tests.
Section 5 concludes.


2       Data
2.1       Data Sources and Data Cleaning
Our sample comes from the universe of ventures in VentureXpert, which is the standard
database for many venture capital studies. We augment VentureXpert with data on
funding rounds and exit events from multiple sources. Our data ends in 2018, and we
limit attention to ventures that had their first funding rounds before 2006.12
    We first collect data on venture funding rounds from VentureXpert that includes the
time, amount raised, and post money valuation of each funding round. Then, we collect
data on the exit events of these ventures. Based on information in VentureXpert, we
classify a venture's exit event as IPO, MA, or bankruptcy. Ventures whose VentureXpert
status is "Went Public" are classified as exiting through an IPO. Those whose VentureX-
pert status is "LBO", "Merger", "Acquisition" or "Pending Acquisition" are classified as
exiting through an MA. Those whose VentureXpert status is "Defunct", "Bankruptcy ­
Chapter 7" or "Bankruptcy ­ Chapter 11" are classified as exiting through a bankruptcy.
Finally, we classify the final outcome of a venture having none of these exit events as
Alive. For the ventures that exited through an IPO or MA, we further collect the data
 12
      This allows for a minimum life cycle length of 12 years.


                                                     6
on their exits from SDC Merger and Acquisition and SDC Global New Issues databases.
    Some of the ventures in VentureXpert either have no recorded exit events or have exit
events but not the associated exit values. We therefore cross-checked the exit events of
those ventures using other data sources, in order to enhance the data coverage on venture
exits. Specifically, for 10,533 US-based ventures that received the first funding round
between 1992 and 2006, and did not experience bankruptcy according to VentureXpert,
we cross-checked their exit events with data from PitchBook, Bloomberg, NASDAQ,
Crunchbase and other internet sources. As shown in Table 1, of the 2,026 ventures that
are shown as being alive in VentureXpert, 604 exited through bankruptcy, 14 through
IPO, and 455 through MA according to other sources.13 Only 953 remained active.
    After identifying the exit events of the ventures, we combine data from various sources
to get the exit values of the ventures. As shown in Table 2, data from the other sources
improved the coverage of exit values. For MAs, in our cross-checked sample of ventures,
4,569 ventures exited through MA according to VentureXpert, out of which 2,194 have
pre-MA valuation data recorded in the SDC databases, and the other data sources are
able to provide valuation data for another 396 ventures. Besides, there are 242 ventures
whose pre-MA valuations recorded in the SDC databases conflict with those in other
data sources14 . For these cases, we adopted the data that appears more reliable. Finally,
thanks to the other data sources, we identify 501 additional venture exits through MAs,
out of which 91 have valuation data.
    For IPOs, we are particularly mindful of the data quality of the pre-IPO valuations.
We note that there are cases where SDC data can be incorrect. For example, the pre-IPO
market value of Targanta Therapeutics Corp is reported as 0.3 million dollars, however
from the prospectus we know that the pre-IPO market value is about 152 million dollars.15
    To ensure the data is correct, we calculate three measures of the pre-IPO market value
and cross-validate them. The first measure is the product of pre-IPO shares outstanding
and the IPO offering price. The second measure is the difference between post-IPO
market value and the IPO proceeds. The third measure is the pre-IPO market value as
reported in SDC database. If large discrepancy is observed across these three measures,
we manually check the prospectus and use the prospectus value. Overall, we find the
first measure to be most reliable. In calculating these three measures, we closely examine
  13
     For the 14 exits through IPOs, we list the ventures' names, IPO exchanges, IPO dates and CRSP
PERMCO in Table IA.1 in the Internet Appendix.
  14
     We regard the exit values in SDC as conflicting with other sources if they differ by more than 5%
  15
     According to the prospectus, there were 15.2 million pre-IPO shares and its offering price was $10
per share.


                                                  7
other detailed data issues. First, shares outstanding data in SDC might be missing for
some NASDAQ IPOs, for which we use the shares outstanding on the first trading day
in CRSP for calculation. Second, in some foreign IPOs the offering prices are in foreign
currencies instead of US dollars, for which we either avoid using offering price, or use the
ratio of proceeds and offering shares to back out the price in dollars.
    Utilizing other data sources to cross-check and supplement the standard SDC data
gives us a more comprehensive and accurate coverage of the ventures' exit events. This
strengthens our measure of venture investment returns, which heavily relies on the valu-
ations of ventures at exit events.


2.2     Sample Selection
As mentioned earlier, we restrict our sample to the US-based ventures that received the
first funding round before 2006. There are two reasons for this sample restriction. First,
our data ends in 2018, so we are not yet able to observe the full life cycle of ventures that
started recently. Looking at the observed total number of funding rounds of ventures
receiving their first rounds in different years, as shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2, we see
that the data censorship problem becomes severe for ventures that had their first rounds
after 2006. Second, for the majority of ventures that went to successful exits ­ IPOs and
MAs, the time between the first round to the exit falls within 10 years.16 Restricting to
the sample that had the first round before 2006, if a venture has not had a successful
exit as observed by 2018, it most likely never will. Such a venture may even already be
defunct, just with its status not updated in the database. We assume the exit value of
such ventures to be zero. Without the sample restriction, gauging the exit value of such
a venture will be difficult.
    We further separate the ventures into two groups. Group A includes ventures that
have post-money valuation data for the first funding round. Group B includes the rest.
For Group B ventures, we exclude the initial funding rounds whose records are not in-
formative using a filtering procedure. Specifically, from the beginning of the funding
process, we sequentially drop the funding rounds with neither amount raised nor post-
money valuation data, until a funding round that has either variable recorded. Then,
we reclassify that funding round as the venture's first funding round, and the subsequent
rounds as the second, third, and so on. Table 3 shows the effect of the filtering procedure.
  16
     The time from the first funding round to exit is within 10 years for 92.0% of the ventures that went
to IPO and 87.6% of those that went to MA.



                                                   8
We see that initially Group A has 3,885 ventures and Group B has 13,357 ventures, and
that 846 (3.33%) of the Group B ventures were effectively dropped by the filtering proce-
dure.17 Due to the concerns that Group A and Group B ventures have distinct natures,
we conduct analysis on them separately.


2.3     Imputation of Missing Values
We utilize statistical models described in Appendix A.1 to impute the missing values
in the variables essential to our analysis ­ including first-round ownership given up, 18
amount raised in the funding rounds, pre-IPO valuations and pre-MA valuations, based
on observable information. Table 4 summarizes the data that were missing and imputed.
We see that imputed values are mainly for pre-MA valuations and first-round ownership
given up. For Group A ventures, we imputed only 0.4% of the first-round ownership data,
but for Group B ventures, we imputed 99.1% of the data. For both groups of ventures, we
imputed around 50% of the pre-MA valuation data. The imputed first-round ownership
given-up is similar to the actual data, but the imputed pre-MA valuations are on average
lower than the actual valuations.19
    To measure the fitness of an imputation model, we rely on the out-of-sample R2 ,
in addition to the standard in-sample R2 . We use the ten-fold cross-validation method
to calculate the out-of-sample R2 . First, we randomly partition the sample that enters
the regression model, into ten equal-sized sub-samples. Second, we iterate over each
one of the ten subsamples, while in each iteration, we calculate the fitted values for the
subsample from the model estimated by the rest nine subsamples, and record the R2 of
the fitted values. After ten iterations, we compute the average of these out-of-sample R2 's
for the subsamples. Finally, we repeat the random sample partition and out-of-sample
calculation procedure ten times, and report the average as the out-of-sample R2 of the
overall model, as cross-validation Pseudo-R2 .
    For the first-round ownership given up data, the imputation uses logit models. Specif-
ically, we estimate a logit model relating the ownership given up in each round to a rich
set of variables, where we cumulatively add the log amount raised in the round and its
  17
      This introduces a (potentially small) look ahead bias for Group B, since we excluded some ventures
based on future information.
   18
      First-round ownership given up measures the ownership given up by the venture founders to the first
rounds investors, and is calculated as the ratio of first-round amount raised to the first-round post-money
valuation.
   19
      This may suggest that those venture MAs with no valuation records tend to have lower valuations,
if our imputation model is correct.


                                                    9
square, log cumulative amount raised starting from the first round, and controlling for
fixed effects on industry, funding stage, the number of rounds that have occurred, time
and the number of investors. Table IA.2 in the Internet Appendix shows that the most
saturated model results in the highest cross-validation Pseudo-R2 of 0.484, which is what
we adopt for the imputation.
    For the amount raised data, the imputation uses linear regression models. For each
round separately, we first estimate the relationship between the amount raised and the
number of investors who participated, the amount raised in the previous round, as well
as industry fixed effects, funding stage fixed effects and time fixed effects. 20 There are
few funding rounds after the ninth round and they are all in late stages, so we treat them
all together as a group. For them, instead of relating the amount raised in a round to the
previous round's, we relate it to the ninth round's. The fitted values from the model are
the imputed values. Table IA.3 in the Internet Appendix shows the estimation results of
the imputation models.
    For the pre-IPO and pre-MA valuations, the imputation uses linear regression models.
Specifically, we estimate the relationship between the pre-MA or pre-IPO valuation, and
a rich set of observables including extrapolated valuations21 , days from last available
post-money valuation to the exit event, the interaction of these two, final-round raised
amount, days from final round to the exit event, NASDAQ return from final round to
the exit event, together with fixed effects for industry, funding stage, number of rounds
received, and exit time. Table IA.4 and Table IA.5 in the Internet Appendix report the
estimation results of the imputation models.


2.4     Descriptive Findings
The upper panel of Figure 3 plots the per-round amount raised by the ventures over time.
Before 2000, there is an upward trend in the average amount raised per-round by ventures.
This number peaked at $14.4 million in 2000. After 2000, it first dropped significantly
and then stabilized between $7.7 million and $9.8 million until 2006, and trended upward
to as high as $19.2 million after 2006. The uptrend after 2006 is to be expected since the
  20
      For the first round, there is no previous round, so the model relates the amount raised to a set of
fixed effects.
   21
      Extrapolated valuation is based on last available post-money valuation and NASDAQ stock return. It
equals the last available post-money valuation multiplied by the cumulative NASDAQ stock return from
that last valuation date to venture's exit event. We use NASDAQ returns as the benchmark because
NASDAQ firms are generally smaller and resemble the risk profile of the ventures better (Cochrane,
2005).


                                                   10
rounds after 2006 are more likely to be later rounds and hence larger, because we only
include ventures that had the first rounds before 2006. Also, the plotted percentiles of
the per-round amount raised shows a wide dispersion among ventures. The bottom panel
of the figure instead plots the amount raised in the ventures' first funding rounds over
time. Before 2000, there is an upward trend in the average first-round amount raised
by ventures. The number peaked at $8.9 million in 2000. After 2000, this number first
dropped and remained stable.
    Figure 4 plots the fraction of ownership given up in the first round over time. The
ownership given up data used here includes the imputed values. We see that on average
the venture founders give up 30% of the ownership to investors in the first funding round.
    Ventures in our data eventually reach one of the four final outcomes: IPO, merger
and acquisition, bankruptcy, or alive. 22 Figure 5 decomposes the final outcomes by the
ventures' first-round years. We see that the fraction of ventures that eventually went to
IPO decreases until 2000, and remains stable at around 6% afterwards. The fraction of
ventures that eventually went to MA increases before 2000 and remains relatively stable
at around 45% afterwards. The fraction of ventures that eventually declared bankruptcy
remains stable at around 8% over time.
    After receiving a funding round, one of the five following events may ensue: receive
another funding round, IPO, MA, bankruptcy, or no further events are observed. Figure 6
decomposes the "next events" by the funding round number. We see that after receiving
the first or second round, most ventures continue to receive additional funding rounds
and the probability of directly going to IPO, MA or bankruptcy is low. After about five
rounds, the probability of a venture subsequently going to IPO, MA or bankruptcy peaks.


3       Net Present Value of Ventures' Life Cycle Cash
        Flows
3.1       Methodology for Computing Present Values
In this section we describe our net present value (NPV) approach to measuring the return
to investing in ventures. The NPV measure is based on the cash flows that the venture
received from all the equity investors in the various funding rounds taken together as a
group, and the cash flow or value received by them upon the venture's exit. Essentially
 22
      We classified the ventures with no observed outcomes as alive.



                                                    11
it represents the return to a hypothetical investor who participates in all the funding
rounds of a venture and provides all the financing cash flows. Appendix A.2 offers an
example of the NPV measure calculation for a hypothetical venture.
    The amount raised in each funding round is the cash flow that the venture receives
from the outside investors. We hereafter use the term VCs to denote all the outside
investors. Before the VCs' investments, the founders of the venture usually have already
invested various resources, including their effort and financial resources. Consequently,
the founders are also equity holders and receive a fraction of the venture's value at its
exit. We use the pre-money valuation of a venture in the first round as a proxy for the
total investment made by the founders.23 To summarize, the pre-money valuation in the
first round and the amount raised in all the rounds are the cash flows received by the
venture.
    The cash flow received by equity holders upon the venture's exit is measured by its
equity value. If a venture exits through an MA, then the equity value at exit is computed
using the fraction of equity transacted and the transaction value. If the venture exits
through an IPO, then the equity value at exit is the pre-IPO equity value. For the other
exit events, we regard the exit equity value as zero.24
    To calculate the present value of the cash flows of ventures, we need to appropriately
adjust for the risk of the cash flows. For that purpose, we use the Generalized Public
Market Equivalent (GPME) method developed by Korteweg and Nagel (2016) and the
Public Market Equivalent (PME) method (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005).
    The GPME and PME involve computing the realized present value at time 0 of a
cash flow, Ct , that occurs at a random time t in the future as Mt Ct , where Mt is the
stochastic discount factor for bringing time t cash flows to time 0. In the case of the
PME, Mt equals the inverse of the time t value of a dollar invested at time 0 in the
                                              1
market portfolio of all stocks, i.e., (1+Rm1 )... (1+Rmt )
                                                           , where Rms is the market portfolio's
rate of return during time period s. It answers the question, how much would you have
to invest in the market portfolio at time 0 to get Ct at time t. The net present value of
all the cash flows becomes,

                                                   T -1
                                 N P V = E0 [-            Mt C t + MT C T ]                             (1)
                                                   t=0

  23
     For Group B ventures where first-round post money valuation is not available, we utilize the imputed
ownership given up in the first round (by the founders) to calculate the pre-money valuation.
  24
     Note that this may lead to a conservative measure of the returns to equity holders, although successful
exits are very unlikely if the time from the first round exceeds 10 years.


                                                    12
    where E0 [.] denotes the expected value at time 0. Note that all cash flows except
the exit value CT are outflows. C0 is first-round post-money valuation, which is the sum
of the first-round pre-money valuation and first-round amount raised, and C1 ,... CT -1
are the cash contributions by equity holders in subsequent funding rounds. The case of
no discounting corresponds to Mt = 1, and the NPV is just the terminal value minus
the cash flows at all funding rounds including what the founder brought into the first
founding round.
    In the GPME, the stochastic discount factor (SDF) is specified as: 25

                                         Mt = exp(at - brm,t )                                           (2)

   where Mt is the stochastic discount factor, t is the time of a funding round or exit
time, with the first round of the venture taking place at time t = 0, a and b parameters
that are positive constants, and rm,t is the log cumulative return on the publicly traded
equity market portfolio since the first round. 26
   We use the parameter values, a = 0.033, and b = 1.444, which are the values estimated
by Korteweg and Nagel (2016) using round to round returns on ventures.27
   In the following sections, we sometimes take an additional step to normalize the net
present value (NPV) by the first-round post-money valuation, i.e., the amount raised by
outside equity investors in the first round plus the value brought in by the founder ­
corresponding to C0 in the NPV formula given in equation 1. The normalized NPV is
given by:

                                                           T -1
                                                                  Mt C t MT C T
                         N ormalized N P V = E0 [-                      +       ]                        (3)
                                                           t=0
                                                                   C0     C0

   We refer to it as the normalized NPV measure. It measures the net present value
per dollar invested in the first round of funding (NPV). Under the null hypothesis that
venture does not earn higher risk premium, N ormalized N P V = 0. Note that we do not
observe N ormalized N P V since we do not observe E0 [.]. We therefore characterize the
  25
     This comes from Equation (1) in Korteweg and Nagel (2016).
  26
     To simplify the calculation, we treat the cash flows after 15 years from the first round as occurring in
the 15th year. Few ventures still receive funding or successfully exit after 15 years from the first round.
  27
     See Table 6 of Korteweg and Nagel (2016). We also re-estimated the SDF parameters based on
round-to-round returns using our sample of data. All the results are qualitatively similar under the
re-estimated parameters.




                                                     13
properties of the time series of realized value of:

                                                           T -1
                                                                  Mt Ct MT CT
                    Realized N ormalized N P V = -                     +      .                    (4)
                                                            t=0
                                                                   C0    C0

Average Realized N ormalized N P V will be a reasonable proxy for N ormalized N P V .
For notational convenience, we will omit `Realized' and referred to Realized N ormalized N P V
as N ormalized N P V whenever it does not lead to any confusion.


3.2     Characteristics of Life Cycle Cash Flows of Ventures
3.2.1    Portfolio of All Ventures

To examine the cash flows over the life cycle of the ventures, we construct the cumulative
discounted cash flows of each individual venture within a period of time from the first
round, and then aggregate across all the ventures. To illustrate how the present value of
cash flows change over the venture's life cycle, Figure 7 plots the aggregate cumulative
cash inflows, cash outflows and net cash inflows (for investors) against the time from the
first funding round. There are two observations. First, the cash outflows from investors
(hence inflows to the venture) is on average larger during the initial funding stages.
Around 70% of the total funding is invested within 8 quarters from the first round.
Second, in the aggregate, investors have to wait 10 to 25 quarters or more from the first
funding round date for the NPV of cash flows from the ventures to become positive (i.e.
ex post or realized break-even), depending on the discounting method used. That is, the
VC investments are "locked" in the ventures for a significantly long time. 28
    The figure first examines this break-even time in the sample of Group A ventures, those
with first-round post-money valuation data. It also examines the break-even time when
pooling Group A ventures and Group B ventures together ­ henceforth, the Group AB
sample. We find that the break-even time of Group A ventures is about 10-15 quarters,
shorter than the break-even time of 20-25 quarters for Group AB ventures, consistent
with that ventures releasing the valuation information are likely better. The figure also
presents the present value of cumulative cash flows under three discounting specifications,
NoDisc, PME and GPMEround. The shapes of average cumulative cash flows curve and
  28
    Other metrics also suggest the illiquidity of venture investments. On average, ventures that exit
through an IPO take 5.01 years and require 5.67 additional dollars per first round dollar. The corre-
sponding numbers are 6.65 and 4.03 for ventures that exit through a merger or an acquisition; 11.27 and
2.15 for ventures that exit through bankruptcy or do not exit at all even after 12 years.



                                                  14
hence the break-even times are robust across the three specifications.

3.2.2    Portfolio of Ventures by First Round's Time

Based on the realized NPV measure, i.e., the present value of the life-cycle cash flows,
we examine how the return to investing in ventures changes over time. In particular, we
construct a portfolio of ventures that had the first rounds at the same time, and study
how the time to realized break-even for that portfolio changes as the first round's time
changes.
    First, for each venture, we discount its cash flows, and construct the cumulative
discounted cash flows for each individual venture over its life cycle.29 Then for each
quarter from 1992Q1 to 2006Q4, we aggregate the cumulative discounted cash flows of
the ventures that had the first funding round in that quarter, and then calculate the
break-even time of a hypothetical investor who invests in all the ventures that received
the first funding round in that quarter.
    Figure 8 shows the time series of the break-even time. We see that the break-even
time varies from 5 quarters to 60 quarters, depending substantially on the time of the first
round. When the investor invests in the ventures that receive the first funding rounds
after 1999Q2 rather than before, the break-even time is substantially longer .
    In Figure 9, for each quarter from 1992Q1 to 2006Q4, we plot the present value (PV)
of the cash inflows and cash outflows of the portfolio of ventures that had the first rounds
in that quarter, as well as the net present value (NPV) normalized by the aggregate first-
round post-money valuation in that quarter. This normalized NPV measures the net
present value per dollar invested in the first round of funding (NPV). We see that it is
significantly positive on average and higher before 1999. A further statistical examination
indicates there is a structural break in the NPVs ­ they are significantly lower after 1999,
which is the main theme of the next section.
    In sum, utilizing our NPV measure of the return to investing in individual ventures,
we document that investing in ventures is risky (the NPV of ventures is volatile even in
the aggregate) and illiquid (the NPV's break-even time is relatively long), and most of the
return comes from a few successful ventures (more than 64% of ventures have negative
normalized NPV 30 ), consistent with related findings in the literature.
  29
     When discounting the cash flows, the cash flows that occurred after 15 years from the first funding
round are considered to occur exactly at the 15th year from the first funding round.
  30
     In comparison, Bessembinder (2017) finds that 70.6% of stocks that first appeared in the CRSP
database during 1997-2006 period have a buy-and-hold return that is less than holding value-weighted



                                                  15
    The average realized net present value per dollar invested in the first round of funding
(NPV) is 1.65 in our sample for Group A firms and 1.56 for Group A and B firms
taken together. These values are statistically different from zero.31 For every dollar of
investment in the first round, on average 3.75 dollars was invested in the rounds that
followed till exit.


4     Effect of Increased Supply of Funds to Ventures
A casual examination of the time series plot of the realized normalized NPVs suggest
that there is a structural break around 1999 (see Figure 9). The average normalized
NPV is larger and significantly positive with a mean of 2.46 in the subsample before
1999. The sample mean is lower in the subsample following 1999, with a mean of 0.72. 32
Later, we confirm the structural break in 1999 using statistical methods. The structural
break follows the passage of the National Securities Markets Improvement Act (NSMIA).
Ewens and Farre-Mensa (2019) argue that NSMIA increased the supply of capital to
the ventures, leading private firms to stay private for a longer period of time. In this
section, we study whether the increased capital supply led by NSMIA can rationalize the
structural break we observe by examining its other implications for venture investments.
    Two distinct provisions of NSMIA have helped increase the supply of private capital,
including venture capital. First, NSMIA exempts qualified private security issuers from
having to comply with the blue sky laws of each state. Traditionally, a venture seeking
external financing needed to comply with the laws governing the issuance of securities in
each state where its securities were sold, commonly known as blue sky laws. Compliance
with blue sky laws required significant time and efforts. NSMIA exempts private issuers
from compliance with blue sky laws in each and every state, as long as all investors
are "accredited investors", hence facilitated venture's security issuance. Second, NSMIA
makes it possible for VC and PE funds to raise capital from a large number of investors
but without registering under the Investment Company Act (ICA) of 1940, enabling VC
and PE funds to raise fund at lower cost.33 The passage of NSMIA would have helped
market return until their delisting or the end of the sample at December 31, 2016 (See Table 2B, Panel
A in Bessembinder (2017)).
  31
     Realized NPVs should have an MA structure since they involve forward-looking sums. Bayesian
Information Criterion suggests ARMA(1,0) is a reasonable approximation of the realized NPV process.
Standard errors are based on ARMA(1,0).
  32
     Section 4.2 gives details on how we compute the sampling errors.
  33
     The ICA required VC and PE funds to register with the SEC and imposed extensive regulations
on registered entities, including investment and leverage restrictions, restrictions on related party trans-


                                                    16
existing ventures in their subsequent funding rounds as well as new ventures that had their
first funding rounds after NSMIA. Hence, the effect on the normalized NPV would be a
bit gradual and not sharp. However, it could still be sharp, if NPVs of the later rounds
are closer to zero and the main effect is concentrated in the first round. Interestingly we
are still able to detect the regime shift in the time series of realized normalized NPVs,
which suggests that the earlier rounds contribute more to the realized normalized NPV.


4.1    A Matching Model of Ventures and VCs
To examine the effects of an increased supply of capital due to NSMIA, we develop a
model characterizing the matching of ventures with VCs, and the bargaining between
them. We interpret NSMIA as increasing the relative supply of low-ability VCs, i.e.,
the fraction of low-ability VCs in the economy. Our model predicts that such a change
will decrease the average normalized NPV of the ventures, and let founder keep a higher
share in ventures that have more high-ability VCs, consistent with our empirical findings.
The force driving our results is that as the fraction of low-ability VCs in the economy
increases, the expected value added by VCs will decline, which decreases the value of the
venture per dollar invested and increases bargaining power of founders in those ventures
that more high-ability VCs participate, which tend to be of higher quality as well. We
need several simplifying assumptions in the model to focus on this main force. To preserve
space, all the proofs are relegated to the appendix.
Ventures and VCs
Consider a two-period economy consisting of ventures and VCs. There are N ventures,
with each owned by a founder. And there is a continuum of VCs, with a total mass of 1.
In the first period, a group of VCs invest in a given venture. In the second period, VCs
and the founder of the venture receive payoffs based on their shares of the ventures.
    The ventures are of different qualities. The quality of a venture i is measured by
Qi , where Qi is drawn from a uniform distribution U (0, 1). For notational convenience,
we drop the subscript i. The fundamental value of a venture with quality Q is v = QV ,
where V is the highest fundamental value a venture can have before the VCs' investments.
In the first period, the venture's type is unknown to anyone. Assuming that all the
participants in the economy do not infer the type of the ventures, the fair pre-money
valuation of a venture is an average of the fundamental value of all types, which is
actions, and ongoing reporting requirements. NSMIA to a large extent allows exemptions of these
regulatory requirements, for certain classes of investors.


                                              17
      1
¯ = 0 QV f (Q)dQ = V
v                       2
                          .
    The VCs also are of different abilities. Each VC can be of either high ability (H-type)
or low ability (L-type). And the fraction of high-ability VCs in the economy is p, where
0 < p < 1. The value added by a high-ability VC is H and the value added by a low-
ability VC is L, where H > L. Suppose  is the fraction of high-ability VCs among the
VCs investing in a venture, then the average value added is  = H + (1 - )L. We
assume the value added is a multiplicative shifter of the venture's value. That is, the
final value of the venture, denoted as s, is the product of the venture's fundamental value
and the average value added by the VCs, that is

                                          s = v                                         (5)

Matching
Every venture gets funding from VCs in the first period. The matching between a ven-
ture and the VCs is governed by a simple matching function where the matching effi-
ciency is exogenously assumed to be . The matching efficiency  measures the effec-
tiveness/assortativeness of the process for matching high-quality ventures to high-ability
VCs, and is assumed to range from 0 to 1. Specifically, we assume the fraction of high-
ability VCs among the VCs investing in a venture  = p(1 - ) + Q, which captures the
matching process.
    The interpretation of the matching function is that, the fraction of high-ability VCs
among VCs funding a venture is a linear function of the matching efficiency parameter .
When  = 0, it means the matching of VCs to ventures is fully random. So  = p, that
is, the fraction of high-ability VCs among VCs funding any venture would just be the
fraction of high-ability VCs in the economy. When  = 1, it means the matching of VCs
to ventures is  = Q, depending only on the quality of the venture. In this case, ventures
with the highest qualities will only be invested by high-ability VCs, and ventures with
the lowest qualities will only be invested by low-ability VCs.
Equilibrium
We define the equilibrium to be derived from a Nash Bargaining game over the ownership
acquired by the VCs after their investments. For simplicity, we assume that the VCs
collectively invest a fixed fraction  of the venture's fair pre-money valuation in the first
period. That is, the amount raised by a venture is v  ¯, where v¯ is the pre-money valuation
of each venture and  is an exogenous constant.
    The VCs face an outside option if not investing in the venture, which is an asset with

                                            18
a constant return of m, which is also exogenous. Suppose x is the fraction of ownership
acquired by the VCs in the first period, then the Nash Bargaining equilibrium can be
formalized by the solution to the following problem

                            max E[(s(1 - x) - v )(sx - mv )]                           (6)
                              x

where, E[mv ] is the expected outside option value of the VCs, and E[v ] is the expected
outside option value of the founder. Note that in the first period, although nobody knows
the type of the venture, but everyone may observe the type of each VC that invests in the
venture. Although the composition of VCs investing in a venture may reveal information
about the venture's type (as the matching function depends on the venture's type), we
assume that neither the VCs nor the founder infer the venture type from the composition
of VCs. We further assume that the founder offers the same terms to both high-ability
and low-ability VCs. Both assumptions will be relaxed in the later analysis.
    We can show that the following propositions hold in the equilibrium. Proposition
1 characterizes the ownership acquired by the VCs in the equilibrium. Proposition 2
characterizes the NPVs to VCs, the founder, and all equity holders after the final value
of the venture is realized in the second period. Note that here when we characterize the
NPVs, we regard the venture's fair pre-money valuation v     ¯ as the cash flow invested by
the founder. This treatment is consistent with the NPV measure we proposed.

Proposition 1 The ownership given up by the founder to the VCs, x, that solves the
Nash Bargaining problem in Equation 6 is given by:

              + m - 1   H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L + m - 1
        x=            =                                                                (7)
                2          2(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L)


    Note that  will in general be much smaller than 1, and m only slightly above 1. So
                                            2x
1 - m > 0. In this case, x    
                                    0 and p        0, which means that ventures that are
invested by more high-ability VCs give up more ownership to VCs, but the difference
shrinks as p, the fraction of high-ability VCs in the economy, decreases.
Proposition 2 The normalized NPV of investments of all investors taken together,  ;
of VCs taken together, V C ; and of founders taken together F D are given by:
(1) All equity holders

                    - 2HQ(-p + p + Q) + 2LQ(-p + p + Q - 1) + 1
             =-                                                                        (8)
                                      +1

                                            19
(2) VCs

                       2Qx(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L)
               V C =                                           -1                       (9)
                                          

(3) Founders

           F D = 2Q(1 - x)(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L) - 1                     (10)


    Regarding the normalized NPV of all equity holders taken together, i.e.,  , we have
the following observations. First, p
                                       0, which means that NPV to all equity holders
                                              2
decreases as p decreases. Second,     0 and p        0, which means that ventures that
are invested by more high-ability VCs deliver higher NPV to all equity holders, but the
difference shrinks as p decreases.
    We interpret the passage of NSMIA as increasing the relative supply of low-ability
VCs, which would decrease the fraction, p, of high-ability VCs in the economy, in the
model. With this interpretation, Propositions 1 and 2 lead to the following testable
hypotheses.

Hypothesis 1. The passage of the NSMIA causes a structural break in the operating
environment of ventures. Average NPV decreases after the structural break.
Hypothesis 2. Ventures that had participation by more high-ability (H -type) VCs have
higher NPV than the others, but the difference shrinks after the structural break.
Hypothesis 3. Ventures that had participation by more high-ability (H -type) VCs tend
to be high-quality (h-type) ventures, both before and after the structural break.
Hypothesis 4. Ventures that had participation by more high-ability (H -type) VCs give
up more ownership to VCs than the others, but the difference shrinks after the structural
break.
Extension
    In the following analysis, we relax the assumption that all the participants infer noth-
ing about the venture type from the composition of VCs, and that the founders offer the
same terms to both high-ability and low-ability VCs.
    First, note that the composition of VCs investing in a venture is public information.
The matching function induces a one-to-one mapping between the venture's type and the
composition of the VCs. Therefore, the investors will be able to infer the venture type

                                            20
by observing the composition of the VCs participating in a venture. We therefore relax
the assumption that investors do not infer the venture type based on public information.
   Second, we now allow different terms to be offered to high-ability and low-ability
VCs. We now assume that for each unit of investment, the amount of shares acquired by
a high-ability VC is H
                     L
                        times of that acquired by a low-ability VC.
   Propositions 3 and 4 below are analogues of Propositions 1 and 2. They characterize
the ownership given to the VCs and the normalized NPVs of investments made by different
participants.

Proposition 3 Under the assumptions mentioned above, the ownership given up by
founders to high-ability and low-ability VCs taken together, x, that solves the Nash Bar-
gaining problem in Equation 6 is given by:

            + m - 1   H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L + m - 1
      x=            =                                                                    (11)
              2          2(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L)


   Note that a venture's type is fully revealed in equilibrium. Therefore the expected
fundamental value of a venture is the same as its fundamental value. Therefore, E[v ] =
v = QV . In spite of this, the ownership given up by founders to VCs continues to be the
same as that given in Proposition 1.

Proposition 4 The normalized NPV of investments of all investors taken together,  ; of
                                                                      H
all VCs taken together, V C ; of all high-ability VCs taken together, V C ; of all low-ability
                       L
VCs taken together, V    C ; and of founders F D taken together are given by:
(1) All equity holders

                     - + H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L - 1
                =                                                                        (12)
                                       +1
(2) VCs

                        x(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L)
                V C =                                         -1                         (13)
                                          

(3) High-ability VCs

                                       H       Hx
                                       V C =      -1                                     (14)
                                                



                                             21
(4) Low-ability VCs

                                      L       Lx
                                      V C =      -1                                   (15)
                                               

(5) Founders

             F D = (1 - x)(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L) - 1                    (16)



    We have the following observations regarding the normalized NPV,  , of all equity
holders taken together. First,    p
                                         0, which means that the normalized NPV of all
                                                                                 2
equity holders taken together decreases as p decreases. Second,      
                                                                         0 and p     = 0,
which means that ventures that have more high-ability VCs have higher normalized NPV.
However, the difference does not depend on p, the fraction of high-ability VCs in the
economy.
    We note that the Hypothesis 1, 3 and 4 continue to hold in this extended model. The
first part of Hypothesis 2 will hold. Ventures that had participation by more high-ability
(H-type) VCs will have higher normalized NPVs. However, the second part of Hypothesis
2 will not hold. The difference in the normalized NPVs of ventures with more and less
high-ability VCs will not change after the structural break. As we will see later, the
data is consistent with both parts of Hypothesis 2. This implies that the quality of the
ventures are not fully revealed (i.e., not inferred) in equilibrium.


4.2    Structural Break in NPV Time Series
We now test Hypothesis 1 of the model, that there exists a structural break soon after
the NSMIA regulatory change and that the average normalized NPV of ventures declines
after the structural break.
    In Figure 9, for each quarter from 1992Q1 to 2006Q4, we plotted the net present value
(NPV) normalized by the aggregate first-round post-money valuation in that quarter.
This normalized NPV measures the net present value per dollar invested in the first round
of funding (NPV). We see that it is significantly positive on average before 1999, and only
slightly positive afterwards. Now we conduct formal statistic tests of the existence of a
structural break in the aggregate normalized NPV time series.
    We start by assuming the aggregate normalized NPV follows a time series model.
Here we consider two basic time series models. The first one assumes that the aggregate

                                            22
normalized NPV is a constant over time and the second one assumes that the aggre-
gate normalized NPV follows an AR(1) model. Then we apply a Supremum Wald test
(Quandt, 1960; Andrews, 1993) for a structural break in the parameters of the model,
at an unknown break time. The method involves a series of Wald tests over all the
possible break times in our sample horizon, where each individual Wald test compares
the parameters estimates from the sample before and after a break time. Not all the
times can be tested as break times because there are insufficient observations to estimate
the parameters if it is too near the beginning or the end of the sample. Thus, following
Andrews (1993), we trimmed 15% of the observations that are too close to the beginning
and the end of the sample before the Wald tests.
    Table 5 shows the test statistics from the structural break tests with different speci-
fications. Column (1)-(3) are results from tests assuming the aggregate normalized NPV
is constant over time. Column (4)-(6) are results from tests assuming the normalized
NPV follows an AR(1) model. Even though the realized normalized NPV process is
a moving-average of random order, Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) suggests that
ARMA(1,0), i.e., AR(1), is a good approximation. Regardless of the discounting methods
we use for the NPV calculation, and regardless of the sample of ventures we conducted
the tests on (either Group A sample or the full sample), the results all indicate that there
is a structural break around the end of the second quarter of 1999, using the supremum
Wald test.


4.3    Experienced VCs and Venture Performance
We now test Hypothesis 2 of the model, showing that ventures invested by high-ability
VCs have higher NPV than the others, but the difference shrinks after the structural
break. In this test, we use the experience of a VC as a proxy for ability. So more
experienced VCs correspond to high-ability VCs in our model.34
    This test is also related to the question that if possible, how to identify ventures that
are more likely to succeed. It is related to the large body of literature that shows that,
among many factors, VC characteristics like experience, age, network, and reputation
are associated with the performance of venture investments. 35 Albeit the large body of
literature, our test adopts a slightly different perspective. Specifically, we study whether
experienced VCs have the ability to differentiate the high-NPV ventures from the others
  34
     Although a VC's ability has many dimensions, they are probably all highly correlated with VC
experience. And we regard the VC experience as a sufficient statistic of ability.
  35
     See Sorensen (2007); Gompers (1996); Hochberg et al. (2007); Nahata (2008).


                                               23
in as early as the first round. In a way this is a test of our assumed matching model ­
that higher ability VCs are more likely to be matched with higher quality ventures.
     We start by constructing a measure of the experience of the VC team that invested
in the first funding round of each venture. At any point of time, the experience of an
individual VC is measured by the VC's rank among all the existing VCs based on the
number of total funding rounds the VC had invested in the immediately preceding 10
years. We refer to a VC who ranks in the top 30 as a Top 30 VC. Then for each venture,
if its first round's VC team includes a Top 30 VC, the venture is regarded as having an
experienced VC team. If that is the case, we assign the venture an indicator variable Top
30 VC = 1, otherwise we assign the venture the indicator variable Top 30 VC = 0. So
the indicator variable Top 30 VC is our measure of VC experience.
     We first examine whether the cumulative discounted cash flows from investing in a
venture whose first round involves a Top 30 VC (Top 30 VC = 1), is different compared
to investing in one that doesn't (Top 30 VC = 0). Figure 10 plots the present value
of the aggregate normalized cumulative cash flows of these two types of ventures over
their life cycles. We see that the ventures with Top 30 VC in the first rounds eventually
have higher cumulative cash flows, no matter when they received the first rounds. This
suggests that indeed ventures invested by more experienced VCs generally have higher
normalized NPV. Also, for both groups of ventures, the cumulative cash flows curves are
much flattened if the first rounds are received after the structural break in 1999.
     Second, we regress the venture's normalized NPV on the experience of the VC team
that invested in the venture's first funding round, together with control variables including
the first round's raised amount, year fixed effects, industry fixed effects and year-industry
fixed effects. The cash flows are discounted using the GPMEround specification when
calculating the NPVs. Besides the Top 30 VC measure, we also consider alternative
measures of VC experience. For example, at any point in time, we compute the fraction
of funding rounds an individual VC had invested in the past 10 years that are associated
with observed ventures' successful exits, by that time. A higher fraction of rounds that
lead to successful exits means the VC is more experienced, so this fraction serves as
a measure experience. Similarly we compute the fractions of funding rounds that are
associated with continued financing, or bankruptcy. They also serve as measures of
individual VC's experience. Then for each venture, the experience of its first-round VC
team is measured by the weighted average of the experience measure of all the individual
VCs that invested in the venture's first round. As for the weights, we use each individual
VC's total number of rounds invested in the past 10 years. Here we use the weighted

                                             24
average in order to not over-emphasize the performance of small VCs which is noisily
measured as they only invested in a few rounds and a few ventures.
    Table 6 reports the regression results. We see that having a Top 30 VC in the first
round is significantly positively related to the venture's normalized NPV before the struc-
tural break in 1999. This reflects that high-quality ventures are matched with more expe-
rienced VCs. However, after the structural break, the relationship between VC experience
and venture's performance becomes insignificant (as indicated by results in Column (3)
and Column (6)). This seems to suggest the experience gained by the VCs from their past
investments before the structural break seems to less relevant afterwards. These findings
are consistent with the predictions of our model. The results are robust regardless of
whether the regression uses the sample of all ventures (Group AB), or the subsample of
ventures whose first funding round post-money valuation data is non-missing (Group A).
The standard errors are double clustered by quarter of the first round and quarter of the
last event, which could be the last round or the exit. We use the double clustered stan-
dard errors to address the error term correlations of the venture-level regression model
introduced by the overlaps of life cycles of different ventures. The correlation in error
terms could be especially strong for the ventures which raise the first round funding or
exit at the same time.
    We also conduct quantile regressions to study the heterogeneity of the relationship
between VC experience and venture performance, across ventures with different levels of
normalized NPVs. The quantile regressions study the relationship between any quantile
of the outcome variable with explanatory variables. Before the structural break, although
having a Top 30 VC in the first round is on average positively related to venture's nor-
malized NPV, this "average effect" is mainly driven by and concentrated at the high
end of the distribution of normalized NPV. The coefficient on the Top 30 VC dummy
is close to zero for ventures with normalized NPVs below the 30% percentile, meaning
that experienced VC is not so good at keeping away from the "bad" ventures. Instead,
the coefficient has a sharp increase for ventures with normalized NPVs above the 70%
percentile, meaning that experienced VC is very good at cherry-picking the best ven-
tures. More detailed results from the quantile regressions can be found in the Internet
Appendix.
    As a robustness check, instead of using our NPV measure to proxy for the perfor-
mance of the ventures we also use successful exits including IPO and MA as the proxy.
Specifically, we regress the measure of the venture's performance ­ an indicator variable
for successful exits, on the experience measures of the VC team invested in the venture's

                                            25
first funding round, together with control variables. Table 7 reports the results. The
standard errors are double clustered by quarter of the first round and quarter of the
last event. Having a Top 30 VC in the first round is significantly positively related to
the venture's successful exits before the structural break in 1999. However, after the
structural break, the relationship becomes insignificant. These are consistent with the
previous results.
Value Added by VCs
We showed that first-round VCs' experience is positively related to the probability of a
venture's successful exit including IPO and MA. However, VCs can influence the venture's
exit decisions, either by making the exit process easier36 or by persuading the founders
directly. If there is conflict of interest between VCs and other venture shareholders, or if
the VCs simply make sub-optimal exit decisions, an exit ­ even being a successful one,
can still for example occur too early and too late, and may not necessarily maximize the
value (NPV) of the venture. Therefore, we also examine the relationship between VC
experience and venture performance at the intensive margin, namely whether experienced
VC is positively associated with ventures with higher normalized NPV conditional on
ventures that successfully exited. Specifically, in the sample of ventures with successful
exits (IPO and MA), we regress the venture's NPV normalized by the first round's amount
raised on a set of experience measures of the VC team invested in the venture's first
funding round, together with control variables including the first round's amount raised,
year fixed effects, industry fixed effects and year-industry fixed effects. The cash flows
are discounted using the GPME method when calculating the NPVs, with parameters
calibrated to round-to-round returns.
    Table 8 reports the regression results. The standard errors are double clustered by
quarter of the first round and quarter of the last event. We see that having a Top 30
VC in the first round is significantly positively related to the venture's NPV normalized
by the first-round amount raised before the structural break in 1999. This reflects that
experienced VCs is associated with higher NPVs even conditional on the ventures having
successful exits. However, after the structural break, the relationship is not significant (as
indicated by results in Column (3) and Column (6)). The results are robust regardless
of whether the regression is based on the Group AB sample, or the Group A sample.
Pre-Break and Post-Break Sub-Samples
  36
   For example, corporate venture capitals (CVC) have connections with many firms, and may persuade
them to acquire or merge with the venture they invested in. Some VCs can also facilitate the IPO process.



                                                   26
In the previous section where we used the entire sample, we essentially imposed the
restriction that the industry fixed effects are the same before and after the structural
break, which may not be true since we know the industry composition of the ventures
changed greatly. To address this concern, we estimate the regression models using data
for the pre-break and post-break sub-periods.
    Table 9 reports the regression results. Still, we see that before the structural break
in 1999, having a Top 30 VC in the first round is significantly positively related to the
venture's performance measures including normalized NPV, successful exit, as well as
on the intensive margin (normalized NPV conditional on successful exit). But these
relationships are not significant after the structural break. The results in Table 9 are
based on regressions in the Group A sample. The results are similar when we use the full
sample, but omitted to preserve space.
Robust Standard Errors
In all regressions above, the outcome variable ­ the venture's normalized NPV or success-
ful exits, depends not only on the time of the venture's first round, but also the market
conditions over the entire life cycle of the venture. The overlaps of life cycles of different
ventures introduce correlations in the error term of the regression model among ventures.
The dependent variables are also likely subject to serial correlation over time. These cor-
relations make it hard to calculate appropriate standard errors of the coefficient estimates
of the regressions. The double clustered standard errors partially addressed these issues.
Besides the double clustered standard errors, we also provide robust standard errors using
an Fama-MacBeth standard errors approach modified from Fama and MacBeth (1973).
    We first run multiple cross-sectional regressions relating the venture's performance to
the VC's experience, where each cross section consists of ventures receiving the first fund-
ing round in a given quarter. After collecting the cross-sectional regression coefficients,
we adopt their average as the point estimate. Then we use three methods to calculate the
standard errors of the point estimates. The first method is based on the sample standard
deviation of the coefficients from the cross-sectional regressions. The second method uses
Newey-West adjusted standard errors with 3 lags. The third method uses Bootstrap
standard errors. Specifically, we first fit the best ARMA model to the time series of
cross-sectional regression coefficients according to AICc (Akaike Information Criterion
corrected for small sample). Then we bootstrap the error terms from the best ARMA
model, construct the series of regression coefficients in each bootstrap iteration according
to the ARMA model and calculate their average. Then the sample standard deviation


                                             27
of these averages is the bootstrap standard errors. To preserve space, all the additional
robust standard errors results are relegated to the Internet Appendix. All the findings
we have (including those in the following sections) are qualitatively similar under these
robust standard errors.


4.4    Experienced VCs and Venture Quality
Now we test the Hypothesis 3 of the model, that ventures invested by more high-ability
(H-type) VCs tend to be high-quality (h-type) ventures, both before and after the struc-
tural break. In this test, we proxy the quality of a venture by the number of innovations
it creates. Although a venture's quality can be viewed in many dimensions, in reality
one important criteria that the VCs use to select the ventures to invest is whether the
venture is innovative enough. By being innovative, the venture can develop a competitive
edge and make profit in the future, hence being more valuable.
    On that front, we study the relationship between VC experience and the venture's
innovation activity. For this purpose we use the number of patent grants and patent
citations during the life time of a venture as the measure of its innovation ability. We
regress the venture's lifetime number of patents and patent citations on the experience
measures of the VC team invested in the venture's first funding round, together with
control variables including the first round's amount raised, year fixed effects, industry
fixed effects and year-industry fixed effects. Table 10 reports the regression results. We
see that VC's past experience is highly correlated with venture's innovation ability, either
measured by lifetime number of patents or by patent citations, and this relationship holds
both before and after the structural break. This means that although experienced VCs are
not more likely to invest in high NPV ventures in the first round, they still tend to invest
in ventures that tend to be more innovative later on. So the results are consistent with
the model's prediction. And the results are robust regardless of whether the regression
uses Group A ventures or the full sample (Group AB ventures).


4.5    Bargaining Power of Founders and Experienced VCs
Here we test the model's Hypothesis 4, that ventures invested by more high-ability (H-
type) VCs give up more ownership to VCs than the others, but the difference shrinks
after the structural break.
    We focus on the ownership given up by the venture founder in the first round. Specif-
ically, we regress the venture founder's first-round ownership given up on the experience

                                            28
measures of the VC team invested in the venture's funding round, together with control
variables including the first round's amount raised, year fixed effects, industry fixed ef-
fects and year-industry fixed effects. Table 11 reports the regression results. We see that
VC's past experience is highly correlated with the venture's first-round ownership given
up before the structural break in 1999, suggesting that more experienced VC is able to
acquire more shares from the venture in the first round. However, this relationship is
not significant after the structural break. This is consistent with the predictions of our
model: the bargaining power of experienced VCs relative to the venture founders declines
after the structural break. The results are also consistent with the findings of Ewens and
Farre-Mensa (2019).


5    Conclusion
In this paper we make a contribution to the empirical literature on venture capital by
characterizing the risk adjusted return to investing in ventures. To address the sparsity of
valuation data at various funding round levels, we measure the return to all equity holders
as a group, including the founders, from the venture's first funding round till exit. The
measure we develop has the advantage that it requires valuation data for the first round
only, apart from amount raised in various funding rounds, which are available for most
funding rounds. Thus, the NPV measure minimizes the need for imputing missing data,
or relying on proprietary valuation models. The shortcoming is that we cannot examine
how the returns vary across different groups of investors and different rounds of a venture.
    The NPV measure is based on discounting the cash flows that the venture received
from all the equity holders in the various funding rounds, and the cash flow (value) to all
equity holders upon the venture's exit. It represents the return to a hypothetical investor
who participates in all the funding rounds of a venture and provides all the financing
cash flows. For discounting the cash flows, we use the Public Market Equivalent method
in Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and the Generalized Public Market Equivalent method in
Korteweg and Nagel (2016).
    Our sample consists of US-based ventures in the SDC VentureXpert database. Our
data consists of 16,396 ventures that raised $448 billion through 57,884 funding rounds
between 1980 and 2018. We first compute the ex post risk-adjusted "time to break-even"
- that is, the minimum holding period such that the NPV of a venture's cumulative
cash flows becomes positive. We find that venture investments are very illiquid. Even
for a diversified portfolio of ventures, the time to break-even can be substantially long.

                                            29
Suppose an investor holds a portfolio of all the ventures that had the first rounds in a given
quarter, her average time to break-even will be between 5 and 60 quarters, depending on
the calendar quarter of the first rounds. That is, even for such a diversified portfolio of
ventures, money can be locked-in for as long as 15 years before breaking even. Most of
the return comes from a few successful ventures, and more than 64% of ventures have
negative NPVs.
    The time series of normalized NPVs have an average of 1.56 ­ i.e., on average a dollar
invested in the first round has a value of (2.56) dollars. For every dollar invested in the first
round, on average 3.75 dollars were invested in the rounds that followed till exit. Further,
the time series of realized normalized NPVs exhibits a structural break in the second
quarter of 1999. This structural break follows the passage of the National Securities
Markets Improvement Act (NSMIA). We hypothesize that this would have increased
the supply of capital to ventures, especially from less sophisticated investors (VCs). To
understand the effect of NSMIA, we develop a model characterizing the matching process
of the ventures and the VCs, and the bargaining among VCs and founders.
    Our empirical findings are consistent with the model's implications. First, the average
normalized NPV of ventures declines after the structural break from 2.46 to 0.72. Second,
ventures with participation by more experienced VCs have higher normalized NPVs and
higher likelihood of successful exits, but this relationship weakened after the structural
break. Third, ventures with participation by more experienced VCs are more innovative
as measured by the number patent grants and citations. The relationship holds both
before and after the structural break. Finally, founders with participation by more expe-
rienced VCs give up more ownership, but this relationship weakens after the structural
break.


References
Akcigit, Ufuk, Emin Dinlersoz, Jeremy Greenwood, and Veronika Penciakova, 2019, Syn-
  ergizing Ventures, Working Paper 26196, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Andrews, Donald W. K., 1993, Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change
 With Unknown Change Point, Econometrica 61, 821.

Ang, Andrew, Bingxu Chen, William N. Goetzmann, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2018,
 Estimating Private Equity Returns from Limited Partner Cash Flows, The Journal of
 Finance 73, 1751­1783.

                                               30
Bernstein, Shai, Xavier Giroud, and Richard R. Townsend, 2016, The Impact of Venture
  Capital Monitoring, The Journal of Finance 71, 1591­1622.

Bessembinder, Hendrik, 2017, Do Stocks Outperform Treasury Bills? 51.

Bottazzi, Laura, Marco Da Rin, and Thomas Hellmann, 2008, Who Are the Active
  Investors? Evidence from Venture Capital, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 488­
  512.

Cochrane, John H., 2005, The Risk and Return of Venture Capital, Journal of Financial
  Economics 75, 3­52.

Driessen, Joost, Tse-Chun Lin, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2011, A New Method to Estimate
  Risk and Return of Non-Traded Assets from Cash Flows: The Case of Private Equity
  Funds, SSRN Electronic Journal .

Du, Qianqian, and Thomas F Hellmann, 2019, Getting Tired of Your Friends: The
 Dynamics of Venture Capital Relationships, Working Paper 26274, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Ewens, Michael, and Joan Farre-Mensa, 2019, The Deregulation of the Private Equity
 Markets and the Decline in IPOs, Working Paper 26317, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Ewens, Michael, Alexander S Gorbenko, and Arthur Korteweg, 2018a, Venture Capital
 Contracts 59.

Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2018b, Cost of Experimen-
 tation and the Evolution of Venture Capital, Working Paper 24523, National Bureau
 of Economic Research.

Fama, Eugene F, and James D MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical
  tests, Journal of political economy 81, 607­636.

Gompers, Paul A., 1996, Grandstanding in the Venture Capital Industry, Journal of
 Financial Economics 42, 133­156.

Gornall, Will, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2017, Squaring Venture Capital Valuations with Re-
 ality, SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2955455, Social Science Research Network, Rochester,
 NY.

                                           31
Gupta, Arpit, NYU Stern, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2019, Valuing Private Equity
 Investments Strip by Strip 71.

Hall, Robert E, and Susan E Woodward, 2010, The Burden of the Nondiversifiable Risk
  of Entrepreneurship, American Economic Review 100, 1163­1194.

Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan, 2014a, Private Equity Perfor-
  mance: What Do We Know?, The Journal of Finance 69, 1851­1882.

Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan, 2015, How Do Private Equity
  Investments Perform Compared to Public Equity?, SSRN Electronic Journal .

Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and Rdiger Stucke, 2014b, Has
  Persistence Persisted in Private Equity? Evidence from Buyout and Venture Capital
  Funds, SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2304808, Social Science Research Network, Rochester,
  NY.

Hochberg, Yael V., Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu, 2007, Whom You Know Matters:
 Venture Capital Networks and Investment Performance, The Journal of Finance 62,
 251­301.

Hsu, David H., 2004, What Do Entrepreneurs Pay for Venture Capital Affiliation?, The
  Journal of Finance 59, 1805­1844.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private Equity Performance: Returns,
 Persistence, and Capital Flows, The Journal of Finance 60, 1791­1823.

Kaplan, Steven N., Per Strmberg, and Berk A. Sensoy, 2002, How Well Do Venture
 Capital Databases Reflect Actual Investments?, SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 939073,
 Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Kerr, William R., Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2014, Entrepreneurship
  as Experimentation, Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, 25­48.

Korteweg, Arthur, and Stefan Nagel, 2016, Risk-Adjusting the Returns to Venture Cap-
 ital, The Journal of Finance 71, 1437­1470.

Korteweg, Arthur, and Morten Sorensen, 2010, Risk and Return Characteristics of Ven-
 ture Capital-Backed Entrepreneurial Companies, The Review of Financial Studies 23,
 3738­3772.

                                         32
Lerner, Josh, 1995, Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms, The Journal
  of Finance 50, 301­318.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, and Matthew Richardson, 2003, The Cash Flow, Return and Risk
  Characteristics of Private Equity, Working Paper 9454, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Maats, Frederike, Andrew Metrick, Ayako Yasuda, Brian Hinkes, and Sofia Vershovski,
 2011, On the Consistency and Reliability of Venture Capital Databases, Unpublished
 working paper .

Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Annette Vissing-Jrgensen, 2002, The Returns to En-
 trepreneurial Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?, American Economic
 Review 92, 745­778.

Nahata, Rajarishi, 2008, Venture Capital Reputation and Investment Performance, Jour-
  nal of Financial Economics 90, 127­151.

Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2013, Investment Cycles and Startup In-
  novation, Journal of Financial Economics 110, 403­418.

Quandt, Richard E., 1960, Tests of the Hypothesis That a Linear Regression System
 Obeys Two Separate Regimes, Journal of the American Statistical Association 55,
 324­330.

Ramsinghani, Mahendra, 2014, The Business of Venture Capital: Insights from Leading
  Practitioners on the Art of Raising a Fund, Deal Structuring, Value Creation, and Exit
  Strategies (John Wiley & Sons), Google-Books-ID: Wv38AwAAQBAJ.

Rin, Marco Da, Thomas Hellmann, and Manju Puri, 2013, A Survey of Venture Capital
  Research, Handbook of the Economics of Finance 2, 573­648.

Sorensen, Morten, 2007, How Smart Is Smart Money? A Two-Sided Matching Model of
  Venture Capital, The Journal of Finance 62, 2725­2762.

Sorensen, Morten, and Ravi Jagannathan, 2015, The Public Market Equivalent and Pri-
  vate Equity Performance, Financial Analysts Journal 71, 43­50.




                                          33
       Fraction of Rounds with Nonmissing Values
                                                   1                                                                              6000



                                                   .8




                                                                                                                                         Number of Rounds
                                                                                                                                  4000
                                                   .6



                                                   .4
                                                                                                                                  2000

                                                   .2



                                                   0                                                                              0
                                                        1980      1990                 2000                 2010           2020
                                                                                      year

                                                                 Fraction of Rounds with Nonmissing Amount Raised (Left)
                                                                 Fraction of Rounds with Nonmissing Valuation (Left)
                                                                 Number of Rounds (Right)




                                                    Figure 1: Fraction of Rounds with Nonmissing Data in Each Year
Note: Figure plots the number of funding rounds received by the ventures in each year, as well as the
fraction of the funding rounds that have non-missing amount raised data and non-missing post-money
valuation data. The sample includes all the US-based ventures in the SDC VentureXpert database that
had the first funding round prior to 2006.




                                                                                         34
   3




   2



                                                                 lg(# of ventures with 1 Rounds + 1)
                                                                 lg(# of ventures with 2 Rounds + 1)
                                                                 lg(# of ventures with 3 Rounds + 1)
   1                                                             lg(# of ventures with 4 Rounds + 1)
                                                                 lg(# of ventures with 5 Rounds + 1)
                                                                 lg(# of ventures with 6 Rounds + 1)
                                                                 lg(# of ventures with 7 Rounds + 1)
                                                                 lg(# of ventures with 8 Rounds + 1)
                                                                 lg(# of ventures with 9 Rounds + 1)
                                                                 lg(# of ventures with >= 10 Rounds + 1)
   0
       1980       1990         2000         2010        2020
                         First Round Year



Figure 2: Ventures with Different Lifetime Total Funding Rounds by the First-Round
Years
Note: Figure plots for each year from 1980 to 2018, the number of ventures whose first funding rounds
are in that year, and ended up receiving 1,2,...,9 or 10 and more funding rounds in total over their life
time. Figure uses the log-10 scale for the number of ventures. The vertical line is at year 2006. We see
the number of ventures whose first funding round is after 2006 decreased abruptly, suggesting as it gets
close to the sample end, there is a data censorship bias. The sample is the universe of ventures in the
SDC VentureXpert database.




                                                   35
             80



             60



             40



             20



             0
                  1980              1990                     2000                        2010       2020
                                                             year

                                                Average Amount Raised ($ M)
                                                5th Percentile of Amount Raised ($ M)
                                                25th Percentile of Amount Raised ($ M)
                                                75th Percentile of Amount Raised ($ M)
                                                95th Percentile of Amount Raised ($ M)




             30




             20




             10




             0
                  1980       1985                1990                1995                 2000   2005
                                                             year

                                           Average 1st-Round Amount Raised ($ M)
                                           5th Percentile of 1st-Round Amount Raised ($ M)
                                           25th Percentile of 1st-Round Amount Raised ($ M)
                                           75th Percentile of 1st-Round Amount Raised ($ M)
                                           95th Percentile of 1st-Round Amount Raised ($ M)




      Figure 3: Amount Raised in the Funding Rounds by the Year of the Rounds
Note: The upper panel plots the average, 5th, 25th, 75th and 90th percentiles of the amount of funding
raised by all the ventures in each year from 1980 to 2018. The bottom panel plots the average, 5th, 25th,
75th and 90th percentiles of the first-round amount of funding raised by all the ventures in each year
from 1980 to 2006. The sample includes all the US-based ventures in the SDC VentureXpert database
that had the first funding round prior to 2006. The vertical line is at year 2006.




                                                           36
        .8



        .6



        .4



        .2



        0
             1980         1985              1990               1995               2000      2005
                                                       year

                                      Average 1st-Round Ownership Given Up
                                      5th Percentile of 1st-Round Ownership Given Up
                                      25th Percentile of 1st-Round Ownership Given Up
                                      75th Percentile of 1st-Round Ownership Given Up
                                      95th Percentile of 1st-Round Ownership Given Up




             Figure 4: First-round Ownership Given Up by the Year of the Rounds
Note: Figure plots the average, 5th, 25th, 75th and 90th percentiles of the ownership given up in the first
funding round by the ventures in each year from 1980 to 2006. The sample includes all the US-based
ventures in the SDC VentureXpert database that had the first funding round prior to 2006. We calculate
the ownership given up in the first funding round as the amount of the funding raised/the venture's post
money valuation. If the ownership given up data is missing, we impute the ownership given up using the
logit model described before.




                                                      37
             1000




              800




              600




              400


                                                                # of Ventures Ended in IPO
              200                                               # of Ventures Ended in M&A
                                                                # of Ventures Ended in Bankruptcy
                                                                # of Ventures Still Alive till 2018
                                                                # of Ventures with Unknown Outcome
                0
                    1990     1995          2000        2005
                            Year of the First Round




                                          (a) Number of Ventures

               .6




               .4




               .2

                                                               Ratio of Ventures Ended in IPO
                                                               Ratio of Ventures Ended in M&A
                                                               Ratio of Ventures Ended in Bankruptcy
                                                               Ratio of Ventures Still Alive till 2018
                                                               Ratio of Ventures with Unknown Outcome
                0
                    1990     1995         2000         2005
                            Year of the First Round




                                            (b) Fraction of Ventures

Figure 5: Number of Ventures with Different Outcomes by the Year of the First Round
Note: For each year from 1992 to 2006, Panel (a) plots the number of ventures which had the first
funding round in that year, and have different outcomes later in their life time. Panel (b) plots the
fraction of ventures with different outcomes among those that had the first funding round in each year
from 1992 to 2006. The ventures are US-based ventures in the SDC VentureXpert database. Five venture
outcomes are considered ­ IPO, Merger/Acquisition, Bankruptcy, Still Active, and Unknown Outcomes.
A venture is regarded as being bankrupted if its bankruptcy is recorded by VentureXpert, Pitchbook
or Bloomberg. A venture is regarded as being still active if it still has operating activity according to
Pitchbook or Bloomberg. Those ventures that we find no information on their outcomes are labeled here
as having Unknown Outcomes.




                                                      38
                  100



                   80
        percent




                   60



                   40



                   20



                   0
                        1      2      3         4        5     6        7          8       9     10
                                                     Round Number
                                   Active with Another Round        Active with No More Events
                                   Ended in Bankruptcy              Ended in IPO
                                   Ended in M&A




                            Figure 6: Distribution of Next Event by Round
Note: When a venture receives a funding round, the next event that occurs is one of the following: (1)
it remains active and receives another funding round, (2) it goes to bankruptcy, (3) it goes to MA, (4)
it goes to IPO, and (5) it remains active but we observe no continued funding or exit events. Figure
plots the fraction of ventures that experienced each of the above listed events after they receive their
first, second, third funding round and so on. Those ventures receiving more than 10 funding rounds are
top coded to have received 10 rounds when computing the fraction. The sample includes all US-based
ventures in SDC VentureXpert database that had the first funding round prior to 2006.




                                                        39
  400
                                                                         1000


  300


                                                                          500
  200


  100
                                                                            0

    0


 -100                                                                    -500
        0    10     20             30              40     50   60               0    10      20             30              40     50   60
                    Quarters from the First Round                                            Quarters from the First Round

                         Zero Cash Flow Line                                                      Zero Cash Flow Line
                         Cumul. Inflow Amount ($ B)                                               Cumul. Inflow Amount ($ B)
                         Cumul. Outflow Amount ($ B)                                              Cumul. Outflow Amount ($ B)
                         Cumul. Net Inflow Amount ($ B)                                           Cumul. Net Inflow Amount ($ B)




            (a) No Discounting, Group A                                             (b) No Discounting, Group AB

  300                                                                     800


                                                                          600
  200

                                                                          400

  100
                                                                          200


    0                                                                       0


                                                                         -200
 -100
        0    10     20             30              40     50   60               0    10      20             30              40     50   60
                    Quarters from the First Round                                            Quarters from the First Round

                         Zero Cash Flow Line                                                      Zero Cash Flow Line
                         Cumul. Inflow Amount ($ B)                                               Cumul. Inflow Amount ($ B)
                         Cumul. Outflow Amount ($ B)                                              Cumul. Outflow Amount ($ B)
                         Cumul. Net Inflow Amount ($ B)                                           Cumul. Net Inflow Amount ($ B)




                  (c) PME, Group A                                                        (d) PME, Group AB

  300                                                                     800


                                                                          600
  200

                                                                          400

  100
                                                                          200


    0                                                                       0


                                                                         -200
 -100
        0    10     20             30              40     50   60               0    10      20             30              40     50   60
                    Quarters from the First Round                                            Quarters from the First Round

                         Zero Cash Flow Line                                                      Zero Cash Flow Line
                         Cumul. Inflow Amount ($ B)                                               Cumul. Inflow Amount ($ B)
                         Cumul. Outflow Amount ($ B)                                              Cumul. Outflow Amount ($ B)
                         Cumul. Net Inflow Amount ($ B)                                           Cumul. Net Inflow Amount ($ B)




             (e) GPMEround, Group A                                                  (f) GPMEround, Group AB

            Figure 7: Cumulative Cash Flows by Quarters from the First Round
Note: Over the life cycle of the venture, Figure plots the aggregate cumulative cash inflow, aggregate
cumulative cash outflow and aggregate cumulative net cash flow for investors investing in the portfolio of
US-based ventures in SDC VentureXpert database who had the first funding round prior to 2006. Cash
outflows and inflows are either not discounted or discounted to the venture's first funding round date
using the PME and GPME methods. Group A includes the ventures that have post-money valuation
data for the first round. Group AB in addition includes the ventures that do not have post-money
valuation data for the first round.


                                                                    40
                                       60                                                                                                                    60
 Number of Quarters until Break-Even




                                                                                                                       Number of Quarters until Break-Even
                                       40                                                                                                                    40




                                       20                                                                                                                    20




                                        0                                                                                                                     0
                                            1992q3        1996q1              1999q3            2003q1   2006q3                                                   1992q3        1996q1             1999q3             2003q1   2006q3
                                                                   Quarter of the First Round                                                                                            Quarter of the First Round




                                                     (a) No Discounting, Group A                                                                                           (b) No Discounting, Group AB

                                                                                                                                                             60
                                       50
 Number of Quarters until Break-Even




                                                                                                                       Number of Quarters until Break-Even
                                       40


                                                                                                                                                             40

                                       30




                                       20
                                                                                                                                                             20


                                       10




                                        0                                                                                                                     0
                                            1992q3        1996q1              1999q3            2003q1   2006q3                                                   1992q3        1996q1             1999q3             2003q1   2006q3
                                                                   Quarter of the First Round                                                                                            Quarter of the First Round




                                                      (c) GPMEround, Group A                                                                                                (d) GPMEround, Group AB

                                                                   Figure 8: Break-even Time by the First-Round Time
Note: For ventures that received the first funding round in each quarter, Figure plots the aggregate
break-even time of investing in these ventures ­ i.e., the number of quarters from the the first round
after which the aggregate cumulative net cash inflows from all these ventures becomes positive. Net
cash inflows are either not discounted, or discounted to the venture's first funding round date using
the GPMEround method, that is, the Generalized Public Market Equivalent method with parameters
calibrated to round-to-round returns. We do not report the results with the PME method, since they
show very similar patterns. The sample includes all US-based ventures in SDC VentureXpert database
who had the first funding round prior to 2006. Group A includes the ventures that have post-money
valuation data for the first round. Group AB in addition includes the ventures that do not have post-
money valuation data for the first round.




                                                                                                                  41
 Quarterly NPV Normalized by First Outflow




                                                                                                                                                                         Quarterly NPV Normalized by First Outflow
                                                                                                                             Quarterly PV of Inflows and Outflows




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Quarterly PV of Inflows and Outflows
                                             10                                                                         20                                                                                           15                                                                       40



                                                                                                                        15                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                              5

                                                                                                                        10                                                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                              0
                                                                                                                        5                                                                                                                                                                     10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                             -5                                                                         0                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                  1992q3       1996q1             1999q3              2003q1   2006q3                                                                                                     1992q3     1996q1             1999q3              2003q1   2006q3
                                                                        Quarter of the First Round                                                                                                                                            Quarter of the First Round

                                                                    NPV Normalized by First Outflow                                                                                                                                       NPV Normalized by First Outflow
                                                                    Average Normalized NPV before Q2 1999                                                                                                                                 Average Normalized NPV before Q2 1999
                                                                    Average Normalized NPV after Q2 1999                                                                                                                                  Average Normalized NPV after Q2 1999
                                                                    PV of Outflows, $ B                                                                                                                                                   PV of Outflows, $ B
                                                                    PV of Inflows, $ B                                                                                                                                                    PV of Inflows, $ B




                                                                 (a) PME, Group A                                                                                                                                                     (b) PME, Group AB
 Quarterly NPV Normalized by First Outflow




                                                                                                                                                                         Quarterly NPV Normalized by First Outflow
                                                                                                                             Quarterly PV of Inflows and Outflows




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Quarterly PV of Inflows and Outflows
                                             10                                                                         20                                                                                           10                                                                       40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                        15                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6

                                                                                                                        10                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                                              0
                                                                                                                        5                                                                                             2                                                                       10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                             -5                                                                         0                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                  1992q3       1996q1             1999q3              2003q1   2006q3                                                                                                     1992q3     1996q1             1999q3              2003q1   2006q3
                                                                        Quarter of the First Round                                                                                                                                            Quarter of the First Round

                                                                    NPV Normalized by First Outflow                                                                                                                                       NPV Normalized by First Outflow
                                                                    Average Normalized NPV before Q2 1999                                                                                                                                 Average Normalized NPV before Q2 1999
                                                                    Average Normalized NPV after Q2 1999                                                                                                                                  Average Normalized NPV after Q2 1999
                                                                    PV of Outflows, $ B                                                                                                                                                   PV of Outflows, $ B
                                                                    PV of Inflows, $ B                                                                                                                                                    PV of Inflows, $ B




                                                             (c) GPMEround, Group A                                                                                                                                                (d) GPMEround, Group AB

                                                           Figure 9: Normalized Inflow, Normalized Outflow, and Normalized NPV
Note: Figure plots the aggregate NPV normalized by first-round post-money valuation, aggregated cash
inflow and aggregate cash outflow by the first-round time of ventures. The sample includes US-based
ventures in SDC VentureXpert database that had the first funding round prior to 2006. Group A includes
the ventures that have post-money valuation data for the first round. Group AB in addition includes the
ventures that do not have post-money valuation data for the first round. Panel (a) and (b) use Public
Market Equivalent method to discount the cash flows. Panel (c) and (d) use Generalized Public Market
Equivalent method to discount the cash flows, with parameters calibrated to round-to-round returns.




                                                                                                                                                                    42
                                                10
                                                                                                      Zero Cash Flow Line
                                                 9                                                    1992
                                                                                                      1993
                                                 8
             Cumulative Normalized Net Inflow
                                                                                                      1994
                                                 7                                                    1995
                                                                                                      1996
                                                 6                                                    1997
                                                 5                                                    1998
                                                                                                      1999
                                                 4                                                    2000
                                                 3                                                    2001
                                                                                                      2002
                                                 2                                                    2003
                                                                                                      2004
                                                 1
                                                                                                      2005
                                                 0                                                    2006

                                                -1

                                                -2
                                                     1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015   2020
                                                                          year




                                                                    (a) 1st-Round without Top 30 VC

                                                10
                                                                                                      Zero Cash Flow Line
                                                 9                                                    1992
                                                                                                      1993
                                                 8
             Cumulative Normalized Net Inflow




                                                                                                      1994
                                                 7                                                    1995
                                                                                                      1996
                                                 6                                                    1997
                                                 5                                                    1998
                                                                                                      1999
                                                 4                                                    2000
                                                 3                                                    2001
                                                                                                      2002
                                                 2                                                    2003
                                                                                                      2004
                                                 1
                                                                                                      2005
                                                 0                                                    2006

                                                -1

                                                -2
                                                     1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015   2020
                                                                          year




                                                                     (b) 1st-Round with Top 30 VC

Figure 10: Cumulative Discounted Cash Flows over Years, for Different 1st-round Year
Note: Figure plots the aggregate cumulative normalized cash flows of ventures that received the first
funding round in different years, for any given years after the first round. Venture cash flows are dicounted
using the GPMEround method, i.e., the Generalized Public Market Equivalent method with parameters
calibrated to round-to-round returns. The sample includes all US-based ventures in SDC VentureXpert
database that had the first funding round prior to 2006. Panel(a) uses the subsample of ventures whose
first-round investor team does not include any Top 30 VC as defined before. Panel (b) uses the subsample
of ventures whose first-round investor team includes at least one Top 30 VC.




                                                                                  43
                     Table 1: Analysis of Ventures Alive in VentureXpert
  SDC Outcomes\Outcomes in Other Data               Alive     BR    IPO    MA     Total    Other Data
                                                         48   440      8   389      885    PitchBook
                                                      202      97      0    37      336    Bloomberg
                       Alive                              0     0      4      0        4   Nasdaq
                                                         30    16      1      6      53    Crunchbase
                                                      673      51      1    23      748    Others
                       Total                          953     604    14    455     2026
Note: We collect information on ventures' outcomes from the universe of SDC VentureXpert, SDC
Merger & Acquisition, and SDC Global New Issues data updated to 2019 June . Based on VentureXpert
data, we classify a venture whose current situation is active or if we do not observe its current situation
as Alive. Also, we classify a venture whose current situation is defunct or bankruptcy as Bankruptcy
(i.e., BR). The ventures that are observed to exit through IPOs and mergers & acquisitions in any of
the SDC databases are classified as IPO and MA, respectively. For US-based ventures that had the
first funding round in 1992-2006, did not go bankrupt according to VentureXpert data, we cross-checked
their outcomes with various other data sources including PitchBook, Bloomberg, Nasdaq, Crunchbase
and other Internet sources. Table reports a tabulation of the ventures' outcomes based on the other data
source, when classified as Alive based on VentureXpert data.




                                                    44
                     Table 2: Source of Venture Outcomes and Exit Values
         A. Source of the Venture Outcomes
         # of Ventures \ Outcome                              IPO             MA              BR
         Total                                                       1,229           5,070    2,228
         Outcome recorded in SDC                                       937            4569     1315
         Outcome solely from other sources                             292              501     913
         B. Exit Values
         # of Ventures \ Outcome                              IPO             MA
         Total                                                       1,229           5,070
                                  Outcomes recorded in SDC
         Exit values non-missing                                  796/937     2,194/4,569
         Exit values complemented by other sources                122/937       396/4,569
         Exit values conflicted with other sources                  75/937      242/4,569
                             Outcomes solely from other sources
         Exit values non-missing                                  278/292           91/501
         Total # of ventures with exit values                 1,196/1,229     2,681/4,569
Note: We collect information on ventures' outcomes from the universe of SDC VentureXpert, SDC
Merger & Acquisition, and SDC Global New Issues data updated to 2019 June . Based on VentureXpert
data, we classify a venture whose current situation is active or if we do not observe its current situation as
Alive. Also, we classify a venture whose current situation is defunct or bankruptcy as Bankruptcy (i.e.,
BR). The ventures that are observed to exit through IPO or mergers & acquisitions are classified as IPOs
and MA, respectively. For US-based ventures that received the first funding round in 1992-2006, did not
go bankrupt according to VentureXpert, we cross-checked their outcomes using PitchBook, Bloomberg,
Nasdaq, Crunchbase and other Internet sources. Then we supplemented the SDC data with these other
data sources. Restricted to the sample of ventures we cross-checked, Panel A of this table shows the
number of ventures that were recorded to go to IPO, M&A and Bankruptcy in SDC databases, and the
number of ventures that were identified to go to IPO, M&A and Bankruptcy only in other data sources.
Panel B shows the number of ventures recorded to go to IPO and MA in SDC databases with exit values,
the number of those without exit values but can be complemented by other sources, the number of those
whose exit values in SDC databases and other sources have conflicts ­i.e., differ by more than 5%. Panel
B also shows the number of ventures that were identified to go to IPO and MA solely in other data
sources and with exit values.




                                                     45
              Table 3: Filter's Effect on the Number of Rounds and Ventures
               Period         Group     # Rounds        # Ventures   # Rounds per Venture

          Before Filtering      A         14,304          3,885                 3.7
          Before Filtering      B         45,203          13,357                3.4
          After Filtering       A         14,304          3,885                 3.7
          After Filtering       B         43,580          12,511                3.5

Note: We first separate all the ventures to two groups. Group A includes ventures that have post-money
valuation data for the first round. Group B includes ventures that do not have post-money valuation
data for the first round. Then we apply a filtering process that excludes the rounds whose records are
not informative. Our filtering process starts from the beginning of the venture's funding process, drops
the rounds with neither amount raised nor post-money valuation data, and reclassify the round with the
first appearance of either amount raised or post-money valuation available as the first round. The filter
has effect only on Group B.




                                                   46
              Table 4: Actual Data vs. Data Filled with Imputation Models
                                         Amount Raised

    Group    Actual or Filled     # Rounds      % Rounds       Total Raised ($ B)     % Raised

             Actual                   14,029          98.1%                  142.2       99.4%
    A
             Filled                       275          1.9%                     0.9       0.6%
             Actual                   42,372          97.2%                  300.9       98.8%
    B
             Filled                     1,208          2.8%                     3.8       1.2%

                                First-Round Ownership Given Up

    Group    Actual or Filled    # Ventures     % Ventures         Avg. 1st-Round OGU

             Actual                     3,871         99.6%                              37.1%
    A
             Filled                        14          0.4%                              30.2%
             Actual                       112          0.9%                              37.4%
    B
             Filled                   12,399          99.1%                              32.3%

                                            MA Value

    Group    Actual or Filled    # Ventures     % Ventures      Total Value($ B)      % Value

             Actual                       909         52.4%                  142.8       77.9%
    A
             Filled                       826         47.6%                   40.5       22.1%
             Actual                     2,244         50.2%                  369.2       78.0%
    B
             Filled                     2,224         49.8%                  104.4       22.0%

                                          Pre-IPO Value

    Group    Actual or Filled    # Ventures     % Ventures      Total Value($ B)      % Value

             Actual                       697         98.7%                  238.1       99.2%
    A
             Filled                         9          1.3%                     1.9       0.8%
             Actual                     1,123         97.4%                  311.1       99.0%
    B
             Filled                        30          2.6%                     3.1       1.0%

Note: Table shows the fraction of data that is filled for four variables including the amount raised,
the first-round ownership given up by the venture founders, the venture's MA value and the venture's
pre-IPO value. Table also compares the filled data with the actual data. Group A includes ventures
that have post-money valuation data for the first round. Group B includes ventures that do not have
post-money valuation data for the first round.




                                                 47
          Table 5: Test Statistics for Structural Break: Constant and AR(1) Models
 Normalized NPVt                    (1)          (2)             (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)

 Constant                        1.817***      1.651***        1.558***    0.764**     0.760**    1.159***
                                  (0.296)       (0.275)         (0.229)    (0.328)     (0.311)     (0.238)
 Normalized NPVt-1                                                        0.551***    0.513***      0.166
                                                                           (0.112)     (0.115)     (0.101)

 Observations                      60             60          60             59           59          59
 R-squared                        0.000          0.000       0.000         0.298        0.258       0.045
 Sample                          GroupA        GroupA      GroupAB        GroupA      GroupA      GroupAB
 Discounting                      PME         GPMEround   GPMEround        PME       GPMEround   GPMEround
 Break Date                      1999Q2         1999Q2      1999Q2        1999Q2       1999Q2      1999Q2
 Chi-squared                      39.77          26.01       18.77         14.64        10.49       18.67
 DF                                 1              1           1             2            2           2
 P Value                          0.000          0.000       0.000         0.013        0.078       0.002
 ***               **
       p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

Note: The Table shows the test statistics from the Supremum Wald tests of whether the parameters
estimates of the time-series models of the aggregate normalized NPV are different before and after an
unknown break date. Column (1)-(3) assumes the aggregate normalized NPV is a constant. Column (4)-
(6) assumes the aggregate normalized NPV follows an AR(1) model. Different discounting method and
different sample of ventures are used in each specification. Group A includes the ventures that have post-
money valuation data for the first round. Group AB in addition includes the venture that do not have
post-money valuation data for the first round. PME stands for the Public Market Equivalent method
for discounting the venture cash flows. And GPMEround stands for the Generalized Public Market
Equivalent method for discounting the venture cash flows, with parameters calibrated to round-to-round
returns.




                                                          48
       Table 6: Past Experience of 1st-Round VCs and Realized Normalized NPV
       VARIABLES                                                    NPV Normalized by First Outflow


       lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)                -1.684    -1.617       -1.779    -1.042     -1.029    -1.139
                                                  (0.461)   (0.469)      (0.488)   (0.215)    (0.214)   (0.226)

       Top 30 VC                                  3.455     5.677        4.497     2.307      3.672     2.940
                                                  (0.993)   (1.746)      (1.569)   (0.573)    (1.179)   (1.148)

       Top 30 VC × Post-1999                                -3.943       -4.174               -2.100    -2.349
                                                            (1.919)      (1.908)              (1.254)   (1.237)

       WAVG VC Ratio of Exit                                             5.830                          4.860
                                                                         (2.381)                        (0.916)

       WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round                                       -0.838                         -0.426
                                                                         (1.091)                        (0.582)

       WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy                                       -0.615                         2.481
                                                                         (4.247)                        (2.588)

       lg(WAVG VC # Rounds)                                              0.688                          0.279
                                                                         (0.568)                        (0.296)
       N                                          3608      3608         3608      11899      11899     11899
       R2                                         0.080     0.083        0.087     0.034      0.035     0.038
       Sample                                     GroupA    GroupA       GroupA    GroupAB    GroupAB   GroupAB
       Year FE                                    Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
       Industry FE                                Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
       Year × Industry FE                         Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
       Standard errors in parentheses
                                    
          p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
Note: Table reports the estimation results from regressing NPV normalized by first round post money
valuation on a set of experience measures of the VC team invested in the venture's first funding round,
and control variables. The NPV uses the GPMEround discounting specification. Top 30 VC is a dummy
variable that equals 1 if any VC that ranked in the top 30 according to the number of total funding
rounds invested in the past 10 years, participated in the venture's first round. WAVG VC Ratio of Exit
is the weighted average of the ratio of the funding rounds that are associated with successful exits in the
past 10 year of all the VCs participated in the venture's first round, where the weight is the total funding
rounds invested by the VCs in the past 10 years. Similarly defined are WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round
and WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy. They are the total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the ratio of
the funding rounds that are associated with continued financing and bankruptcy of the first-round VCs,
respectively. WAVG VC # Rounds is the total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the funding rounds
invested in the past 10 years by the first-round VCs. Group A are ventures that have first-round post-
money valuations. Group AB in addition includes the ventures that do not have first-round post-money
valuations. In parenthesis are standard errors.



                                                               49
          Table 7: Past Experience of 1st-Round VCs and Venture Successful Exits
   VARIABLES                                  Exit through IPO or M&A     Exit through IPO       Exit through M&A


   lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)                0.0579      0.0448        0.0394      0.0216      0.0184      0.0232
                                              (0.00617)   (0.00392)     (0.00626)   (0.00278)   (0.00705)   (0.00421)

   Top 30 VC                                  0.0585      0.0326        0.0760      0.0638      -0.0175     -0.0312
                                              (0.0200)    (0.0200)      (0.0270)    (0.0207)    (0.0266)    (0.0208)

   Top 30 VC × Post-1999                      -0.0505     -0.0407       -0.0885     -0.0473     0.0381      0.00661
                                              (0.0214)    (0.0201)      (0.0295)    (0.0221)    (0.0301)    (0.0223)

   WAVG VC Ratio of Exit                      0.00658     0.0761        0.128       0.0452      -0.121      0.0309
                                              (0.0812)    (0.0353)      (0.0530)    (0.0185)    (0.0709)    (0.0359)

   WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round                0.0180      -0.0134       -0.0763     -0.0337     0.0944      0.0204
                                              (0.0537)    (0.0255)      (0.0350)    (0.0132)    (0.0510)    (0.0269)

   WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy                0.0432      0.0383        0.212       0.0310      -0.169      0.00729
                                              (0.325)     (0.175)       (0.240)     (0.0762)    (0.201)     (0.166)

   lg(WAVG VC # Rounds)                       0.0225      0.0381        0.0000598   0.0104      0.0224      0.0276
                                              (0.0239)    (0.00950)     (0.0152)    (0.00560)   (0.0220)    (0.00995)
   N                                          3608        11899         3608        11899       3608        11899
   R2                                         0.077       0.059         0.199       0.116       0.066       0.045
   Sample                                     GroupA      GroupAB       GroupA      GroupAB     GroupA      GroupAB
   Year FE                                    Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
   Industry FE                                Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
   Year × Industry FE                         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
   Standard errors in parentheses
                                
      p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
Note: Table reports the estimation results from regressing dummies for venture successful exits on a
set of experience measures of the VC team invested in the venture's first funding round, together with
control variables. Top 30 VC is a dummy variable that equals 1 if any VC that ranked in the top
30 according to the number of total funding rounds invested in the past 10 years, participated in the
venture's first round. WAVG VC Ratio of Exit is the weighted average of the ratio of the funding rounds
that are associated with successful exits in the past 10 year of all the VCs participated in the venture's
first round, where the weight is the total funding rounds invested by the VCs in the past 10 years.
Similarly defined are WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round and WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy. They are
the total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the ratio of the funding rounds that are associated with
continued financing and bankruptcy of the first-round VCs, respectively. WAVG VC # Rounds is the
total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the funding rounds invested in the past 10 years by the first-
round VCs. Group A are ventures that have first-round post-money valuations. Group AB in addition
includes the ventures that do not have first-round post-money valuations. In parenthesis are standard
errors.



                                                                   50
Table 8: Past Performance of 1st-Round VCs and Realized Normalized NPV Conditional
on Exit
       VARIABLES                                          NPV Normalized by First Outflow (Only Exited Ventures)


       lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)                  -5.143      -5.065    -5.372    -4.536      -4.518     -4.690
                                                    (0.995)     (1.015)   (1.033)   (0.518)     (0.519)    (0.534)

       Top 30 VC                                    5.845       8.209     5.537     4.801       6.464      4.794
                                                    (1.580)     (2.702)   (2.491)   (0.986)     (1.970)    (2.006)

       Top 30 VC × Post-1999                                    -4.572    -4.739                -2.697     -3.020
                                                                (3.023)   (2.997)               (2.104)    (2.077)

       WAVG VC Ratio of Exit                                              10.71                            8.091
                                                                          (4.351)                          (2.383)

       WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round                                        -0.981                           -0.107
                                                                          (1.918)                          (1.304)

       WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy                                        -23.41                           -1.228
                                                                          (14.77)                          (6.878)

       lg(WAVG VC # Rounds)                                               1.582                            0.763
                                                                          (1.058)                          (0.618)
       N                                            2337        2337      2337      6932        6932       6932
       R2                                           0.132       0.134     0.141     0.095       0.096      0.100
       Sample                                       GroupA      GroupA    GroupA    GroupAB     GroupAB    GroupAB
       Year FE                                      Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes
       Industry FE                                  Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes
       Year × Industry FE                           Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes
       *** p   < 0.01,   ** p   < 0.05, * p < 0.1
Note: Table reports the estimation results from regressing NPV normalized by first round post money
valuation on a set of experience measures of the VC team invested in the venture's first funding round,
and control variables. The NPV uses the GPMEround discounting specification. The sample includes
only the successfully exited ventures. Top 30 VC is a dummy variable that equals 1 if any VC that ranked
in the top 30 according to the number of total funding rounds invested in the past 10 years, participated
in the venture's first round. WAVG VC Ratio of Exit is the weighted average of the ratio of the funding
rounds that are associated with successful exits in the past 10 year of all the VCs participated in the
venture's first round, where the weight is the total funding rounds invested by the VCs in the past 10
years. Similarly defined are WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round and WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy. They
are the total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the ratio of the funding rounds that are associated with
continued financing and bankruptcy of the first-round VCs, respectively. WAVG VC # Rounds is the
total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the funding rounds invested in the past 10 years by the first-
round VCs. Group A are ventures that have first-round post-money valuations. Group AB in addition
includes the ventures that do not have first-round post-money valuations. In parenthesis are standard
errors.

                                                                  51
Table 9: Past Performance of 1st-Round VCs and Performance: Regression by Periods
   VARIABLES                                       Normalized NPV           IPO or M&A Exit        Normalized NPV (Exited)

                                                      (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
   lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)                  -3.365      -0.738        0.0484      0.0626       -8.100      -3.032
                                                (1.633)     (0.638)       (0.0219)    (0.0134)     (1.794)     (0.834)

   Top 30 VC                                    4.611       0.284         0.101       -0.0116      5.699       0.448
                                                (1.648)     (0.541)       (0.0538)    (0.0282)     (2.614)     (0.572)

   WAVG VC Ratio of Exit                        13.97       1.709         0.194       -0.0668      16.06       4.448
                                                (6.050)     (1.582)       (0.0556)    (0.0846)     (9.842)     (2.955)

   WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round                  -3.929      0.573         -0.155      0.121        0.215       -1.155
                                                (2.093)     (1.273)       (0.0564)    (0.0615)     (4.014)     (2.146)

   WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy                  -21.91      0.982         1.245       -0.0720      -61.49      -9.276
                                                (21.29)     (3.767)       (1.031)     (0.216)      (38.14)     (18.04)

   lg(WAVG VC # Rounds)                         0.793       0.363         0.00164     0.0297       1.353       1.278
                                                (1.324)     (0.515)       (0.0202)    (0.0287)     (2.444)     (0.840)
   N                                            1355        2253          1355        2253         989         1348
   R2                                           0.076       0.041         0.081       0.057        0.133       0.103
   Sample                                       GroupA      GroupA        GroupA      GroupA       GroupA      GroupA
   Year FE                                      Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
   Industry FE                                  Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
   Year × Industry FE                           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
   Period                                       Pre-Break   Post-Break    Pre-Break   Post-Break   Pre-Break   Post-Break
   *** p   < 0.01,   ** p   < 0.05, * p < 0.1
Note: Table reports the estimation results from regressing NPV normalized by first outlow (Column
(1) and (2)), dummies for successful exits (Column (3) and (4)) on a set of experience measures of
the VC team invested in the venture's first funding round, and control variables. The NPV uses the
GPMEround discounting specification. Column (5) and (6) have NPV normalized by first outlow as
outcome variable as well, but restrict the sample to only the successfully exited ventures. Column (1),
(3) and (5) are regression results for the pre-break period. Column (2), (4) and (6) are regression results
for the post-break period. Top 30 VC is a dummy variable that equals 1 if any VC that ranked in the
top 30 according to the number of total funding rounds invested in the past 10 years, participated in
the venture's first round. WAVG VC Ratio of Exit is the weighted average of the ratio of the funding
rounds that are associated with successful exits in the past 10 year of all the VCs participated in the
venture's first round, where the weight is the total funding rounds invested by the VCs in the past 10
years. Similarly defined are WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round and WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy. They
are the total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the ratio of the funding rounds that are associated
with continued financing and bankruptcy of the first-round VCs, respectively. WAVG VC # Rounds
is the total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the funding rounds invested in the past 10 years by the
first-round VCs. Group A are ventures that have first-round post-money valuations. In parenthesis are
standard errors.


                                                                     52
                   Table 10: Past Performance of 1st-Round VCs and Innovation
       VARIABLES                                           Has Patent        lg(1 + # Patents)    lg(1 + # Citations)


       lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)                  0.000178    -0.00484    0.0723     0.0974     0.105      0.194
                                                    (0.00878)   (0.00610)   (0.0456)   (0.0254)   (0.0854)   (0.0465)

       Top 30 VC                                    0.0902      0.0531      0.209      0.196      0.684      0.446
                                                    (0.0280)    (0.0175)    (0.123)    (0.0945)   (0.284)    (0.196)

       Top 30 VC × Post-1999                        -0.0425     -0.00141    -0.0127    0.0406     -0.219     -0.0122
                                                    (0.0337)    (0.0152)    (0.148)    (0.0878)   (0.320)    (0.170)

       WAVG VC Ratio of Exit                        0.0869      0.0335      0.0294     0.210      -0.654     0.139
                                                    (0.0688)    (0.0358)    (0.239)    (0.207)    (0.812)    (0.277)

       WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round                  0.0853      0.00120     -0.241     0.0123     -0.0733    0.173
                                                    (0.0406)    (0.0227)    (0.214)    (0.135)    (0.446)    (0.304)

       WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy                  0.294       -0.0446     0.204      0.167      -2.028     0.384
                                                    (0.220)     (0.118)     (0.686)    (0.455)    (2.702)    (1.312)

       lg(WAVG VC # Rounds)                         0.0325      0.0419      0.183      0.0698     0.261      0.131
                                                    (0.0188)    (0.00996)   (0.0599)   (0.0246)   (0.207)    (0.0819)
       N                                            3608        11899       2039       6450       2039       6450
       R2                                           0.112       0.090       0.126      0.096      0.144      0.114
       Sample                                       GroupA      GroupAB     GroupA     GroupAB    GroupA     GroupAB
       Year FE                                      Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
       Industry FE                                  Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
       Year × Industry FE                           Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
       *** p   < 0.01,   ** p   < 0.05, * p < 0.1
Note: Table reports the estimation results from regressing venture's patents holding and patents citations
on a set of experience measures of the VC team invested in the venture's first funding round, together
with control variables. Top 30 VC is a dummy variable that equals 1 if any VC that ranked in the
top 30 according to the number of total funding rounds invested in the past 10 years, participated in
the venture's first round. WAVG VC Ratio of Exit is the weighted average of the ratio of the funding
rounds that are associated with successful exits in the past 10 year of all the VCs participated in the
venture's first round, where the weight is the total funding rounds invested by the VCs in the past 10
years. Similarly defined are WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round and WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy. They
are the total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the ratio of the funding rounds that are associated with
continued financing and bankruptcy of the first-round VCs, respectively. WAVG VC # Rounds is the
total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the funding rounds invested in the past 10 years by the first-
round VCs. Group A are ventures that have first-round post-money valuations. Group AB in addition
includes the ventures that do not have first-round post-money valuations. In parenthesis are standard
errors.




                                                                  53
  Table 11: Past Performance of 1st-Round VCs and 1st-Round Ownership Given Up
     VARIABLES                                                            1st-Round Ownership Given Up


     lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)                  0.0603      0.0608         0.0593      0.0601       0.0603       0.0594
                                                  (0.00239)   (0.00241)      (0.00221)   (0.000890)   (0.000896)   (0.000862)

     Top 30 VC                                    0.0285      0.0434         0.0207      0.0203       0.0343       0.0148
                                                  (0.00379)   (0.00397)      (0.00533)   (0.00193)    (0.00292)    (0.00323)

     Top 30 VC × Post-1999                                    -0.0263        -0.0233                  -0.0215      -0.0199
                                                              (0.00688)      (0.00680)                (0.00411)    (0.00402)

     WAVG VC Ratio of Exit                                                   -0.0495                               -0.0243
                                                                             (0.0211)                              (0.00918)

     WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round                                             0.0439                                0.0235
                                                                             (0.0165)                              (0.00333)

     WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy                                             -0.148                                -0.0641
                                                                             (0.101)                               (0.0311)

     lg(WAVG VC # Rounds)                                                    0.0174                                0.0149
                                                                             (0.00642)                             (0.00185)
     N                                            3608        3608           3608        11899        11899        11899
     R2                                           0.207       0.208          0.214       0.466        0.467        0.474
     Sample                                       GroupA      GroupA         GroupA      GroupAB      GroupAB      GroupAB
     Year FE                                      Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
     Industry FE                                  Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
     Year × Industry FE                           Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
     *** p   < 0.01,   ** p   < 0.05, * p < 0.1
Note: Table reports the estimation results from regressing venture's first-round ownership given up to the
VC investors on a set of experience measures of the VC team invested in the venture's first funding round,
together with control variables. Top 30 VC is a dummy variable that equals 1 if any VC that ranked in
the top 30 according to the number of total funding rounds invested in the past 10 years, participated
in the venture's first round. WAVG VC Ratio of Exit is the weighted average of the ratio of the funding
rounds that are associated with successful exits in the past 10 year of all the VCs participated in the
venture's first round, where the weight is the total funding rounds invested by the VCs in the past 10
years. Similarly defined are WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round and WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy. They
are the total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the ratio of the funding rounds that are associated with
continued financing and bankruptcy of the first-round VCs, respectively. WAVG VC # Rounds is the
total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the funding rounds invested in the past 10 years by the first-
round VCs. Group A are ventures that have first-round post-money valuations. Group AB in addition
includes the ventures that do not have first-round post-money valuations. In parenthesis are standard
errors.




                                                                     54
A       Appendix
A.1       Methodology for Imputing Missing Values
We utilize statistical models to impute the missing values in several key variables of our
study. For the amount raised data, we impute the missing values using linear regression
models. For each round number r = 1, 2, ..., 9 and separately for rounds which has round
number > 9 , we estimate the model given below.

            log AmountRaisedi,r =  +  log AmountRaisedi,r-1 + Zi,r +            i,r         (1)

where AmountRaisedi,r is the amount raised by venture i in round r. Zi,r is a set
of control variables: including fixed effects on the number of participating investors,
industry, funding stage and time.
    For the first-round ownership given up data, we impute the missing values using a
logit model. Specifically, we estimate a logit model relating the ownership given up in
each round to a rich set of observable variables as follows.

        OwnershipGivenU pi,r
log                            =  + 1 log AmountRaisedi,r + 2 (log AmountRaised)2
                                                                                i,r +
      1 - OwnershipGivenU pi,r
                                3 log CumulativeAmountRaisedi,r + Zi,r +              i,r   (2)

where OwnershipGivenU pi,r is the ownership given up by venture i in round r to
the outside investors. AmountRaisedi,r is the amount raised by venture i in round r.
CumulativeAmountRaisedi,r is the cumulative amount raised by venture i from the first
round to round r. Zi,r is a set of control variables, including fixed effects on the number of
participating investors, industry fixed effects, funding stage fixed effects, round number
fixed effects and time fixed effects.
    For the pre-IPO valuations and pre-MA valuations, the imputation model is

V aluationi =  + 1 V aluationi + 2 lastP M V toExiti + 3 V aluationi × lastP M V toExiti
             + 4 log F inalAmountRaisedi + 5 F inalRoundtoExiti
             + 6 N ASDAQReturni +        i                                                  (3)

where V aluationi is either pre-IPO valuation or pre-MA valuation of venture i. As for
the independent variables, V aluationi is the extrapolated valuation for venture i, which
equals the last available post-money valuation multiplied by the cumulative NASDAQ

                                             55
stock return from the last post-money valuation date to the venture's exit. lastP M V toExiti
is the number of days from the last post-money valuation date to the venture's exit.
F inalAmountRaisedi is the amount raised by venture i in its last funding round. F inalRound-
toExiti is the number of days from venture i's last funding round to the its exit. N ASDAQ-
Returni is the cumulative NASDAQ stock return from venture i's last funding round to
its exit.


A.2     Example: Calculating the NPV of a Venture
In Table A.1, we show the life cycle of a hypothetical venture the complete funding
round information. The venture raises one round per year and bankrupt at the end of
the 4th year. In the example, the market return is 10% every year. With the amount
raised and post-money valuation data in each round, we can easily calculate the pre-
money valuation, ownership given up, and the three measures of returns: round-to-round
return, round-to-exit return and normalized NPV.

                                                Amount Raised
                    Ownership Given Up =
                                             Post-Money Valuation

                                            Pre-Money Valuationt+1
               Round-to-Round Returnt =                            -1
                                            Post-Money Valuationt

                                           Value of Founder's EquityT
                 Round-to-Exit Returnt =
                                           Value of Founder's Equityt
   The Normalized NPV capturing the net return to all equity holders is calculated as:

                               1              5     8      20      8
         Normalized NPV =         × (-10 -       -      -      +      ) = -3.07
                              10            1.1 1.12 1.13 1.14
   Here, we use the first-round pre-money valuation as a proxy for the amount of money
invested by the founder, and use PME for discounting.
   Table A.2 illustrates how the calculation of round-to-round returns and round-to-exit
returns is impacted by missing data. We still study this hypothetical venture, but assume
the post-money valuation of the 3rd round is missing. We see that the round-to-round
returns and round-to-exit returns could not be computed for multiple rounds. However,
the Normalized NPV could still be calculated and is not affected by the missing data.




                                           56
   Table A.1: Computation of Return Measures with Complete Round Information
   Year                              0           1        2         3           4

   Stage                      Round 1 Round 2 Round 3 Round 4 Bankrupt
   Amount Raised                    2       5       8      20      n.a.
   Post-Money Valuation            10      20      40      80         8
   Market Return                 10%     10%     10%     10%      10%

   Pre-Money Valuation               8           15      32         60       n.a.
   Ownership Given Up             20%          25%     20%        25%        n.a.
   Round-to-Round Return          50%          60%     50%       -90%        n.a.
   Round-to-Exit Return          -64%         -76%    -85%       -90%        n.a.
   Normalizd NPV (PME)           -3.07



   Table A.2: Computation of Return Measures with Incomplete Round Information
   Year                              0           1        2         3           4

   Stage                      Round 1 Round 2 Round 3 Round 4 Bankrupt
   Amount Raised                    2       5       8      20      n.a.
   Post-Money Valuation            10      20       .      80         8
   Market Return                 10%     10%     10%     10%      10%

   Pre-Money Valuation               8          15        .         60       n.a.
   Ownership Given Up             20%         25%         .       25%        n.a.
   Round-to-Round Return          50%            .        .      -90%        n.a.
   Round-to-Exit Return              .           .        .      -90%        n.a.
   Normalizd NPV (PME)           -3.07


A.3    Proofs of the Propositions
Proof of Proposition 1:
  From the first order condition of the maximization problem in Equation (6), we get:

                                x=
                                     E[s] - v
                                            ¯ + mv
                                                 ¯
                                           2s

   Since   E[s] = E[v] = v
                         ¯ = V , we have x =
                                              + m - 1
                                                2
                                                      .

                                         57
   Since the average quality of VCs funding a venture  = H +(1 - )L and the fraction
of H -type VCs among VCs funding a given venture  = p(1 - ) + Q, we know that
 = H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L, and could then express x as:

                    H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L + m - 1
               x=
                       2(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L)
   Then we could calculate the partial derivatives:

           x   x Q                (H - L)(m - 1)
             =     =-
               Q      2(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L)2

          2x    2 x Q            ( - 1)(H - L)2 (m - 1)
             =        =-
         p     Qp        (H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L)3
    Assume that 1 - m > 0, since  will in general be much smaller than 1, and m only
                                    2x
slightly above 1. Then x
                            0 and p      0.
Proof of Proposition 2:
(1) All equity holders
    The NPV of the investment in a venture is QV - (v     ¯+v ¯), where Q indicates the
quality of the venture. Normalize the NPV with the initial investment by both VCs and
founder, we get the normalized NPV to all equity holders:

                                         QV
                                    =         -1
                                         v
                                         ¯+v¯

Since  = H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L and v
                                                ¯ = V /2, we could express the
normalized NPV as:

                    - 2HQ(-p + p + Q) + 2LQ(-p + p + Q - 1) + 1
            =-
                                      +1

With which we could calculate the partial derivatives:

                                   2( - 1)Q(H - L)
                                =-
                              p         +1

                    Q   2(2Q(H - L) + (1 - )p(H - L) + L)
                 =    =
                   Q                ( + 1)
                         2    2  Q    2( - 1)(H - L)
                           =       =-
                        p    Qp          ( + 1)



                                          58
                                                                            2
   Since Q 0, H - L > 0, and -1 +  0, we know        p
                                                           0, 
                                                                   0 and p 
                                                                                 0.
(2) VCs The VCs get x fraction of the return, and the investment is v¯, so:

               xQV     2Qx(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L)
       V C =       -1=                                         -1
               v¯                         

(3) Founder The founder get 1 - x fraction of the return, and the investment is v
                                                                                ¯, so:
                (1 - x)QV
          F D =              -1
                     v
                     ¯                                                              (4)
              = 2Q(1 - x)(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L) - 1

Proof of Proposition 3:
  From the first order condition of the maximization problem in Equation (6), we get:

                               x=
                                    E[s] - QV + mQV
                                            2s

   Since E[s] = s = QV , we have x =
                                        + m - 1
                                                   .
                                            2
                                                       -p+p+Q)+(-1)Lp-LQ+L+m-1
   Thus, the same as the case in Proposition 1, x = H (2(H (-p+p+Q)+(-1)Lp-LQ+L)
                                                                                 .
Proof of Proposition 4:
(1) All equity holders
   All equity holders get QV as the return, and the investment is QV + QV , so:

                    QV
               =           -1
                   QV + QV
                   - + H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L - 1
                 =
                                     +1

With which we could calculate the partial derivatives:

                                     ( - 1)(H - L)
                                  =-
                                p        +1

                                    Q   H -L
                                 =    =
                                   Q    +1
                                  2    2  Q
                                    =       =0
                                 p    Qp 
                                                                  
   Since Q     0, H - L > 0, and -1 +      0, we know    p
                                                             0,   
                                                                     0.
(2) VCs



                                          59
   The VCs get x fraction of the return, and the investment is QV , so:

                xQV     x(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L)
        V C =       -1=                                       -1
                QV                        

(3) High-ability VCs
                                                                                    H
    The high-ability VCs contribute to  fraction of the amount raised, and get    H+L(1-)
fraction of the return to the VCs, then:
                                           H
                         H
                                   xQV   H+L(1-)         Hx
                         V C   =                   -1=      -1
                                      QV                  

(4) Low-ability VCs
                                                                                   L(1-)
    The low-ability VCs contribute to 1- fraction of the amount raised, and get   H+L(1-)
fraction of the return to the VCs, then:

                                          L(1-)
                         L
                                   xQV   H+L(1-)         Lx
                         V C   =                   -1=      -1
                                    QV (1 - )             

(5) Founder
   The founder get 1 - x fraction of the return, and the investment is QV , so:

          (1 - x)QV
  F D =             - 1 = (1 - x)(H (-p + p + Q) + ( - 1)Lp - LQ + L) - 1
             QV




                                            60
(This page intentionally left blank)
                            Internet Appendix
                            (Not Intended for Publication)

A. Data Sources and Data Cleaning
For 10,533 US-based ventures that received the first funding round between 1992 and




                                                     ix
2006, and did not experience bankruptcy according to VentureXpert, we cross-checked
their exit events with data from PitchBook, Bloomberg, NASDAQ, Crunchbase and other
Internet sources. Among the 2,026 ventures thatare shown as being alive in VentureXpert,




                                                   nd
604 exited through bankruptcy, 14 through IPO, and 455 through MA according to other
sources. Table IA.1 below lists the 14 exits through IPOs.




                                               pe
                   Table IA.1: IPOs not recorded by VentureXpert
     name                               IPO exchange IPO date           PERMCO
     Ikano Communications Inc           NASDAQ             9/22/2005        47441
     EXDS Inc                           NASDAQ             3/19/1998        16018
                                   Ap
     Ivow Inc                           NASDAQ              7/3/1997        15577
     Jmxi Inc                           NASDAQ              5/7/1999        16518
     Rubio's Restaurants Inc            NASDAQ             5/21/1999        16543
     Greenway Health Inc                NYSE                2/2/2012        53986
     Ambicom Inc                        OTC                 3/4/2011
                           et

     Modular Space Corp                 OTC                2/22/2017
     Infoteria Corp                     TKS                6/22/2007
     Morpho Technologies                TOKYO SE           7/21/2011
                  ern



     Crown Bioscience Inc               TPEX              12/12/2016
     CoadNA Photonics Inc               TWSE                9/9/2011
     Intelligent Epitaxy Technology Inc TWSE               7/24/2013
     Netex Inc                          MADRID SE         10/31/2017
         Int




                                           1
B. Estimation Results of the Imputation Models
    We utilize statistical models described in Appendix A.1 to impute the missing values
in the variables essential to our analysis ­ including first-round ownership given up,
amount raised in the funding rounds, pre-IPO valuations and pre-MA valuations, based
on observable information.




                                                                     ix
    Table IA.2 reports the estimation results of the imputation models for the first-round
ownership given up data. Table IA.3 below reports the estimation results of the imputa-




                                                                   nd
tion models for the amount raised data. Table IA.4 and Table IA.5 report the estimation
results of the imputation model for the pre-MA and pre-IPO valuations.

     Table IA.2: Estimation of the Imputation Models for the Ownership Given Up


                   VARIABLES
                                                           (1)


                                                              pe      (2)
                                                          Logit Ownership Given Up
                                                                                  (3)
                                                 Ap
                   Log Amount                          0.431***    2.355***    2.448***
                                                        (0.008)     (0.097)     (0.090)
                   Log Amount Squared                              -0.064***   -0.050***
                                                                    (0.003)     (0.003)
                   Log Cumulative Amount                                       -0.711***
                                                                                (0.015)
                                     et


                   Observations                          13,709     13,709      13,709
                   R-squared                             0.384       0.402       0.489
                      ern



                   Industry FE                            Yes        Yes         Yes
                   Stage FE                               Yes        Yes         Yes
                   Round Number FE                        Yes        Yes         Yes
                   Year FE                                Yes        Yes         Yes
                   Investor Number FE                     Yes        Yes         Yes
           Int




                   CV Psuedo-R2 Mean                     0.379       0.396       0.484
                   CV Psuedo-R2 Sd                       0.025       0.029       0.026
                   Repeats of 10-fold CV                      10      10          10
                   *** p   < 0.01,   ** p   < 0.05, * p < 0.1
Note: Table reports the regression results when estimating the imputation models for the ownership given
up by the venture founders. The sample includes all the US-based ventures in the SDC VentureXpert
database and had the first funding round prior to 2006. In parenthesis are standard errors.



                                                          2
                                    Table IA.3: Estimation of the Imputation Model for the Amount Raised
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)           (7)        (8)       (9)       (10)
     VARIABLES                                                                   Log Amount Raised
     ROUND NUMBER                   1           2           3           4           5         6             7         8          9        >9
                 Int
     Log Amount Raisedt-1                    0.310***     0.333***    0.296***    0.289***    0.254***   0.286*** 0.294*** 0.267*** 0.265***
                                              (0.008)      (0.010)     (0.011)     (0.013)     (0.016)    (0.019)   (0.024)   (0.028)   (0.023)
                                        ern
     Constant                    16.647***   13.865***   12.158***   14.175***   12.727***   14.824***   12.942*** 13.316*** 13.348*** 13.684***
                                  (0.693)     (1.159)      (0.786)
                                                           et          (0.777)     (0.730)     (0.732)    (0.716)   (0.967)   (0.922)   (0.627)

     Observations                 16,371      11,643       8,624       6,303       4,413       2,996      2,013      1,375      912      1,751




3
     R-squared                    0.328        0.517       0.551       0.538       0.514       0.475      0.526      0.501     0.515     0.507
     Industry FE                   Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
     Stage FE                      Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
     Year FE                       Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
                                                                               Ap
     Investor Number FE            Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
     CV Psuedo-R2 Mean            0.320       0.488        0.505       0.505       0.496       0.484      0.483      0.479     0.449     0.465
     CV Psuedo-R2 Sd              0.011       0.011        0.012       0.012       0.013       0.015      0.017      0.017     0.020     0.027
     Repeats of 10-fold CV          10          10           10         10          10
                                                                                               pe10         10         10        10       10
     ***         **          *
        p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.1
    Note: Table reports the regression results when estimating the imputation models for the amount raised in each venture funding round. The
                                                                                                                nd
    sample includes all the US-based ventures in the SDC VentureXpert database that had the first funding round prior to 2006. In parenthesis are
    standard errors.
                                                                                                                  ix
                      Table IA.4: Estimation of the Imputation Models for Mergers and Acquisitions Valuation
                                                                 (1)      (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)          (6)       (7)      (8)
     VARIABLES                                                                         Log Mergers and Acquisitions Valuation

     Extrapolated Valuation                                             0.596***    0.764***    0.742*** 0.738*** 0.481*** 0.824*** 0.733***
                                                                         (0.028)     (0.039)     (0.043)  (0.044)   (0.104)   (0.057)   (0.095)
     Days between Last PMV and Exit                                                 0.002***    0.002*** 0.002***     0.001  0.003*** 0.003***
                 Int
                                                                                     (0.000)     (0.000)  (0.000)   (0.001)   (0.000)   (0.001)
     Extrapolated Valuation × Days between Last PMV and Exit                       -0.000***   -0.000*** -0.000***   -0.000  -0.000*** -0.000***
                                                                                     (0.000)     (0.000)  (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
     Log Amount of the Final Round                                                              0.110*** 0.112*** 0.211*** 0.092***      0.079*
                                  ern
                                                                                                 (0.021)  (0.021)   (0.050)   (0.029)   (0.043)
     Days between Final Round and Exit                                                         -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000***
                                                                                                 (0.000)  (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)
     NASDAQ Return from Final Round to Exit
                                                     et                                                    0.037      0.072    0.088     -0.082




4
                                                                                                          (0.051)   (0.188)   (0.070)   (0.087)

     Observations                                               3,436    3,433       3,433      3,433      3,433      628       1,972    833
     R-squared                                                  0.054    0.166       0.176      0.205      0.205     0.254      0.233   0.216
                                                                        Ap
     Industry FE                                                 Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes       No         No      No
     Stage FE                                                    Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes     Yes
     Round Number FE                                             Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes     Yes
                                                                                         pe
     Year FE                                                     Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes     Yes
     CV Psuedo-R2 Mean                                          0.006    0.090       0.099      0.132      0.133     0.086      0.107   0.098
     CV Psuedo-R2 Sd                                            0.004    0.013       0.014      0.016      0.016     0.015      0.014   0.013
                                                                                                        nd
     Repeats of 10-fold CV                                       10        10          10        10         10        10         10       10
     Industry                                                    All      All         All        All        All      Health      IT     Others
     ***
        p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1
                                                                                                          ix
    Note: Table reports the regression results when estimating the imputation models for the M&A valuations of ventures. The sample includes all
    the US-based ventures in the SDC VentureXpert database and had the first funding round prior to 2006. In parenthesis are standard errors.
                              Table IA.5: Estimation of the Imputation Models for the Pre-IPO Valuation
                                                                 (1)      (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)          (6)      (7)      (8)
     VARIABLES                                                                                 Log Pre-IPO Valuation

     Extrapolated Valuation                                             0.508***    0.578***    0.527*** 0.502*** 0.423*** 0.482*** 0.575***
                                                                         (0.024)     (0.028)     (0.032)   (0.032)  (0.066)   (0.046)  (0.069)
     Days between Last PMV and Exit                                                 0.002***    0.001*** 0.001***   0.001**  0.001*** 0.002***
                 Int
                                                                                     (0.000)     (0.000)   (0.000)  (0.001)   (0.000)  (0.001)
     Extrapolated Valuation × Days between Last PMV and Exit                       -0.000***   -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000** -0.000*** -0.000**
                                                                                     (0.000)     (0.000)   (0.000)  (0.000)   (0.000)  (0.000)
     Log Amount of the Final Round                                                              0.052*** 0.057*** 0.088*** 0.096***     -0.027
                                  ern
                                                                                                 (0.017)   (0.017)  (0.032)   (0.026)  (0.036)
     Days between Final Round and Exit                                                          -0.000** -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000**   -0.000
                                                                                                 (0.000)   (0.000)  (0.000)   (0.000)  (0.000)
     NASDAQ Return from Final Round to Exit
                                                     et                                                   0.204*** 0.305*** 0.415***    -0.035




5
                                                                                                           (0.048)  (0.095)   (0.080)  (0.086)

     Observations                                               1,833    1,833       1,833      1,833     1,833         555      873     405
     R-squared                                                  0.364    0.491       0.500      0.518     0.523        0.487    0.568   0.562
                                                                        Ap
     Industry FE                                                 Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes          No       No      No
     Stage FE                                                    Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes
     Round Number FE                                             Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes
                                                                                            pe
     Year FE                                                     Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes
     CV Psuedo-R2 Mean                                          0.223    0.397       0.414      0.449     0.449        0.358    0.346   0.360
     CV Psuedo-R2 Sd                                            0.030    0.038       0.037      0.034     0.035        0.035    0.038   0.037
                                                                                                        nd
     Repeats of 10-fold CV                                       10        10          10        10        10           10       10       10
     Industry                                                    All      All         All        All       All         Health    IT     Others
     ***
         p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1
                                                                                                          ix
    Note: Table reports the regression results when estimating the imputation models for the pre-IPO valuations of ventures. The sample includes
    all the US-based ventures in the SDC VentureXpert database and had the first funding round prior to 2006. In parenthesis are standard errors.
C. Calculating Robust Standard Errors
When testing the hypotheses implied by the matching model between ventures and VCs,
we carried out a series of regression analyses. In these regression analyses, the outcome
variables ­ for example, venture normalized NPV and successful exits, depend not only
on the time of the venture's first round, but also the market conditions over the life cycle




                                                        ix
of the venture. The overlaps of life cycles of different ventures introduce correlations
in the error term of the regression model among ventures. The dependent variables are




                                                      nd
also likely subject to serial correlation over time. These correlations make it necessary
to calculate robust standard errors of the coefficient estimates of the regressions. Here,
we provide robust standard errors using an Fama-MacBeth standard errors approach
modified from Fama and MacBeth (1973).



                                                 pe
    We first run multiple cross-sectional regressions relating the venture's performance to
the VC's experience, where each cross section consists of ventures receiving the first fund-
ing round in a given quarter. After collecting the cross-sectional regression coefficients,
we adopt their average as the point estimate. Then we use three methods to calculate the
                                     Ap
standard errors of the point estimates. The first method is based on the sample standard
deviation of the coefficients from the cross-sectional regressions. The second method uses
Newey-West adjusted standard errors with 3 lags. The third method uses Bootstrap
standard errors. Specifically, we first fit the best ARMA model to the time series of
cross-sectional regression coefficients according to AICc (Akaike Information Criterion
                             et

corrected for small sample). Then we bootstrap the error terms from the best ARMA
model, construct the series of regression coefficients in each bootstrap iteration according
to the ARMA model and calculate their average. Then the sample standard deviation of
                   ern



these averages is the bootstrap standard errors.
Hypothesis 2
We now test Hypothesis 2 of the model, showing that ventures invested by high-ability
VCs have higher NPV than the others, but the difference shrinks after the structural
          Int




break. We regress the normalized NPV of venture or the likelihood of successful exits
on the measure of VC experience. In order to compare the relationship between before
and after the structural break, we conduct the Fama-MacBeth regressions for the pre-
break and the post-break period separately. Also, since the sample size for some cross
sections is small, we minimize the number of right hand side variables to avoid bias
caused by too many regressors. That is, we use only the Top 30 VC variable as the VC
experience measure, but control variables including the first round's raised amount, and


                                             6
year-industry fixed effects are still added.
    Table IA.6 and IA.7 report the regression results for Group A ventures and Group AB
ventures separately. In Column (1) and (2) of both tables, we see that having a Top 30 VC
in the first round is significantly positively related to the venture's NPV normalized by
the first-round raised amount before the structural break in 1999. This reflects that good




                                                        ix
ventures are matched with more experienced VCs. However, after the structural break,
the relationship between VC experience and venture's performance becomes smaller and




                                                      nd
insignificant. The results are robust regardless of whether the regression uses Group A
ventures (ventures with first funding round post-money valuation data) or Group AB
ventures (the sample of all ventures).
    Column (3) and (4) of both tables report the estimation results when we use successful



                                                 pe
exits including IPO and MA to proxy for the performance of the ventures ­ that is, we
regress the indicator variable for successful exits on the variable Top 30 VC, together
with control variables including the first round's raised amount, and year-industry fixed
effects. We find that having a Top 30 VC in the first round is significantly positively
                                     Ap
related to the venture's successful exits both before and after the structural break in
1999. The results are robust regardless of whether our sample includes Group A ventures
or Group AB ventures.
    Column (5) and (6) of both tables report the Fama-MacBeth regression results study-
ing the intensive margin. We see that having a Top 30 VC in the first round is significantly
                             et

positively related to the venture's NPV normalized by the first-round amount raised be-
fore the structural break in 1999. This reflects that experienced VCs is associated with
higher NPVs even conditional on the ventures having successful exits. However, after
                   ern



the structural break, the relationship becomes insignificant for Group A ventures and
becomes much weaker for Group AB ventures. These results are consistent with what we
find using the double clustered standard errors.
          Int




                                             7
Table IA.6: Past Experience of 1st-Round VCs and Performance: Fama-MacBeth Re-
gression by Period on Group A Ventures
  VARIABLES                                        Normalized NPV                 IPO or MA Exit      Normalized NPV (Exited)
                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
  log(1st Round Amount Raised) -2.486                       -0.901            0.037       0.083       -5.086      -2.714




                                                                                     ix
          F-M p-value          0.002                        0.058             0.067       0.000       0.001       0.002
          N-W p-value          0.010                        0.065             0.064       0.000       0.003       0.002
          Bootstrap p-value    0.006                        0.063             0.026       0.000       0.000       0.005
          ARMA(p,q)            ARMA(1,0)                    ARMA(0,1)         ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,1)




                                                                                   nd
  Top 30 VC                                 5.688           2.071             0.069       0.053       8.188       2.682
         F-M p-value                        0.001           0.195             0.037       0.087       0.000       0.120
         N-W p-value                        0.000           0.305             0.034       0.161       0.000       0.161
         Bootstrap p-value                  0.000           0.137             0.007       0.031       0.000       0.184




                                                                           pe
         ARMA(p,q)                          ARMA(1,0)       ARMA(0,1)         ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,2)
  Sample                                    GroupA    GroupA                  GroupA    GroupA     GroupA    GroupA
  Discounting                               GPMEround GPMEround               GPMEround GPMEround GPMEround GPMEround
  Industry FE                               Yes       Yes                     Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
  Period                                    Pre-Break Post-Break              Pre-Break Post-Break Pre-Break Post-Break
                                                            Ap
  ***               **
        p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 according to Bootstrap p-value
Note: Table reports the Fama-MacBeth estimation results from regressing NPV normalized by first
outlow (Column (1) and (2)), dummies for successful exits (Column (3) and (4)) on the experience
measure of the VC team invested in the venture's first funding round, together with control variables.
Column (5) and (6) have NPV normalized by first outlow as outcome variable as well, but restrict the
sample to only the successfully exited ventures. Column (1), (3) and (5) are regression results for the
pre-break period. Column (2), (4) and (6) are regression results for the post-break period. Top 30 VC is a
                                                et

dummy variable that equals 1 if any VC that ranked in the top 30 according to the number of total funding
rounds invested in the past 10 years, participated in the venture's first round. Group A are ventures
that have first-round post-money valuations.The average of Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional coefficient
                                  ern



estimates, where each cross section includes ventures having the first funding rounds in a specific quarter,
is reported as the point estimate. F-M p-value is the p-value based on the sample standard deviation
of the cross-sectional coefficient estimates.N-W p-value is the p-value based on Newey-West standard
errors with 3 lags of the cross-sectional coefficient estimates. We then select the best ARMA model for
the cross-sectional coefficient estimates based on AICc information criterion. Then Bootstrap p-value
based on bootstrapping the errors from the best ARMA model is reported.
                Int




                                                                       8
Table IA.7: Past Experience of 1st-Round VCs and Performance: Fama-MacBeth Re-
gression by Period on Group AB Ventures
  VARIABLES                                        Normalized NPV                 IPO or MA Exit      Normalized NPV (Exited)
                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
  log(1st Round Amount Raised) -2.040                       -0.531            0.046       0.055       -6.221      -3.116




                                                                                     ix
         F-M p-value           0.000                        0.014             0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000
         N-W p-value           0.000                        0.015             0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000
         Bootstrap p-value     0.000                        0.004             0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000
         ARMA(p,q)             ARMA(0,0)                    ARMA(0,0)         ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)




                                                                                   nd
  Top 30 VC                                 3.834           0.802             0.082       0.036       6.432       2.095
        F-M p-value                         0.000           0.120             0.000       0.033       0.000       0.004
        N-W p-value                         0.000           0.248             0.001       0.004       0.000       0.025
        Bootstrap p-value                   0.000           0.135             0.000       0.012       0.000       0.014




                                                                           pe
        ARMA(p,q)                           ARMA(0,0)       ARMA(1,0)         ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(1,0)
  Sample                                    GroupAB   GroupAB                 GroupAB   GroupAB    GroupAB   GroupAB
  Discounting                               GPMEround GPMEround               GPMEround GPMEround GPMEround GPMEround
  Industry FE                               Yes       Yes                     Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
  Period                                    Pre-Break Post-Break              Pre-Break Post-Break Pre-Break Post-Break
                                                            Ap
  ***               **
        p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 according to Bootstrap p-value
Note: Table reports the Fama-MacBeth estimation results from regressing NPV normalized by first
outflow (Column (1) and (2)), dummies for successful exits (Column (3) and (4)) on the experience
measure of the VC team invested in the venture's first funding round, together with control variables.
Column (5) and (6) have NPV normalized by first outlow as outcome variable as well, but restrict the
sample to only the successfully exited ventures. Column (1), (3) and (5) are regression results for the
pre-break period. Column (2), (4) and (6) are regression results for the post-break period. Top 30 VC
                                                et

is a dummy variable that equals 1 if any VC that ranked in the top 30 according to the number of total
funding rounds invested in the past 10 years, participated in the venture's first round. Group A are
ventures that have first-round post-money valuations. Group AB in addition includes the ventures that
                                  ern



do not have first-round post-money valuations. The average of Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional coefficient
estimates, where each cross section includes ventures having the first funding rounds in a specific quarter,
is reported as the point estimate. F-M p-value is the p-value based on the sample standard deviation
of the cross-sectional coefficient estimates.N-W p-value is the p-value based on Newey-West standard
errors with 3 lags of the cross-sectional coefficient estimates. We then select the best ARMA model for
the cross-sectional coefficient estimates based on AICc information criterion. Then Bootstrap p-value
                Int




based on bootstrapping the errors from the best ARMA model is reported.



Hypothesis 3
We now test Hypothesis 3 of the model, showing that ventures invested by more high-
ability (H-type) VCs tend to be high-quality (h-type) ventures, both before and after
the structural break. In this test, we proxy the quality of a venture by the number of
innovations it creates. We regress the venture's lifetime number of patents and patent

                                                                       9
citations on the experience measures of the VC team invested in the venture's first funding
round, together with control variables including the first round's amount raised, year fixed
effects, industry fixed effects and year-industry fixed effects.
    Table IA.8 and Table IA.9 report the Fama-MacBeth regression results for Group A
and Group AB ventures separately. We see that VC's past experience is highly correlated




                                                        ix
with venture's innovation ability, either measured by lifetime number of patents or by
patent citations, and this relationship holds both before and after the structural break.




                                                      nd
This means that although after the structural break experienced VCs are not more likely
to invest in high NPV ventures in the first round, they still tend to invest in the more
innovative ventures. The results are robust regardless of whether the regression uses
Group A ventures or Group AB ventures.



                                              pe
                                     Ap
                             et
                   ern
          Int




                                            10
Table IA.8: Past Experience of 1st-Round VCs and Innovation: Fama-MacBeth Regres-
sion by Period on Group A Ventures
VARIABLES                                            Has Patent                log(1 + # Patents)       log(1 + # Citations)

                                              (1)              (2)              (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
log(1st-Round Amount Raised)                -0.016            0.047            0.005      0.123         0.016       0.234




                                                                                    ix
       F-M p-value                           0.493            0.001            0.979       0.060        0.936        0.146
       N-W p-value                           0.384            0.007            0.977       0.036        0.899        0.077
       Bootstrap p-value                     0.236            0.451            0.516       0.013        0.406        0.050
       ARMA(p,q)                           ARMA(0,0)        ARMA(0,0)        ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)    ARMA(0,1)    ARMA(0,0)




                                                                                  nd
Top 30 VC                                   0.180            0.088             0.253      0.393        0.684        0.797
      F-M p-value                            0.000            0.001            0.584       0.000        0.150        0.009
      N-W p-value                            0.000            0.000            0.561       0.000        0.109        0.046
      Bootstrap p-value                      0.000            0.000            0.317       0.000        0.048        0.012




                                                                         pe
      ARMA(p,q)                            ARMA(0,0)        ARMA(0,0)        ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)    ARMA(0,0)    ARMA(0,1)

Sample                                       GroupA          GroupA           GroupA      GroupA       GroupA       GroupA
Industry FE                                    Yes             Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Period                                      Pre-Break       Post-Break       Pre-Break   Post-Break   Pre-Break    Post-Break
                                                            Ap
                   **
 ***
       p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 according to Bootstrap p-value
Note: Table reports the Fama-MacBeth estimation results from regressing venture's patents holding and
patents citations on the experience measure of the VC team invested in the venture's first funding round,
together with control variables. Top 30 VC is a dummy variable that equals 1 if any VC that ranked in
the top 30 according to the number of total funding rounds invested in the past 10 years, participated
in the venture's first round. Group A are ventures that have first-round post-money valuations. Group
AB in addition includes the ventures that do not have first-round post-money valuations. The average
                                                et

of Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional coefficient estimates, where each cross section includes ventures having
the first funding rounds in a specific quarter, is reported as the point estimate. F-M p-value is the
p-value based on the sample standard deviation of the cross-sectional coefficient estimates. N-W p-
value is the p-value based on Newey-West standard errors with 3 lags of the cross-sectional coefficient
                                  ern



estimates. We then select the best ARMA model for the cross-sectional coefficient estimates based on
AICc information criterion. Then Bootstrap p-value based on bootstrapping the errors from the best
ARMA model is reported.
                   Int




                                                                      11
Table IA.9: Past Experience of 1st-Round VCs and Innovation: Fama-MacBeth Regres-
sion by Period on Group AB Ventures
VARIABLES                                            Has Patent                log(1 + # Patents)       log(1 + # Citations)

                                              (1)              (2)              (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)
log(1st-Round Amount Raised)                -0.007            0.006           0.079       0.124         0.023       0.251




                                                                                    ix
       F-M p-value                           0.341            0.400            0.050       0.000        0.696        0.000
       N-W p-value                           0.107            0.470            0.009       0.000        0.668        0.001
       Bootstrap p-value                     0.147            0.191            0.025       0.000        0.342        0.000
       ARMA(p,q)                           ARMA(0,0)        ARMA(0,0)        ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(0,0)    ARMA(0,0)    ARMA(0,1)




                                                                                  nd
Top 30 VC                                   0.103            0.113            0.293       0.318        0.652        0.695
      F-M p-value                            0.000            0.000            0.015       0.000        0.001        0.000
      N-W p-value                            0.000            0.000            0.008       0.000        0.000        0.000
      Bootstrap p-value                      0.000            0.000            0.006       0.000        0.000        0.000




                                                                         pe
      ARMA(p,q)                            ARMA(1,0)        ARMA(0,1)        ARMA(0,0)   ARMA(1,0)    ARMA(0,0)    ARMA(0,0)

Sample                                      GroupAB         GroupAB          GroupAB     GroupAB      GroupAB      GroupAB
Industry FE                                    Yes             Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Period                                      Pre-Break       Post-Break       Pre-Break   Post-Break   Pre-Break    Post-Break
                                                            Ap
                   **
 ***
       p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 according to Bootstrap p-value
Note: Table reports the Fama-MacBeth estimation results from regressing venture's patents holding and
patents citations on the experience measure of the VC team invested in the venture's first funding round,
together with control variables. Top 30 VC is a dummy variable that equals 1 if any VC that ranked in
the top 30 according to the number of total funding rounds invested in the past 10 years, participated
in the venture's first round. Group A are ventures that have first-round post-money valuations. Group
AB in addition includes the ventures that do not have first-round post-money valuations. The average
                                                et

of Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional coefficient estimates, where each cross section includes ventures having
the first funding rounds in a specific quarter, is reported as the point estimate. F-M p-value is the
p-value based on the sample standard deviation of the cross-sectional coefficient estimates. N-W p-
value is the p-value based on Newey-West standard errors with 3 lags of the cross-sectional coefficient
                                  ern



estimates. We then select the best ARMA model for the cross-sectional coefficient estimates based on
AICc information criterion. Then Bootstrap p-value based on bootstrapping the errors from the best
ARMA model is reported.



Hypothesis 4
                   Int




We now test Hypothesis 4 of the model, showing that ventures invested by more high-
ability (H-type) VCs give up more ownership to VCs than the others, but the differ-
ence shrinks after the structural break. Specifically, we regress the venture founder's
first-round ownership given up on the experience measures of the VC team invested in
the venture's funding round, together with control variables including the first round's
amount raised, year fixed effects, industry fixed effects and year-industry fixed effects.
    Table IA.10 reports the Fama-MacBeth regression results. The Fama-MacBeth regres-

                                                                      12
sion results are consistent with the regression results based on double clustered standard
errors. We see that VC's past experience is significantly correlated with the venture's
first-round ownership given up before the structural break in 1999, suggesting that more
experienced VC is able to acquire more ownership from the venture in the first round.
However, this relationship weakens after the structural break.




                                                                     ix
Table IA.10: Past Experience of 1st-Round VCs and 1st-Round Ownership Given Up:




                                                                   nd
Fama-MacBeth Regression by Period
VARIABLES                                                 1st-Round Ownership Given Up

                                                (1)               (2)            (3)          (4)
log(1st-Round Amount Raised)                 0.075             0.071            0.066        0.064



                                                           pe
       F-M p-value                            0.000             0.000           0.000        0.000
       N-W p-value                            0.000             0.000           0.000        0.000
       Bootstrap p-value                      0.000             0.000           0.472        0.435
       ARMA(p,q)                            ARMA(0,0)         ARMA(0,0)       ARMA(0,0)    ARMA(1,0)
                                                 Ap
Top 30 VC                                    0.039             0.015           0.034        0.014
      F-M p-value                             0.023             0.141           0.000        0.000
      N-W p-value                             0.002             0.029           0.000        0.000
      Bootstrap p-value                       0.000             0.040           0.000        0.000
      ARMA(p,q)                             ARMA(0,1)         ARMA(0,0)       ARMA(0,0)    ARMA(0,0)
                                        et


Sample                                        GroupA           GroupA         GroupAB       GroupAB
Industry FE                                     Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes
Period                                       Pre-Break        Post-Break      Pre-Break     Post-Break
                             ern



  ***               **
        p < 0.01,        p < 0.05, * p < 0.1 according to Bootstrap p-value
Note: Table reports the Fama-MacBeth estimation results from regressing venture's first-round ownership
given up to the VC investors on the experience measure of the VC team invested in the venture's first
funding round, together with control variables. Top 30 VC is a dummy variable that equals 1 if any
VC that ranked in the top 30 according to the number of total funding rounds invested in the past
              Int




10 years, participated in the venture's first round. Group A are ventures that have first-round post-
money valuations. Group AB in addition includes the ventures that do not have first-round post-money
valuations. The average of Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional coefficient estimates, where each cross section
includes ventures having the first funding rounds in a specific quarter, is reported as the point estimate.
F-M p-value is the p-value based on the sample standard deviation of the cross-sectional coefficient
estimates. N-W p-value is the p-value based on Newey-West standard errors with 3 lags of the cross-
sectional coefficient estimates. We then select the best ARMA model for the cross-sectional coefficient
estimates based on AICc information criterion. Then Bootstrap p-value based on bootstrapping the
errors from the best ARMA model is reported.


                                                         13
D. Quantile Regessions
The quantile regressions study the relationship between any quantile of the outcome
variable with explanatory variables. We conduct quantile regressions to study the het-
erogeneity of the relationship between VC experience and venture performance, across
ventures with different levels of normalized NPVs.




                                                        ix
    Figure IA.1 plots the coefficients on the explanatory variables from the quantile regres-
sions of venture's normalized NPV on VC experience (Top 30 VC) and control variables.




                                                      nd
The regressions are conducted for the pre-break and post-break periods separately. We
see from the figure that before the structural break, although having a Top 30 VC in the
first round is on average positively related to venture's normalized NPV, this "average
effect" is mainly driven by and concentrated at the high end of the distribution of nor-



                                               pe
malized NPV. The coefficient on the Top 30 VC dummy is close to zero for ventures with
normalized NPVs below the 30% percentile, meaning that experienced VC is not so good
at keeping away from the "bad" ventures. Instead, the coefficient has a sharp increase
for ventures with normalized NPVs above the 70% percentile, meaning that experienced
                                     Ap
VC is very good at cherry-picking the best ventures. The coefficients on the other ex-
planatory variables from the quantile regressions are also plotted, and also show strong
heterogeneity across the distribution of venture's normalized NPV.
    Similarly, on the intensive margin, the relationship between venture's normalized NPV
and VC experience shows strong heterogeneity across the ventures. Figure IA.2 plots the
                             et

coefficients on explanatory variables from the quantile regressions of venture's normalized
NPV on VC experience, after restricting to the sample of ventures with successful exits.
We see from the figure that both before and after the structural breakthe strong correla-
                   ern



tion between venture normalized NPV and VC experience concentrates at the high end
of the distribution of normalized NPV.
    When conducting the quantile regressions in the pooled sample of both pre-break
and post-break periods, the results are similar. Figure IA.3 plots the coefficients on
explanatory variables from the quantile regressions of venture's normalized NPV on VC
          Int




experience. And Figure IA.4 studies the intensive margin, that is it plots the coefficients
on explanatory variables from the quantile regressions of venture's normalized NPV on
VC experience, after restricting to the sample of ventures with successful exits.




                                             14
                           5.00




                                                                                           30.00
                           0.00




                                                                                           20.00
             lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)
                              -5.00




                                                                               Top 30 VC




                                                                                                          ix
                                                                                10.00
                    -10.00 -15.00




                                                                                           0.00




                                                                                                        nd
                           -20.00




                                                                                           -10.00
                                           0     .2   .4      .6   .8     1                         0   .2   .4      .6   .8   1
                                                       Quantile                                               Quantile




                                                              (a) Before the Structural Break



                                                                               pe          10.00
                           2.00




                                                                    Ap
             lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)
                                   0.00




                                                                                           5.00
                                                                               Top 30 VC
                     -2.00




                                                                                           0.00
                           -4.00




                                                          et
                           -6.00




                                                                                           -5.00




                                           0     .2   .4      .6   .8     1                         0   .2   .4      .6   .8   1
                                                       Quantile                                               Quantile




                                                              (b) After the Structural Break
                                                ern



                                               Figure IA.1: Quantile Regression of Normalized NPV
Note: Different panels plot the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals (the curves and shaded
areas) of the coefficients on explanatory variables ­ log(1st-Round Amount Raised) and Top30 VC, from
the quantile regressions fitting different quantiles of the outcome variable ­ normalized NPV. The sample
           Int




includes Group A ventures (those with first-round post-money valuation data). Dotted horizontal lines
are point estimates and 95% confidence intervals of the coefficients from OLS. When calculating the
normalized NPV, the cash flows are discounted using the GPMEround method, i.e., Generalized Public
Market Equivalent method with parameters calibrated to round-to-round returns.




                                                                              15
                               10.00




                                                                                              50.00
                                                                                              40.00
                                          0.00
              lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)




                                                                                                 30.00
                           -10.00




                                                                                        Top 30 VC




                                                                                                               ix
                                                                                      20.00
             -20.00




                                                                                              10.00




                                                                                                             nd
                               -30.00




                                                                                              0.00
                                                    0   .2   .4      .6   .8     1                       0   .2   .4      .6   .8   1
                                                              Quantile                                             Quantile




                                                                     (a) Before the Structural Break



                                                                                      pe      15.00
                               5.00




                                                                                              10.00
                                             0.00




                                                                           Ap
                  lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)




                                                                                      Top 30 VC
                             -5.00




                                                                                        5.00
             -10.00




                                                                                              0.00
                                                                 et
                               -15.00




                                                                                              -5.00




                                                    0   .2   .4      .6   .8     1                       0   .2   .4      .6   .8   1
                                                              Quantile                                             Quantile




                                                                     (b) After the Structural Break
                                                        ern



 Figure IA.2: Quantile Regression of Normalized NPV Conditional on Successful Exits
Note: Different panels plot the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals (the curves and shaded areas)
of the coefficients on explanatory variables ­ log(1st-Round Amount Raised) and Top30 VC, from the
quantile regressions fitting different quantiles of the outcome variable ­ normalized NPV. The sample
           Int




is restricted to Group A ventures (those with first-round post-money valuation data) that eventually
successfully exited. Confidence intervals are based on OLS standard errors. Dotted horizontal lines
are point estimates and 95% confidence intervals of the coefficients from panel OLS regression. When
calculating the normalized NPV, the cash flows are discounted using the GPMEround method, i.e.,
Generalized Public Market Equivalent method with parameters calibrated to round-to-round returns.




                                                                                     16
                                                                                                     20.00                                                                 5.00
    lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)




                                   2.00




                                                                                                                                           Top 30 VC X Post-1999
                                                                                                     15.00
                                                                                                                                                                           0.00
                                   0.00




                                                                       Top 30 VC
                                                                                                     10.00
                                  -2.00                                                                                                                                   -5.00
                                                                                                      5.00




                                                                                                                                    ix
                                  -4.00                                                                                                                                  -10.00
                                                                                                      0.00

                                  -6.00
                                                                                                     -5.00                                                               -15.00

                                          0   .2   .4    .6   .8   1                                         0   .2    .4    .6   .8   1                                          0   .2   .4   .6    .8   1




                                                                                                                                  nd
                                                   Quantile                                                            Quantile                                                            Quantile


                                  30.00                                                               4.00                                                                30.00
                                                                       WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round




                                                                                                                                           WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy
    WAVG VC Ratio of Exit




                                                                                                                                                                          20.00
                                                                                                      2.00
                                  20.00




                                                                                                                       pe
                                                                                                                                                                          10.00
                                                                                                      0.00

                                  10.00                                                                                                                                    0.00
                                                                                                     -2.00
                                                                                                                                                                         -10.00

                                   0.00                                                              -4.00
                                                                                                                                                                         -20.00
                                                                                                        Ap
                                          0   .2   .4    .6   .8   1                                         0   .2    .4    .6   .8   1                                          0   .2   .4   .6    .8   1
                                                   Quantile                                                            Quantile                                                            Quantile




                                                    Figure IA.3: Quantile Regression of Normalized NPV
Note: Different panels plot the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals (the curves and shaded
areas) of the coefficients on different explanatory variables, from the quantile regressions fitting different
quantiles of the outcome variable ­ normalized NPV. Dotted horizontal lines are point estimates and
                                                                       et


95% confidence intervals of the coefficients from OLS. When calculating the normalized NPV, the cash
flows are discounted using the GPMEround method, i.e., Generalized Public Market Equivalent method
with parameters calibrated to round-to-round returns. Top 30 VC is a dummy variable that equals 1 if
                                                        ern



any VC that ranked in the top 30 according to the number of total funding rounds invested in the past
10 years, participated in the venture's first round. WAVG VC Ratio of Exit is the weighted average of
the ratio of the funding rounds that are associated with successful exits in the past 10 year of all the
VCs participated in the venture's first round, where the weight is the total funding rounds invested by
the VCs in the past 10 years. Similarly defined are WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round and WAVG VC
Ratio of Bankruptcy. They are the total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the ratio of the funding
                                          Int




rounds that are associated with continued financing and bankruptcy of the first-round VCs, respectively.
The sample of ventures includes both Group A (those with first-round post-money valuation data) and
Group B (those without).




                                                                                                                      17
                                    5.00                                                              25.00
                                                                                                                                                                            0.00
    lg(1st-Round Amount Raised)




                                                                                                                                            Top 30 VC X Post-1999
                                                                                                      20.00
                                    0.00                                                                                                                                   -5.00




                                                                        Top 30 VC
                                                                                                      15.00

                                   -5.00                                                                                                                                  -10.00
                                                                                                      10.00




                                                                                                                                     ix
                                  -10.00                                                               5.00                                                               -15.00


                                                                                                       0.00                                                               -20.00
                                  -15.00
                                           0   .2   .4    .6   .8   1                                         0   .2    .4    .6   .8   1                                          0   .2   .4   .6    .8   1




                                                                                                                                   nd
                                                    Quantile                                                            Quantile                                                            Quantile


                                  40.00                                                               10.00
                                                                        WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round




                                                                                                                                            WAVG VC Ratio of Bankruptcy
                                                                                                                                                                           20.00
    WAVG VC Ratio of Exit




                                  30.00
                                                                                                       5.00                                                                 0.00




                                                                                                                        pe
                                  20.00
                                                                                                                                                                          -20.00
                                                                                                       0.00
                                  10.00
                                                                                                                                                                          -40.00


                                   0.00                                                               -5.00
                                                                                                                                                                          -60.00
                                                                                                         Ap
                                           0   .2   .4    .6   .8   1                                         0   .2    .4    .6   .8   1                                          0   .2   .4   .6    .8   1
                                                    Quantile                                                            Quantile                                                            Quantile




                                     Figure IA.4: Quantile Regression of Normalized NPV of Exited Ventures
Note: Different panels plot the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals (the curves and shaded
areas) of the coefficients on different explanatory variables, from the quantile regressions fitting different
                                                                        et


quantiles of the outcome variable ­ normalized NPV. Dotted horizontal lines are point estimates and
95% confidence intervals of the coefficients from OLS. When calculating the normalized NPV, the cash
flows are discounted using the GPMEround method, i.e., Generalized Public Market Equivalent method
                                                         ern



with parameters calibrated to round-to-round returns. Top 30 VC is a dummy variable that equals 1 if
any VC that ranked in the top 30 according to the number of total funding rounds invested in the past
10 years, participated in the venture's first round. WAVG VC Ratio of Exit is the weighted average of
the ratio of the funding rounds that are associated with successful exits in the past 10 year of all the VCs
participated in the venture's first round, where the weight is the total funding rounds invested by the
VCs in the past 10 years. Similarly defined are WAVG VC Ratio of Next Round and WAVG VC Ratio
                                           Int




of Bankruptcy. They are the total-funding-rounds-weighted-average of the ratio of the funding rounds
that are associated with continued financing and bankruptcy of the first-round VCs, respectively. The
sample includes the ventures eventually have successful exits from both Group A (those with first-round
post-money valuation data) and Group B (those without first-round post-money valuation data).




                                                                                                                       18
