                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INTERMEDIATION AND COMPETITION IN SEARCH MARKETS:
                          AN EMPIRICAL CASE STUDY

                                            Tobias Salz

                                       Working Paper 27700
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27700


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




I am indebted to my advisors John Asker, Guillaume Frechétte, Kei Kawai, and Alessandro
Lizzeri for their guidance and support. I am extremely grateful to Isabelle Perrigne and Quang
Vuong for helpful discussions. Luis Cabral, Michael Dickstein, Klaus-Peter Hellwig, Kate Ho,
Jean-Francois Houde, Myrto Kalouptsidi, Yunmi Kong, John Lazarev, Konrad Menzel, Joseph
Mullins, Ariel Pakes, Maryam Saeedi, Maher Said, Kevin Thom, Allan Collard-Wexler, Larry
White, Sevgi Yuksel, Jidong Zhou, as well as seminar participants at Caltech, Carnegie Mellon
University, Columbia, Cornell, Duke, Harvard, LSE, Microsoft Research Cambridge, MIT,
Northwestern, the New York Fed, NYU, Princeton, Stanford, UCLA, USC, UPenn, UT Austin
and Yale SOM, provided invaluable feedback. The research in this paper was conducted with
data provided by New York City's Business Integrity Commission. The data has been modified to
preserve the anonymity of all market participants. In addition, results have been reviewed to
ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The research results and conclusions
expressed are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Business Integrity
Commission. I want to thank Thi-Mai Anh Nguyen for exceptional research assistance. All
remaining errors are mine. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Tobias Salz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Intermediation and Competition in Search Markets: An Empirical Case Study
Tobias Salz
NBER Working Paper No. 27700
August 2020
JEL No. D43,D44,L0,L13,L81,L97

                                          ABSTRACT

Intermediaries in decentralized markets can affect buyer welfare both directly, by reducing
expenses for buyers with high search cost and indirectly, through a search-externality that affects
the prices paid by buyers that do not use intermediaries. I investigate the magnitude of these
effects in New York City's trade-waste market, where buyers can either search by themselves or
through a waste broker. Combining elements from the empirical search and procurement-auction
literatures, I construct and estimate a model for a decentralized market. Results from the model
show that intermediaries improve welfare and benefit buyers in both the broker and the search
markets.


Tobias Salz
MIT Deparatment of Economics
77 Massachusetts Avenue, E52-404
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
tsalz@mit.edu
1       Introduction

In decentralized markets, a transaction typically requires a costly search for the
cheapest or best-suited seller. These search frictions can increase sellers' market
power and allow them to raise prices. At the same time, search frictions create a
role for intermediaries that search on behalf of buyers and thereby mitigate this
effect. Intermediaries are commonly found in markets with search frictions, but
there is little systematic empirical evidence on how they influence market out-
comes.1 This paper uses new a dataset from the New York City trade waste indus-
try to study study how intermediation affects market efficiency. In order to assess
the impact of intermediaries on competition and welfare, I develop and estimate a
model that combines elements from the empirical search and auction literatures.

      Buyers that use the services of intermediaries directly benefit from access to
a better search technology. At the same time, intermediaries can also benefit the
other buyers through a search externality. Intermediaries are used by buyers with
higher search cost. This selection changes the composition of buyers in the search
market, increasing the proportion of those who can afford more comparison shop-
ping. Therefore, sellers have an incentive to quote lower prices relative to a sce-
nario without intermediaries. Results from the model suggest that this externality
is quantitatively important for welfare.2

      It is difficult to obtain data on the operation of decentralized markets due to the
very nature of these markets. However, the trade waste industry in New York pro-
    1 Examples     beyond housing and real estate include textile (http://www.economist.com/news/business/21657375-
story-indias-biggest-maker-towels-and-their-journey-cotton-field-big-box (last accessed on 06/14/20)), advertising bro-
kers, freight brokers (http://www.dat.com//media/files/dat/resources/dat_broker_start-up_guide_rnd2.pdf (last
accessed on 08/29/15)), literary agents (http://aaronline.org/ (last accessed on 06/14/20)), energy brokers
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_broker (last accessed on 06/14/20)). Spulber (1996b) estimates that 25% of U.S.
economic activity is intermediation.
    2 This   is reminiscent of the effect of informed buyers in Salop and Stiglitz (1977), when sellers can't distinguish between
informed and uninformed buyers. Sellers know that some buyers search a lot and, therefore, need to lower their prices.




                                                                 2
vides a rare opportunity to gain insight into such a market: as a measure against
the historical entrenchment of organized crime in this industry, the city has estab-
lished a regulator that monitors carters and collects data about many operational
aspects of their activity. This study uses an anonymized panel of the universe of
bilateral agreements between 100 private carters (the supply side) and more than
100,000 businesses (the demand side).

   Several observations about the market indicate that search frictions play an im-
portant role. Price dispersion in the market is large, even after accounting for ob-
servable contract characteristics. Both sides of the market mainly feature smaller
players. In the majority of zip codes, buyers can choose from more than 20 differ-
ent waste carters. Buyers have the option to procure their contract through a waste
broker and a significant portion of buyers makes use of this option.

   My model combines elements from the empirical search and auction literatures.
Sellers draw a match-specific cost for each buyer. Buyers can either contact carters
directly at some cost per inquiry or delegate search to a broker. If the buyer dele-
gate search, the broker holds an auction among a fixed set of sellers to procure the
contract and charges a percentage fee for the service. The main primitives of the
model are the distributions of buyer search costs and seller service costs.

   It is important to discuss an assumption that stands in contrast to previous
empirical research on search in the industrial organization literature, which has
assumed that sellers' costs are constant across buyers (for instance, Hortaçsu and
Syverson (2004) and Hong and Shum (2006)). In models with constant cost, price
dispersion is due to variation in search cost under a mixed-strategy pricing equi-
librium. While this approach is sensible in a posted-price setting, in which goods
are not customer-specific, it is less appropriate in a market for a highly individu-
alized service. The constant-cost assumption has the advantage that search costs
are often identified from price and quantity data or even from price data alone.
The identification of the model in this paper is complicated by the need to recover


                                         3
two primitive distributions from observed prices in the market - the search cost
for buyers and the cost of service provision for sellers. Key to the identification
strategy are two features of the setting. First, brokers award contracts through a
competitive bidding process resembling a first-price auction. Second, I observe both
brokered and non-brokered contracts in the data. Carter cost can be identified
from broker data following standard arguments in the empirical auction literature.
Identifying the distribution of search costs is complicated by the fact that I do not
know how many quotes the buyer requests from sellers. The number of competi-
tors is a result of buyers' optimal search strategy, which, in turn, depends on the
distribution of search cost. Both the equilibrium number of price inquiries and the
search cost are unobserved. Given a distribution of seller costs (which is already
identified), the observed variation in prices can be directly mapped to the number
of price quotes that buyers must have asked for. The distribution of the number of
price inquiries can in turn identify the distribution of search cost for sellers.

   My estimates suggest that search costs make up a significant percentage of buy-
ers' total expenses, ranging from about 8% to 15%, and larger volume buyers have
larger search costs.

   In the main counterfactuals the ability to contract through brokers is removed.
This alternative market scenario reveals that both the direct and indirect effects
are large. Expenses for buyers that were using brokers rise, on average, by $445
(11.7%) annually if they have to contract directly through the search market. Prices
in the search market rise because the average buyer now compares fewer prices,
which reduces the competitive pressure on sellers. Therefore, expenses for buyers
that were already searching by themselves rise, on average, by $64 (2.5%).

   As a result, the search externality through intermediaries has strong implica-
tions for the distribution of rents in the market: while buyers that never use an
intermediary benefit less, there are many more of them. Without accounting for
the search externality one would underestimate the positive effect of intermedi-


                                           4
aries on consumer surplus by more than 42%. Taking everything into considera-
tion, I can bound the total annual welfare benefit from intermediation, which lies
between $4.3 and $12.6 million. The lower bound is a 4.4% increase in welfare and
the upper bound a 14.2% increase.3


1.1      Literature Overview

This paper relates to the empirical literature on search and intermediation as well
as on auctions.

    Related Literature on Intermediation: Here, the focus is on intermediaries that help
buyers search for sellers, but intermediaries also function as guarantors of quality
and liquidity and act as market makers (Spulber (1996a)). The theoretical literature
has extensively studied the different facets of intermediation (for example, Rubin-
stein and Wolinsky (1987); Gehrig (1993); Spulber (1996b); Lizzeri (1999); Rust and
Hall (2003); Moraga Gonzalez et al. (2014)).

    Recently there has been a growth in empirical studies of intermediaries. The
most relevant empirical paper is Gavazza (2016), who examines the effect of inter-
mediaries in the secondary market for business aircrafts using a dynamic search
and bargaining framework. My paper differs in conceptual ways, as well as in
its model, application, and findings. While Gavazza (2016) is interested in inter-
temporal trading frictions, my focus is on the pricing incentives of a finite number
of firms with market power, which are exacerbated by customers' search costs.
Thus, Gavazza (2016) tries to explain only aggregate state-dependent prices in the
market, while in this setting, the unobserved sources of heterogeneity are crucial
for buyers' strategic choice to delegate to an intermediary, as well as for explain-
ing the full distribution of transaction-specific prices. My modeling choices reflect
these conceptual differences. Another important distinction is that in my model
   3 Welfare   can only be bounded because total change in welfare depends on the fixed cost of broker services, for which I
have no estimate.


                                                              5
buyers choose whether to use an intermediary, whereas in Gavazza (2016) buyers
are matched exogenously with a seller or an intermediary.

   Another paper that compares a bilateral market with an intermediated market
is Hendel et al. (2009), which studies the relative performance of a real estate listing
service with a platform on which house owners sell their homes directly.

   Related Literature on Search Cost: This study is concerned with markets in which
consumers lack full information about prices. McCall (1970) and Stigler (1961)
were the first to describe buyers optimal search-strategy in a sequential and non-
sequential search setting respectively. The corresponding equilibrium models for
sequential and non-sequential search settings were formulated in Stahl (1989) and
Burdett and Judd (1983). Price dispersion in these models arises due to mixed
strategy pricing even though the goods are homogeneous. For the purposes of
this study, the assumption of non-sequential search has several advantages. First,
under this assumption, the firm's problem against the searching consumer (in the
search market) is equivalent to a first-price auction with an unknown number of
competitors. This makes the problem tractable and allows me to build on the
tools in the empirical auction literature. Second, this assumption also increases
the transparency of market comparability and identification. Third, several stud-
ies have found that non-sequential search better explains actual search behavior
(De los Santos et al. (2012) and Honka and Chintagunta (2014)).

   One goal of this study is to quantify the size of search externalities. The theo-
retical literature has explored such externalities, which arise if firms cannot distin-
guish between different types of consumers. Two examples are Salop and Stiglitz
(1977) and Armstrong (2015). This paper is, to my knowledge, the first empirical
to addresses the importance of such an externality and the effects of intermediaries
in concentrated search markets more broadly. The goal of most empirical studies
in this literature is to back out unobserved customer search costs. Hortaçsu and
Syverson (2004) document price dispersion in the mutual fund industry and esti-


                                           6
mate a search model that allows for product differentiation, using both price and
quantity data. Hong and Shum (2006) propose a procedure for estimating search
cost from price data alone both for the sequential and non-sequential cases. Allen
et al. (2014) use Canadian mortgage data along with quasi-experimental variation
due to a merger to estimate search cost non-parametrically. With the exception
of Allen et al. (2014), all of the aforementioned papers assume homogeneous cost
on the seller side. The fact that these studies explore retail settings, in which con-
sumers purchase from firms, makes this a plausible assumption. In this setting,
however, the buyers are firms themselves, and both observed and unobserved
variation determines how costly it is for sellers to service the buyer.4 Thus, I allow
cost to be customer-specific. The empirical model, therefore, has two distributions
of unobservables: search cost and service cost. The empirical challenge lies in iden-
tifying both of these. Another related study is Allen et al. (2019), which estimates a
search and bargaining model for the mortgage market, in which home banks have
an incumbency advantage.

     Related Empirical Literature on Auctions: My model is related to the empirical
literature on auctions. Brokers in this market explicitly use procurement auctions
to allocate contracts to sellers, but competition in the search market can also be
viewed through the lens of competitive bidding: a customer chooses the carter
that quotes the lowest price, but carters in that case do not know the number of
competing firms, which depends on the search costs of the customer and the opti-
mal search strategy against the known distribution of prices. The pricing sub-game
of sellers in the search market can therefore be viewed as a first-price auction with
an unknown number of sellers. The identification of auction models has been dis-
cussed in Guerre et al. (2000) and further developed in Athey and Haile (2002) for
asymmetric auctions.5
   4 Factors   that determine the cost of service provision include the location, the quantity, the composition of the waste, the
distance to the transfer station and many unobserved factors.
   5 The methods have been used to investigate auctions with resale (Haile (2001)), entry into auctions (Li and Zheng (2009)),




                                                                 7
      Roadmap: Section 2 provides relevant industry facts and describes the data. Sec-
tion 3 establishes important descriptive facts that inform the setup of the model.
Section 4 describes the model, Section 5 the identification of the model, and Section
6 the estimation. Section 7 describes the results, and Section 8 the counterfactual
computations.



2       Data and Industry Facts

This section first gives an overview of the data and then establishes two important
facts about the market. First, the market supports a large number of suppliers in a
geographic area, allowing buyers to choose among many different carters. Second,
brokers procure contracts through a Request for Proposals, which is akin to a first-
price auction. This procurement system will be important in the identification of
the model, which I discuss in detail in Section 5.


2.1         Data

Trade waste industry is the official name for New York's private waste market.6 To
free the trade waste industry from its ties to organized crime, Mayor William Louis
Giuliani established the Trade Waste Commission in 1995. This commission, subse-
quently renamed the Business Integrity Commission (henceforth BIC), has a compre-
hensive oversight mandate over the trade waste industry.7
time incentives in procurement projects (Bajari and Lewis (2009)), collusion in auctions (Asker (2010)), bid preference pro-
grams (Krasnokutskaya and Seim (2011)) and many others.
    6 New   York's residential waste disposal market is publicly administered by the Department of Sanitation. Self-haulers
are an exception. Self-haulers need to register with the BIC to do so. The registration fee for a two-year term is $1000 and
$400 for each utilized vehicle; see https://www1.nyc.gov/nycbusiness/description/self-hauler-registration (accessed on
06/14/20).
    7 Private   waste carters need to be licensed with the BIC, which monitors their financial and operational activity. The
BIC also sets a rate cap for the market and sets rules about sub-contracting and merger applications. If measured in cubic
yards this rate cap was $12.2 before 2008, $15.89 from 2008 to 06/2013, which is the relevant data period, and $18.27 from
07/2013 onwards. If measured per 100lbs, it was $8.00 before 2008, $10.41 from 2008 to 06/2013, and $11.98 thereafter.


                                                               8
     This paper uses a subset of BIC data, which have been modified to preserve
the anonymity of customers and carters. The data cover the period from July 2009
to June 2014 and include all contracts in that period; they contain the customer's
zip code, the negotiated price (quoted in terms of either volume or weight) and
the quantity of waste generated by the customer. Additional information for each
contract includes the date on which it was signed, whether or not the contract was
brokered, the type of waste and to which transfer station the waste was carted. In
total, there are 1,184,641 panel observations at a half-yearly frequency.8



                                          Table (1)        Summary statistics

                Variable                                        Mean              Median             Std. dev
                Monthly charges ($)                              198                92                239.2
                Price                                           11.93              12.2                3.19
                Monthly quantity (cu/yd)                        25.94              8.66                55.5
                Recyclables (yes/no)                             0.5               0.0                  0.5
                Number of weekly pickups                         5.27               5.0                3.69
                Note: In total there are 1,184,641 observations. The quantity and pickup variables are winsorized
                at the 1% level to account for outliers.


     Table 1 provides some summary statistics. The mean monthly charges for a
business are about $198, with a very large standard deviation reflecting the tail of
extremely large waste generators. The median number of pick-ups per week is
five. Close to half of all businesses generate recyclables.9 One data caveat is that I
only observe the prices that brokers charge customers in 2014, and I cannot match
these prices to the customer register contract data. Therefore, I run a hedonic re-
gression of the broker charges on the set of observables that are available in the
Another important restriction regards the length of contracts, which cannot exceed two years, after which the customer has
the option to sign with another carter.
   8 This   excludes contracts that only involve medical waste, shredding of paper and cardboard or grease haul.
   9 Contracts differ in whether the price is charged per cu/yd or per lbs.   For my analysis I only use volume based contracts,
which comprise three quarters of my data. Otherwise, I would need to take a stance on the conversion rate between the
two, which would introduce a lot of measurement error.


                                                               9
broker dataset as well as in the customer register and impute the broker fee for a
given contract as the predicted value from this regression. See Section 6 for details.


2.2         The New York City Market

With very few exceptions, all waste-producing businesses and other private in-
stitutions in New York City are required to have a contract with a private waste
carters. A breakdown by business type is provided in Table 8 in Appendix D.
Carter service consists of the pickup and hauling of recyclable and non-recyclable
refuse to one of the 61 transfer stations in or around New York (New York locations
are shown as white triangles in Figure 1).10

     The yearly market volume of the trade waste industry in New York is about
$352 million, and it accounts for 3.9 million tons of waste.11 On average, there
are 94 active carters per reporting period (half-year) who serve 110,000 customers.
To give a sense of the concentration of the industry: averaged over all reporting
periods, the four biggest firms serve 37% of all customers, the seven biggest firms
48% of all customers and the ten biggest firms 55% of all customers.12

     A salient feature of the New York market is the large number of suppliers serv-
ing each geographic area. On average, a zip code is served by 20 carters (Figure 1),
which is more than a fifth of the total number of operating firms. The fragmented
supply is surprising, especially since carters' services allow relatively little room
for horizontal product differentiation.13 The following observation from an article
  10 The   typical volume of one of the rear loaders used in New York City is about 20 to 30 cu/yd, and the median monthly
quantity generated by a business in the city is about 8.66 cu/yd. I am not looking at the market for hazardous material,
which is subject to much more stringent regulation. Most of the carters operating in New York are not vertically integrated
with the transfer station and, therefore, need to individually negotiate tipping fees with the transfer stations.
  11 The   publicly administered market creates an additional 3.8 million tons. See Commission (2012). Medical waste and
waste shredders are excluded.
  12 For   confidentiality reasons, I cannot provide a more complete picture of the firm-size distribution.
  13 There   are several potential explanations for the large number of local suppliers, which stands in contrast to the consoli-
dation in other parts of the country. Historically, the waste industry in New York was captured by organized crime (see, for
example, Jacobs et al. (2001)). When the waste industry was consolidating on a national scale, New York City was still in


                                                               10
in The New Yorker emphasizes this point:

     "When I recently walked down a four-block stretch of Broadway on the Upper West
Side of Manhattan, I identified about forty businesses - restaurants, clothing shops, bode-
gas, banks. Licenses in windows listed the commercial-waste haulers they use - at least
fourteen in all, by my count, for a stretch that covers only a fifth of a mile. If there was a
pattern, I couldn't grasp it: the Starbucks at Ninety-third and Broadway uses a different
commercial-waste company from the Starbucks at Ninety-fifth and Broadway." - The
New Yorker, 200914

     The large overlap in suppliers' routes has also received attention from city offi-
cials, who have started to collect route information from carters to decide whether
to switch to a procurement system with exclusive territories.15 Prices in the mar-
ket are individually negotiated between customer and carters. Thus, unlike in
most retail settings, searching in this context requires calling an individual carter
and haggling. The large number of suppliers and the idiosyncratic nature of the
arrangements suggest that this search process is costly for buyers.
the grip of a property-rights and racketeering system. According to Kelly (1999), this system was in place for more than 50
years, and the New York District Attorney's office estimated over-billings of 30% to 40%, which was regarded as a "garbage
tax" for doing business. In 1995, a New York City grand jury indicted 23 carters for price fixing, bid rigging, racketeering,
corruption and the establishment of a property-rights system. According to the District Attorney's office, small business
owners were paying $15,000 a year for the waste removal services and restaurants about $50,000. The article also mentions
that while in other parts of the country, many firms were replaced by high-technology entrants, New York was still served
by 600 labor-intensive small carters. This might explain why consolidation is delayed in the city and that there is still a large
number of relatively small carters. Another potential explanation is the population density of the city. Anecdotally, route
density is an important aspect for carters to reduce cost, leading to strong network effects. See also: Nguyen and Wilson
(2010). New York City, however, is so densely populated that route density by itself might not be an important margin for
overall cost reductions compared to other cities or rural areas.
  14 http://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/a-better-way-to-take-out-the-garbage            (accessed on 06/12/2020)
  15 See   for example: http://citylimits.org/2015/05/19/city-weighs-reining-in-private-garbage-collectors/ (accessed on
06/12/2020)




                                                              11
                    Figure (1)       Average number of active carters per zip code
                                       transfer station

                                    carters <= 10
                                    10 < carters <= 15
                                    15 < carters <= 25
                                    25 < carters <= 30
                                    30 < carters <= 45
                                    45 < carters




                           Note: This map shows the number of carters that are active in a zip code,
                       averaged over time. "Active" is defined as having at least one customer in the
                       zip code. Triangles show the locations of the transfer stations.




2.3      Brokers

Trade waste brokers are a potential remedy for customers' search problem, and
their services are particularly valuable in markets like New York's. Brokers allow
customers, who often operate on a national scale, to have a one-stop shop for deal-
ing with the fragmented landscape of waste removal services. Since many carters
in New York City are relatively small, they often are not able to offer the kind of
easy access to their services that large waste removal companies can afford. The
burden of matchmaking, therefore, falls predominantly on customers. Unlike cus-
tomers, trade waste brokers know which carters are available to serve customers
and have established contacts with a subset of available carters.16

    Conversations with brokers reveal that they award contracts through a Request
  16 Brokers   arrange contracts between businesses and carters; they are not allowed to accept direct payments by carters,
see http://www.nyc.gov/html/bic/downloads/pdf/regulations/tw_title17_chap_1.pdf (accessed on 08/15/15)




                                                              12
for Proposals - a competitive bidding process akin to a first price-auction - to these
carters.17 A 2015 article in the New York Times, which portrays one of the large
trade waste brokers, reiterates some of these points.18

      The identification of the model will build on the fact that the bidding process
in a request for proposals works the same as the well understood mechanism of
a first-price auction. This bidding mechanism helps pin down the supply-side
cost distribution from the subset of brokered contracts. Once the cost of service
provision is known, the variation in search cost can be identified from the search
market.

      The fraction of brokered contracts is relatively stable across business types, lo-
cations and volume of buyers. About 13% of businesses indicate that they arranged
contracts through a broker. Small waste generators in the first quartile (of quantity
of waste) are less likely, at 6%, to use brokers than the three remaining quartiles
(15%, 14%, and 19% brokered contracts).19 Table 9 in Appendix E provides a more
detailed view, showing the percentage of brokered contracts conditional on Bor-
ough location, the business type, the quantity of waste, and whether a business
produces recyclables. The percentage of brokered contracts is similar in Manhat-
tan, Brooklyn and the Bronx (14%, 14% and 17%) but lower in Queens (9%). Large
  17 As part of this research, I spoke to many brokers on the phone.     All of them explained that contracts are awarded through
request for proposals, which is a competitive bidding procedure.
  18 "[...]   Two big national companies, Waste Management and Republic Services, dominate the market, owning fleets of trucks and
hundreds of landfills. Thousands of smaller, regional trash haulers fill in the gaps. Rubicon, based in Atlanta, isn't in the business
of hauling waste. It doesn't own a single truck or landfill. [...] It begins by holding an online bidding process for its clients' waste
contracts, fostering competition among waste management businesses and bringing down their prices. [...] Through a combination of
big data and online auctions for hauling contracts, Rubicon says it reduces clients' waste bills by 20 percent to 30 percent. [...]" -
The New York Times, 2015. http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/26/business/dividing-and-conquering-the-trash.
html?gwh=3238DE6F0B98ED349E78CCC23645724D&gwt=pay&assetType=nyt_now&_r=0 (accessed 07/14/20)
  19 These     numbers pertain to the subset of contracts that are used in the study. In Appendix A I explain how I select the
sample. Note also that a larger quantity of waste does not necessarily mean a larger business in terms of revenue, but one
expects the two to be correlated. There might be multiple reasons for this pattern. It could be due to the differentially
stronger discounts for large quantities in the broker market. In the following section, I demonstrate that brokers do price
observable information, such as the quantity of waste generated by a business, more systematically. A second reason could
be that sales offices need to go to a "procurement procedure" through a broker to comply with audit rules.



                                                                  13
hotels and institutions are more likely to use brokers than other non-food retail
and wholesale businesses.20

     Similar to the carter market, the broker market is relatively unconcentrated.
The top five firms account for 26.32% of customer market share, the top ten firms
for 52.6%, and the largest 15 firms for about 78.95%, averaged over the entire ob-
servation period. Note, however, that for the broker market the market shares
in New York City might not be the most meaningful. Anecdotally, many brokers
are contacted by businesses out of town and might have a more dominant market
share in their respective location.



3      Descriptive Results

This section establishes several facts about prices in the trade waste market. First,
there is residual dispersion in prices, which points at large expected returns to
searching, even when sellers and buyers account for observable information. Sec-
ond, comparing brokered prices and search-market prices provides evidence that
customers with higher search cost use brokers.


3.1       Evidence of Price Dispersion

I document both variation in raw prices pi jt and, following Allen et al. (2014), the
dispersion in residual prices to account for observable price variation. Residual
prices pi jt are computed from the following regression pi jt = X ·  + pi jt . I re-
strict the sample to customers that are in the retail business to limit the possibility
that observed price variation is driven by unobserved differences across customer
  20 My   model assumes that substitution between brokers and the search market is based solely on search cost. But there
might be other factors, such as service quality and reliability, that are driving the decision to search through a broker.
However, one reason that speaks against this is the fact that virtually all carters that are active in the broker market also
serve contracts in the regular market. It is hard to imagine that the workers that serve both types of contracts on a given
route know which locations have been brokered and treat them differently.


                                                            14
types. I report the percentage of explained variation and the residual price disper-
sion from two sets of regressions. The left-hand side variable of these regressions is
the price (per cu/yd) that carter j charges customer i during observation period t,
which is a half-year. I include only the initial price of each contractual relationship.
I run both regressions separately on brokered and non-brokered contracts and in-
clude a common set of controls; the only difference is whether I include carter fixed
effects. Throughout, I use q to denote the quantity of waste produced by a given
customer.



                                    Table (2)         Documenting price dispersion

                        First specification (no carter FE)                         Second Specification (carter FE)
                        Not Brokered                   Brokered                    Not Brokered                    Brokered

    1 - R2                      0.71                        0.35                           0.51                         0.24
    SD ( pi jt )                 2.9                         4.4                            2.9                          4.4
    SD ( pi jt )                 2.5                         2.2                           2.13                         1.97
    mean( pi jt )               12.4                        10.9                           12.4                         10.9

    Note:    The table shows the percentage of unexplained variation in observed prices pi jt as well as the dispersion of rates
    and residual rates pi jt . The second specification is identical to the first but also includes carter fixed effects. All regressions
    include the following controls: zip code fixed effects, transfer station fixed effects, quantity and higher orders of the quan-
    tity variable, recyclables fixed effects, time fixed effects, fixed effects for the number of pickups per week.


Table 2 reports the results of these regressions. Despite the fine-grained controls,
the percentage of unexplained price variation is substantial across specifications,
and the standard deviation of residual prices is still large. Results from the spec-
ification with carter fixed effects show that even within carter, price variation is
large. The mean and the percentage of unexplained variation for brokered con-
tracts is smaller, which means that prices on these contracts are better explained
by observable differences in contracts.

   As a measure of price dispersion, the literature often refers to the coefficient of
variation, which divides the sample standard deviation by the sample mean of the


                                                                    15
price distribution. The coefficient of variation in the search market is 0.24 and in
the broker market 0.2. As a comparison, in a well-known empirical study of price
dispersion, Sorensen (2000) reports an average coefficient of variation of 0.22 in the
retail market for prescription drugs.21


3.2        Comparing prices across Broker Market and Search Market

This section establishes that prices including the broker commissions are higher
than prices in the bilateral search market, which are, in turn, higher than prices in
the broker market without commissions. This relationship calls for an unobserved
variable that makes buyers who use broker services differentially inelastic to the
prices charged in this part of the market. This pattern is consistent with buyers
in the brokered marked having search costs at least as high as the search costs for
buyers in the bilateral market.

     Figure 2 shows that this clearly holds when examining the raw CDFs of prices.
The distribution of brokered prices with commission stochastically dominates the
distribution of non-brokered contracts, which, in turn, dominates the distribution
of broker prices without commission. Brokers charge substantial markups over the
rates obtained from carters in the auction. The median commission is 34.0%, and
the mean commission is 38.0%. Results from two sets of regressions (shown in Ta-
ble 10 and Table 11, in Appendix E) confirm that this relationship also holds after
accounting for the observable differences in contracts. The two sets differ only in
the dependent variable. The first set includes broker prices without commissions
  21 The   following calculations give a sense of the dollar value of this dispersion: for a business that reports in cu/yd and
generates the mean quantity of waste (17.8 cu/yd), moving one standard deviation ( SD ( pi jt )) in the residual distribution
of prices would cost an extra $1281.6 over the length of a contract, which is slightly longer than two years. Most businesses
in New York City are small. According to the 2013 County Business Patterns provided by the Census Bureau, 60,856 out of
105,439 businesses have fewer than four employees, and 77,965 have fewer than ten employees. BizBuySell.com provides
the median sales price of a business in New York City, that have been sold over this platform, which was about $229,500
in 2013. Assuming an interest rate of 3%, that would imply annual profits of $6885.0. The subset of businesses sold on this
page is almost surely biased towards small companies, but it provides some reference point for the above calculations.



                                                              16
   Figure (2)            CDF for non-brokered/brokered prices (w and w.o. commission)
                        1.00


                  CDF   0.75


                        0.50


                        0.25


                        0.00
                               $0       $5        $10        $15        $20       $25        $30       $35
                                                          Rate (per cu/yd)
                                     Broker Price       Search Market    Broker Price + Commission




and the second set with commissions. The main variable of interest is a dummy
that indicates whether the contract is brokered, and I explore both the mean ef-
fect in an OLS specification and the effect at different points of the distribution
using quantile regressions. All of the regressions include the following controls:
quantity of waste; transfer-station fixed effects; zip code fixed effects; business-
type fixed effects; length-of-contract fixed effects; recyclable materials fixed effects;
reporting-date fixed effects; number of weekly pickups; and the zip code HHI in-
dex.22 The estimated linear effect of the broker dummy from the first specification
in Table 10 is -1.55, which is about 13% of the mean price and shows that brokers
obtain lower average prices from carters after observable information is taken into
account. Results from the quantile regressions reveal that this difference is com-
posed of a stronger difference in the lower tail of the distribution (25th percentile)
with an effect of -1.78. The median effect is -1.0, and the effect is weaker in
the upper tail, -0.08 for the 75th percentile. All but the 75th percentile effect are
highly significant.
  22 Goldberg   (1996), for example, uses quantile regressions to re-examine experimental results on race-based price discrim-
ination. The quantile regressions do not include controls for transfer stations. This is because it is computationally very
costly to include that many controls.



                                                              17
    Table 11 shows the same set of regressions, where broker prices include the
commission. The coefficient on the main independent variable of interest, the indi-
cator whether a contract is brokered, reverses sign from negative to positive. The
effect implies that final prices are about $4.47 higher for brokered contracts, hold-
ing other characteristics fixed. At the low end of the distribution, final prices for
brokers are $0.24 higher, while median prices are $2.6 and prices in the upper tail
$4.7 higher. All of these differences are highly significant. These regression results
confirms the observation in the raw price distributions in Figure 2.


Summary of descriptive results In this section, I show that residual variation in
prices, even after conditioning on many important observable aspects of a con-
tract is large. This dispersion suggests that customers benefit from searching for
carters. Residual dispersion among brokered contracts is lower. Brokers obtain
lower prices from carters, but because of high commissions, the average broker
price that customers pay is higher. These two facts are consistent with the idea
that buyers with high search costs use brokers.



4    Model Overview

To establish a causal effect of intermediaries in the market, one would ideally com-
pare markets with different and randomly assigned prices for broker contracts and
test how markets fare under different conditions. However, such exogenous varia-
tion does not exist in this setting. To evaluate the effect of brokers, one needs to take
into consideration that different observed fractions of brokered contracts might be
due to different inherent market characteristics that affect both the propensity to
hire a broker and prices. The model will help explain how the observed prices de-
pend on customer search cost and the cost of service provision for carters, as well
as account for the potential selection of customers across the two markets and how


                                           18
this selection affects carter pricing.

   The search of businesses for brokers is modeled as a sequential game between
customers and carters. Brokers are non-strategic players. A customer j in the
model is described by privately observed iid search cost  j , drawn an from a con-
tinuous distribution H (·). These search costs are the marginal cost for an addi-
tional price inquiry. The cost  j should be thought of as capturing both search cost
and also the cost of haggling to get the best possible price quote from a given carter.
Carters are indexed by i and draw an iid customer-specific service cost ci j from a
continuous distribution ci j  G (·). In the empirical specification of the model both
H (·) and G (·) depend on observables. I will suppress the dependence of these key
model primitives on observables until I start discussing the estimation since these
observables are not essential for understanding the setup of the model and play no
role in the identification.

The timing of the game is as follows:

      t = 0 : Customer draws search cost  and carters draw service cost c. Both
      are privately observed.

      t = 1 : Customers decide whether to delegate search to a broker and, if not,
      how many price quotes to get, m  {1, . . . , M}, where M is the total number
      of carters.

      t = 2 : Carters submit price quotes either in a first-price auction when the
      contract is procured through a broker, or in the search market.


4.1   Customer Search and Brokers

In the model, I abstract from the competition between brokers. Instead, I assume
that buyers make their decision to delegate the search based on the average bro-
kered price (conditional on relevant observables). Brokers determine the seller

                                          19
through a competitive bidding process. I assume that searching customers incur
expenses for each additional price inquiry, while I regard the broker infrastruc-
ture as fixed. A broker b will, each time she receives a request by a customer,
hold an auction with Nb bidders. Let the expected price obtained through a bro-
ker be E[ p B ]. This price is the average lowest bid over different broker auctions
with a varying number of competitors, E[ p B ] =  f b · E[ p B |b], where f b is the fre-
quency with which customers encounter broker b, and E[ p B |b] is the conditional
broker price of broker b. In line with the industry practice of running a request for
proposal, I model these auctions as a first price-auctions. On the customer side,
each type  will optimally ask for m( ) price quotes, which yields an expected
price E[ p1:m( ) ]. The expression 1 : m( ) indicates that the expectation is over the
first order statistic out of m( ) draws from the price offer distribution. In the next
section, I will provide details on how E[ p B ] and E[ p1:m( ) ] are determined in the
model. The markup charged by brokers is denoted as .

     With these ingredients I can use Equation 1 to define a cut-off type ¯ who is
indifferent between an arrangement with a broker and the expected cost of indi-
vidual search under the optimal search policy,

                                    q · E[ p B ] ·  = q · E[ p1:m(¯)
                                                                     ] + m(¯) ·¯.                                        (1)

Every customer with higher search cost will use a broker, and every customer with
a lower search cost will search in the bilateral market. Let F ( p) be the equilibrium
distribution of price offers in the search market, and remember that  j  H (·)
is the distribution of marginal search cost and ci j  G (·) the distribution of cost
draws for carters.23 I will now discuss what the optimal search strategy of cus-
tomers against such an equilibrium price offer function looks like. Search is non-
sequential.24 A customer j with search cost  j minimizes their total cost over the
  23 The   distribution F (·) is unobserved. The data record only the contract price.
  24 In   an earlier stage of this project, I also experimented with a sequential search model. For some parameter values, it
was not possible to solve for an equilibrium in these models. This finding, along with the lack of general existence proofs,



                                                               20
number of searches m  {1, . . . , M}:

                                            min q j · E[ p1:m ] + m ·  j ;
                                              m

using the distribution function of the lowest price in terms of the equilibrium price
offer distribution F ( p), the expected cost for making m searches can be expressed
as:
                                       ¯
                                       p
                         min               m · p · q · (1 - F ( p))m-1 · f ( p)dp + m ·  .
                     m{1,..., M} 0
The following lemma says that buyers, for a given distribution of price offers, will
sort themselves according to the optimal number of price inquiries for their type.
Depending on E[ p B ] ·  and prices under the optimal search strategy in the bi-
lateral market, there is a marginal type ¯ <  such that every type with higher
search costs will delegate search to a broker.

                       Figure (3)          Sorting buyers according to search cost

          h( )                                 m searches


                                                              m - 1 searches


                                                                                 brokered




                            m-2            m-1             m
                                                                                                           
                                                                         ¯
                                                                         

             Notes: This figure shows the sorting of buyers according to their search cost. Higher search cost leads
         to fewer calls m. Types with search cost above ¯ delegate their search to a broker.



Lemma 1. There are marginal types 0   M-1 < . . . < m-1 < m < ¯   such that
every type   [m-1 , m ] samples m firms, and every type larger than ¯ delegates search
to an intermediary.
led me to abandon this path.


                                                            21
   Proof: This Lemma follows from the fact that E[ p1:m ] is concave, and the search
cost is linear in the number of searches m. Note that these cut-off types are given
by m = q · (E[ p1:m ] - E[ p1:(m+1) ]). Because of the sorting it must be true that if
q · E[ p B ] ·  > E[ p, m] -  · m then q · E[ p B ] ·  > q · E[ p1:(m+1) ] -  · (m + 1)

   Brokers provide "rents" to every type above ¯ . Figure 3 depicts the sorting of
buyers along the search cost distribution into bins of types that want to make m
searches and the selection into the broker market.


4.2   Carter Pricing

This section describes the symmetric optimal bidding strategy b (·) of carters in
the auction held by broker b, in which they face a known number of competitors
Nb . I also describe the symmetric price offer strategy  S (·) in the search market in
which carters are bidding against an unknown number of bidders out of M poten-
tial bidders (as a function of the buyers search strategy). The search market and
and the broker market are linked through the common cost distribution G (·) that
carters in both markets are drawing from. Denote G (·) = 1 - G (·). The optimal
bidding functions b (·) in the procurement auction of broker b with Nb bidders are
derived from the following objective function:

                              max( p - c) · G (- 1
                                               b ( p ))
                                                        Nb -1
                                                              .                           (2)
                                p

In the search market, carters offer their price quotes without knowing consumers'
type  . They serve the contract if they are the cheapest among m firms, where m is a
multinomial random variable with probabilities wm = H (m | < ¯ ) - H (m-1 | <
¯ ). Note, that the weights wm themselves depend on carters' equilibrium price

offer distribution via the expectations over prices that give rise to the cut-off types.
I will now describe carter's strategy  S (·) in the sub-game where carters make
price offers to consumers in the search market, planning with the correct vector of
search weights (w1 . . . w M ). These strategies map the customer-specific cost-draw

                                             22
to a price quote. Using this notation, the maximization problem for carters is:

                                              M
                        max( p - c) ·                wm · G (- 1
                                                             S ( p ))
                                                                      m-1
                                                                          .
                          p
                                             m=1

   This maximization problem is akin to a first-price procurement auction with
an unknown number of competitors. The number of competing firms is not de-
termined by some entry process but instead by customers' search strategies, as
summarized by the weights. Suppressing the dependence on covariates, the bid-
ding function from this problem has a closed form solution (Krishna (2009)) and is
given by:
                  M
                          wm · G ( c )(m-1)                      1             ¯
                                                                               c
        S (c) =         M
                                                     · c+                          G (u)(m-1) du   .   (3)
                  m=1   k =1   wk   · G ( c )(k-1)          G ( c )(m-1)   c


   Combining the behavior of carters and the customer search strategy, an equi-
librium for the market can be formulated:

Definition 1. An equilibrium in the decentralized market for customer type is a set of:

   1. Bidding strategies in each broker market: b (·), b  {1, . . . , B}

   2. A bidding strategy in the search market:  S (·)

   3. Customer search weights w1 , ..., w M .

such that:


   1. The search weights result from customer's optimal search behavior under the price
      distribution F (·) in the search market and F B (·) in the broker market.

   2. b (·), b  {1, . . . , B} are optimal given the number of bidders Nb for broker b and
       S (·), is optimal given the distribution of price inquiries resulting from w1 , ..., w M .

   3. F (·) and F B (·) result from  S (·) and b (·), b  {1, . . . , B}.

                                                     23
5      Identification

This section discusses the identification of the model's primitives, which are H (·)
and G (·). For brokered contracts the observables are the broker contract prices
p B , the commission , the quantity q that consumers contract for and the number
of bidders Nb . For search market contracts the observables are the search market
price p and the quantity q. In addition, the econometrician observes variables x,
which are contract-specific observables. These are not used in the identification
and are therefore suppressed until I talk about estimation. Note that in the empir-
ical implementation I do not directly observe the number of bidders but a variable
that serves as a very good proxy, which is the number of carters that a broker
awards contracts to. This issue is discussed in more detail in section 6.2.2 where I
also refer to a robustness check to this assumption.

     From Athey and Haile (2002) I adopt the following definition of identification.
Define a model as a pair (F, ), where F is a set of joint distributions over the
vector of latent random variables,  is a collection of mappings  : F  H , and H
is the set of all joint distributions over the vector of observable random variables.
Implicit in the specification of a model is the assumption that it contains the true
(F ,  ) generating the observables.

Definition 2. A model (F,  ) is identified iff for every ( F, F )  F2 and ( , ^ )   2 ,  ( F) =
^ ( F ) implies ( F,  ) = ( F , 
                                ^ ).25

     Illustrations in Appendix B.1 demonstrate why, from one price distribution
alone, service- and search cost are not separately identified. The distribution of
observed prices in the search market is given by Equation 4, and depends both
on search costs via the weights and carter costs. The simple intuition for non-
identification is that the same distribution of prices can be generated either by a
  25 For   a similar definition see Matzkin (2007).



                                                      24
combination of low search cost and high carter cost, or by a combination of high
search cost and low carter cost.
                                                                                            m
                                F o ( p) =  wm · 1 - 1 - G (- 1
                                                            S ( p ))                             .                          (4)
                                              m

It is therefore crucial that the data record the contracts arranged in both the bro-
kered market and the search market. To make some progress, I make the following
assumption:

Assumption 1. Carter bids in the broker market and in the bilateral market are based on
                                                                                         1-G (·)
the same cost distribution G (·) with density g(.), and where                             g(·)
                                                                                                     is Lipschitz continu-
ous.26

     Furthermore, I require the following assumption.

Assumption 2. A decentralized market equilibrium exists and is unique in the data.

     Under these assumptions one can identify the distribution of carter cost and a
partition of the consumer search cost distribution as follows.

     Given Assumption 1, Theorem 1 in Guerre et al. (2000) allows for the identifica-
tion of carter cost based on observing the prices p (winning bids) and Nb in the bro-
ker market. A known cost distribution for carters can then be used in conjunction
with the distribution of bilaterally negotiated contract prices to identify a partition
  26 In   an earlier version of this paper the model accounted for persistent differences of carters by allowing for a finite
number of different cost distributions. In Appendix B.3 I discuss the assumptions under the previous setup and briefly
outline how one can estimate such a model. Additional details can be found in the old working paper version: https:
//papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3568571. I found that accounting for persistent cost differences does
not affect the counterfactual results much. One can also use observed prices to directly test for persistent cost differences
across carters that serve brokers and those that do not. Table 10 and Table 11 show the results of such a test by including an
indicator that is one if at least one contract of the carter is arranged through a broker and zero otherwise. The coefficient on
this indicator is not significant in explaining contract price variation in the subset of contracts that I use for my estimation.
Lastly, within the symmetric model I have estimated a version in which carters that participate in broker auctions are
drawing from a truncated cost distribution G (·|c
                                                ¯), where c
                                                          ¯ is an additional parameter. This is a more ad-hoc way to allow
                                                                                   ¯ that is so high that it does not lead to a
for cost differences across the two markets. I find that the estimation recovers a c
different cost distribution for carters that participate in broker auctions.


                                                               25
of the search cost distribution. The key intuition is that under Equation 3 one can
map from the distribution of winning prices to a unique set of search weights (as
illustrated in Figure 3) once carter costs are known and "controlled for". This is
the result of the following proposition.

Proposition 1. If G (·) is known and A1 and A2 hold, the search-weights (w1 , ..., w M )
and cut-off types (1 , ...,  M-1 , ¯ ) are identified from prices p (winning "bids") in the
bilateral market.

   Proof: The proof is relegated to Appendix B.2.

   The argument involves the following steps: (i) Derive an expression for the in-
verse bid distribution in terms of quantities that are observed or known, which
are G (·) and F o (·) and their densities. This gives rise to an ordinary differential
equation that has a unique solution from which I can recover  S (·). (ii) Given that
G (·) and  S (·) are known, the weights are uniquely identified based on an induc-
tive argument. (iii) Given the weights, the full bidding function  S (·) is known,
which also identifies the conditional expectations of prices E[ p1:1 ], ..., E[ p1: M ]. The
cut-off types 1 , ...,  M-1 are a direct function of those conditional prices and q, and
therefore also identified. Lastly note that all objects in Equation 1 are now known
up to ¯ , which therefore identifies ¯ . The fraction of brokered contracts, which are
all buyer types above ¯ are directly observed in the data.

   Referring back to Figure 3, with Proposition 1 we can identify the weights cor-
responding to the partition of the search cost distribution as well as the value of
the marginal types  M-1 , ..., 1 , ¯ . Note also that this argument allows for the iden-
tification of carter cost and search cost conditional on q and whatever other covari-
ates one wants to condition the above argument on. In practice, the partition of
the search cost distribution is quite fine. The left panel in Figure 11 (Appendix F)
provides an example based on my estimates. Each line in those graphs has a cor-
responding known empirical CDF that is given by the sum of the search weights


                                            26
up to this point.


Additional Restrictions if q is excluded from H (·): Because search costs are in-
terpreted as a marginal cost, it is natural to exclude q from the search cost distribu-
tion. Carter cost, on the other hand, might naturally depend on q because of scale
efficiencies. Since each level of q gives rise to a different set of search weights by
moving the cut-off types m = q · (E[ p1:m ] - E[ p1:(m+1) ]), the identified partition
becomes much finer. The panel on the right of Figure 11 shows this partition for
the empirical implementation of the model, which is based on four different quan-
tity levels. However, excluding q from the search cost also leads to a restriction on
the substitution to brokers because not only does a higher quantity lead to more
search by moving the cut-off types 1 , ... M-1 to the right, but it also moves ¯ to
the right. If one wants to exclude q from H (·), the model might be too restrictive in
explaining the substitution to brokers across different quantity levels. This issue is
discussed in more detail in the next section, where I will also allow the substitution
to brokers to depend on q.



6    Estimation

This section explains the details of the estimation. Estimation is conducted via
full-solution method of simulated moments. This means that the model is solved
each time a new set of parameters is evaluated. I first explain how the moments
are constructed given a solution to the model, and then how to solve for equilibria
given a parameter guess. Lastly, I give a detailed overview over the full estimation
algorithm.

    To deal with observable contract heterogeneity I rely on a combination of con-
trolling for observables in the estimation and restricting the sample to a more ho-
mogeneous set of contracts. I estimate carter cost conditional on a set of contract


                                          27
covariates, which are denoted as x. The contract covariates x are given by borough
fixed effects, the presence of recyclables in the customer's waste stream, and the
quantity of waste at the customer location. Including quantity accounts for poten-
tial scale efficiencies. For search cost I estimate an unconditional distribution.27

     Regarding the length of the contract, I rely on the fact that the BIC mandates
a maximal contract lock-in of two years. The estimation assumes that when cus-
tomers search they expect to contract for the full two years. I only model the initial
two years and do not try to model the dynamics of contract renewals. Hence, in the
estimation I only rely on the initial price in the customer-carter relationship. One
issue is that some customers might anticipate that they only remain in contract for
a few months and therefore have lower incentives to search. To better fit my as-
sumption of a two-year planning horizon, I only use contracts for customers that
stay in the contract for two years. The data shows that 58.4% of all contracts last the
full two years, 10% for 1.5 years, 13% for one year, and 17.8% for only six month.
I provide an in-depth discussion of dynamic considerations in the customer-carter
relationship in section 6.2.1.

     I further restrict the estimation to a subset of contracts whose customers oper-
ate a retail business to minimize the possibility that price variation is driven by
unobserved factors that are idiosyncratic to the customer's industry. The retail cat-
egory is the largest category in my data and does therefore not restrict the sample
too severely. See Table 8 for a breakdown of customer business types. These re-
strictions leave 44417 contracts on which the model is estimated. Some additional
details on the construction of the sample are given in Appendix A.

     For the estimation it is convenient to impose parametric restrictions on the dis-
tribution of unobservables of the model, which are the search- and carter costs. I
assume that both are normal distributions, restricted to the positive domain. The
  27 In   other versions of the estimation consumer search cost was also a function of the borough, but this made almost no
difference to the estimates.




                                                             28
observables x enter carter cost through a linear index restriction. Under these sam-
ple restrictions, the cost-distribution for a contract with observables x is assumed
to be:
                                                                            4
                                                                            c, Boro
  G (·| x) = N[0,) (mc ( x),  c ) where m( x) = µ c +                       k       ·
                                                                           k=1

     1{Contract in Borough k} +  q · q +  r · 1{Contract specifies recyclables}. (5)

The specification for the customer search cost distribution is:28

                                               H (·) = N[0,) (µ s ,  s ).

         In the empirical version of the model I also allow the relative attractiveness of
the broker option to depend on the customer's quantity of waste. Without this
shifter the model would not fit the data well due to the restrictions that changes in
the quantity impose on buyers' search strategy and, hence, the type distribution. I
illustrate this issue in Appendix D.1. The model predicts that higher quantity buy-
ers search more, which leads all cut-off types, including the broker-marginal type to
shift rightwards. Holding the search cost-cost distribution fixed, the model would
therefore predict that there are too few brokered contracts among high quantity
buyers because the incentives to search are always high enough. This is, however,
not what I observe in the data. Table 9 shows that a larger fraction of high quantity
buyers use brokers.

         There are two potential explanations that could rationalize the fact that we do
not see "enough" search among high quantity buyers. The first is that search costs
depend directly on q and are increasing in q. Alternatively, high quantity buyers
are "compensated" in other ways such as additional services from brokers. The
first explanation has less appeal because search costs are interpreted as a marginal
  28 I   have also tried a version where customer search cost depends on the borough, but this made almost no difference to
the results, which is why I decided to drop the extra parameters. The difference in average prices across boroughs is less
than $0.50.



                                                             29
cost. The latter is a more plausible explanation, which leads me to assume that the
relative attractiveness of brokers also depends linearly on q via  as follows:29

                   q · E[ p B | x] · ( x) -  · q = q · E[ p1:m(¯)
                                                                  | x] + m(¯ ( x)) · ¯ ( x).                               (6)

     A final data caveat is that I only have access to broker commissions for one re-
porting period in 2014, the first time the BIC collected such data. There is no com-
mon identifier that would allow me to merge the broker commission data with the
main contract-level data. Instead, to bridge the two datasets I run a hedonic pricing
regression to impute the broker commissions  based on the two sets of variables
that overlap in both datasets, which are the carter charges and the customer zip-
code. The model is specified as a linear regression of prices on a fifth-order polyno-
mial in carter charges and zip-code fixed effects. At the contract level, the fit of this
model is low with an R2 of 0.22. However, in this study I do not attempt to explain
broker competition and contract-level broker prices. Moreover, price dispersion in
broker commissions plays no role in the counterfactual, in which buyers do not
have the option to use brokers. Instead, I am interested in selection into the broker
market, given the prevailing level of commissions and what those commissions re-
veals about average search costs in a bin of observables. Buyers in the model make
the decision to use brokers based on the average broker price E[ p B | x] · ( x). With
an R2 of 0.87 the imputation model works well in explaining the relevant average
commissions ¯ ( x), which is defined conditional on the borough and quartiles of

carter charges.

     The estimation seeks to recover  = {µ s , µ c ,  s ,  c ,  s, Boro ,  r ,  q , }. I search
over those parameters, minimizing the distance between data moments and model-
simulated moments. I target the first and second moment of the price distribution
as well as the number of brokered contracts, each conditional on x.

     The estimation method relies on repeatedly solving the equilibrium for each set
  29 In a previous version of the paper the search cost was conditional on   q and under this specification the model suggested
that search cost is increasing in q.


                                                             30
of conditioning variables. It would be impossible to solve the equilibrium for each
unique value in the support of a continuous covariate. I therefore discretize the
quantity q, which is the only continuous variable in x. I divide buyers into four
quantity bins based on quartile cut-offs. The product of 4 boroughs, the binary
variable that indicates the presence of recyclables, the number of reporting periods,
and the four quantity bins results in 160 cells, which means that the model must be
solved 160 times for each iteration of the objective function. In an abuse of notation
I denote an index for a set from this partition as x. The number of observations in
this set is denoted Nx , and the collection of indices corresponding to the collection
of contracts in a given set is A x .

   I now explain how I construct the moments for estimation given a set of equi-
librium objects b (·) b,  S (·), w1 , ..., w M , 1 , ...,  M-1 , ¯ . For each of the aforemen-
tioned cells x I match five different types of moments. These moments are based on
the mean and the standard deviation of prices for both brokered and non-brokered
contracts as well as the fraction of brokered contracts. Note that the model-derived
mean of prices in the search market is given by:
                                 M
                    S ( , x) =         wk ( x) ·     S (c| x) · g1:m (c| x;  ) dc,
                                 m=1
where g1:m refers to the lowest order statistic of carter costs out of m draws. It
is much easier to simulate this mean instead of computing it directly. Each sim-
ulation draw includes a random draw from the multinomial distribution with
weights {w1 , ..., w M } to determine the number of searches and then a correspond-
ing number of cost draws from G (·| ), the lowest of which is denoted as ck and
mapped to a price via psk =  S (ck | x; w). This leads to a vector of simulated prices
{ ps1 , ..., psK }| x of length K. This procedure leads to the following approximation:
                                                        K
                               S ( , x)  K -1 ·          psk (, x)
                                                        k=1
Similarly, I can simulate the mean of broker prices by drawing a broker according
to f b and then taking Nb cost draws and mapping the lowest cost draw to a price

                                                   31
via pb         k
     sk = b ( cb ; Nb ):

                                                                                       K
                                                                              -1
            B ( , x) =      fb ·      b (c) · g1: Nb (c| x;  ) dc  K               ·    pb
                                                                                         sk ( , x )
                           b                                                           k=1

where f b is the empirical frequency of contracts with broker b. Simulation is es-
pecially advantageous for matching the standard deviations of observed prices,
which I can simply compute on the same set of prices from the simulation de-
scribed above. Lastly, it is easy to compute the number of brokered contracts in
closed form as (1 - H (¯ ( x)| )) · Nx .

   To sum up, I use simulated prices for the broker market and the search mar-
ket, conditional on x, along with the fraction of brokered contracts implied by the
model to build the following estimation moments. The moments for the mean of
prices are given by:
                                                                          K
                                     -1
                     m1, S ( , x) = Nx  ·               pi - K -1 ·        psk (, x),                         (7)
                                                i A x                 k=1

and for the standard deviation of prices by

                                                                    0.5
                                                                2
                    -1                     -1
  m2, S ( , x) =   Nx  ·            p i - Nx  ·            pi
                            i A x                 i A x
                                                                                                      0.5
                                                 K                                                2
                                    - K -1 ·              psk ( , x) - K -1 ·       psk (, x)               . (8)
                                                k=1                             k=1

The moments for the brokered market m1, B ( , x) and m2, B ( , x) are defined anal-
ogously using the simulated broker prices { pb          b
                                             s1 , ..., psK }| x. Lastly, the moment for

the fraction of brokered contracts is given by

                            -1
              m f ( , x) = Nx  ·             1{brokered}i - (1 - H (¯ ( x))) · Nx .                           (9)
                                     i A x

So for each x I have one vector of moments given by

         m( , x) = m1, B ( , x) m1, S ( , x) m2, B ( , x) m2, S ( , x) m f ( , x)

                                                     32
Denoting m( ) the stacked vector of moments across all bins x, the estimation
consists of the following optimization problem:

                                     MSM = argmin m( ) ·  · m( )                                     (10)

    I use the inverse of the observed variance of each moment in the data to weight
the moments.30 I employ a non-parametric bootstrap (Efron and Tibshirani, 1994)
to obtain standard errors and 95% confidence intervals for my estimates and the
counterfactual numbers. I draw B = 200 bootstrap samples, each with the same
sample size as the original data. Draws are with replacement from the full set of
contracts that are used in the estimation.



6.1        The Estimation Algorithm

For each parameter guess, constructing the moments requires solving for the equi-
librium objects b (·) b,  S (·), w1 , ..., w M , 1 , ...,  M-1 , ¯ . In Table 3 I describe the
steps that are involved in this process. The inner loop is repeated for each x-bin,
but I suppress this dependence to lighten the notation. The equilibrium search-
weights are derived by simply updating them iteratively according to steps 1 and
2 in Table 3. Starting from a set of weights with equal probability in each entry, I
first obtain a bidding function from which I can compute expected prices. From
those expected prices I can compute a set of cut-off types which then give rise to
new weights and a new bidding function. Note that at each updating step this
procedure also determines ¯ , which determines the types of consumers that search
versus contact brokers. This selection on the consumer side links the two markets.
I found that as long as I rule out the Diamond paradox -- an equilibrium in which
nobody searches and all sellers charge the monopoly price -- this iterative updat-
ing quickly converges to a unique vector after a few iterations.31 This drastically
 30 For   each moment is use 20 simulation draws, which leads to a total of 1280 simulation draws.
 31 The   Diamond paradox is rejected by the data.


                                                            33
speeds up the inner loop because I do not have to run a separate numerical search
for the equilibrium.

                             Table (3)     Estimation Algorithm

 Algorithm 1: Estimation of the Model

   Result: Estimate of 

   while m( ) · ^ · m( ) > outer tolerance do

      1. Initialize weight vector w0 with 1/ M in each entry;

      2. while d(wk , wk-1 ) = ||wk - wk-1 || > inner tolerance do
           2.1 Recompute the broker bidding functions k
                                                      b ( ·| )  b;

           2.2 Use wk to recompute the bidding function k       k
                                                        S ( ·| w ;  );

           2.3 Use k       k
                   S ( ·| w ;  ) to compute expected prices E [ p
                                                                  1:m ] for each m;


           2.4 Recompute m = E[ p1:m ] - E[ p1:(m+1) ] m  1, ..., M as well as ¯;

           2.5 Form new weights wk +1
                                 m = H (m | < ¯ ) - H (m-1 | < ¯ )  m;
      end

      3. Use the equilibrium objects to simulate { ps1 , ..., psk } and { pb          b
                                                                           s1 , ..., psk },

         compute the average and the standard deviation of simulated prices, compute
         fraction of brokered contracts (1 - H (¯ )) · N .;

      4. Construct moments for the objective function.
   end


   One potential concern is that the set of equilibria with a non-degenerate price
distribution is not unique. I have not found this to be an issue in practice. One
advantage in this setting is that the equilibrium in the search market is easily sum-
marized -- it is a set of search weights. A given set of search weights will au-
tomatically imply a bidding function for carters, which is unique given the set
of weights. One can therefore easily explore uniqueness by starting the iterative
procedure to solve for equilibria from different initial weights. For the paramet-

                                                 34
ric implementation that I use in this paper I have never encountered an issue of
multiple equilibria. In Appendix G I shows the results from these explorations.
These tables show each step of the iteration until convergence; for a wide variety
of starting values, the algorithm converges to the same equilibrium.


6.2      Limitations and Practical Considerations for Estimation

6.2.1     Contract Dynamics

The estimation focuses on new contracts between buyers and carters. The wel-
fare quantifications that I discuss below only pertain to the initial contract period.
This allows me to avoid some of the complications that would arise from mod-
eling a dynamic relationship once the initial contract period ends. One remain-
ing complication is that, while the data provides information about the duration
of a customer-carter relationship, it does not speak to when contract terms are re-
newed. Thus, one must make an assumption about the length of the initial contract
period. One thing that helps in this regards is that per BIC regulation customers
can switch after two years at no additional pecuniary cost.32 I therefore assume
that each first time relationship lasts for two years. In addition, to rule out unob-
served heterogeneity, I only include contracts in the estimation that lasted for two
full years and where the customer did not either exit or switch carters.33

     A closely related issue is switching cost, which could affect buyers' decisions
once they initialize a relationship with a carter. For example, if buyers can go
  32 http://www.nyc.gov/html/bic/html/trade_waste/customer_info_contracts.shtml (last accessed on 08/19/15).                    In line
with this regulation being binding for most contracts I find that about 2.18 years pass, on average, before customers obtain
a new rate, go out of business or switch.
  33 Overall, this issue is less problematic than it sounds.   Similar to q, contract-length scales the cut-off types and, as a result,
the estimated search cost. Suppose that  is the number of time periods for which the contract is signed. The cut-off types
 and, therefore, the estimated search cost and contract expenses are both scaled by  as the length of the contract changes.
This means that search cost per unit of time and as a fraction of total expenses (contract expenses plus search cost) remains
the same because the ratio of search cost and total expenses remains the same, as both are scaled by the same factor.




                                                                  35
back to the incumbent seller's price but have to search for new outside offers,
search costs act as switching costs. If buyers obtain a low initial price quote, this
might help them sustain lower future prices in the relationship. For estimation, this
would mean that search costs are underestimated.34 To give a sense of how large
the dynamic component of pricing is, Figure 9 in Appendix C shows the time dum-
mies of a hedonic price regression (using the same controls as similar regressions
referred to earlier) with and without contract fixed effects. We see that after two
years, prices adjust upwards, consistent with search costs acting as switching cost.
However, the magnitudes, at less than $.50, are modest. In general, search and
switching costs are hard to identify separately without observing the information
set of buyers (Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004)). Embedding the current framework
in a dynamic setting that accounts for such dynamics is beyond the scope of this
paper and left for future research.


6.2.2        Number of Bidders in The Broker Market

I do not directly see the number of bidders in the broker auctions on an auction-
by-auction basis. I therefore set the number of bidders on a broker contract to the
number of carters that have won a contract through this broker. Note that this
could underestimate the true number of bidders if, in reality, brokers do not so-
licit quotes from every carter they have a relationship with. Welfare changes in
the counterfactual depend on both search and service costs, and a bias in the num-
ber of bidders would lead to a bias in the relative size of search and service costs
and, possibly, in the conclusions drawn from counterfactuals. If the true number
of bidders is smaller than assumed, service costs would be overestimated since the
observed first-order statistic is less selected. This, in turn, would mean that search
costs are underestimated since sellers are drawing from lower cost distributions;
  34 In   that case, one would have m = q · (E[ p(m) ] - E[ p(m+1) ]) + (V ( p(m) ) - V ( p(m+1) )), where the second term would be
omitted.




                                                                 36
thus, it must be that buyers searched less to rationalize prices in the search mar-
ket. Since the overall effect on welfare is unclear, the counterfactual results section
discusses a robustness check, which shows how results change if the number of
bidders was, in fact, lower or higher.


6.2.3       Contract Level Cost Heterogeneity

The model does not take into account the possibility of contract-level heterogene-
ity that is unobserved to the econometrician. The auction literature has established
methods for dealing with auction-level heterogeneity that is observed to bidders but
unobserved to the econometrician. These methods build on insights from the non-
linear measurement error literature (Li and Vuong, 1998) and have been applied
in a variety of settings.35 The key requirement for these approaches is multiple
"measurements", which in the auction context would mean multiple bids per auc-
tion. In this setting, I only observe what can be interpreted as the equivalent of the
winning bid, which makes such methods infeasible. Alternatively, auction level
heterogeneity could be unobserved to the econometrician and only imperfectly ob-
served to bidders who in this case receive a noisy signal about a common value. Such
models are typically not identified (Athey and Haile, 2002), but one could test for
common values in first price sealed-bid auctions (Haile et al., 2003).

    While it is outside the scope of this paper to extent the model in these directions,
I would like to briefly discuss the likely bias that would result from such auction-
level heterogeneity. In both cases the likely bias is similar and would result from an
overestimate of idiosyncratic cost differences across sellers. One welfare effect of
intermediaries is higher allocative efficiency. Such allocative effects arise because
buyers do not necessarily find the lowest cost seller. The more dispersed the id-
iosyncratic cost of carters, the more severe is mis-allocation. This means that any
allocative effects due to cost differences in the counterfactual are overstated if some
 35 See,   for example, Asker (2010) and Krasnokutskaya (2011)



                                                           37
of the variation is in reality due to auction-level variation. Moreover, lower cost
dispersion means that the bidder's incremental gain from searching is in reality
(unobservably) lower. This would mean that search cost are underestimated. Be-
cause brokers increase allocative cost efficiencies less when cost are less dispersed
but reduce search cost more when search cost are higher, the overall bias on the
counterfactual results is unclear.



7    Results

This section describes the estimation results. I graphs the model's fit in Appendix J.
The parsimonious model fits the key moments quite well across the different quan-
tity bins, with broker prices being slightly underestimated for low quantity buyers.
Table 4 shows the parameter estimates along with standard errors. Average carter
cost per cu/yd are estimated as $9.969 with a standard deviation of 2.96. Note that
this is the value for the population distribution and not the average cost for ob-
served contracts, which is a selected set from this distribution. Carter costs are de-
creasing in the quantity of waste but not very strongly. This means that the strong
quantity discounts that I observe in the data are primarily driven by customers'
increased incentives to search. The model recovers a positive effect of recyclables
on cost but the coefficient is not significant. There are small cost differences across
boroughs. The Bronx and Manhattan are estimated to be cheaper to service than
Brooklyn and Queens.




                                          38
                                     Table (4)        Model Parameter Estimates

                                                                  Parameter                         95% Confidence
    Parameter Name                                                 Estimate                 SE      Interval


    Supply
    Mean Carter Cost                                                 9.969                 0.203    [9.774,10.024]
    SD Carter Cost                                                    2.96                 0.151    [2.806,3.106]
    Quantity cost efficiencies (×1000)                               -2.456                1.545    [-4.602,-0.164]
    Recyclables cost efficiencies (×1000)                            -0.152                6.879    [-1.783,19.157]
    Bronx cost shifter                                               -0.235                0.034    [-0.3,-0.211]
    Brooklyn cost shifter                                            -0.002                0.008    [-0.002,0.021]
    Manhattan cost shifter                                            -0.32                0.035    [-0.407,-0.279]

    Demand
    Mean Search Cost                                                 79.718                5.416    [77.178,96.963]
    SD Search Cost                                                   62.352                4.613    [58.717,72.486]
    Quantity Broker Shift                                            -0.309                0.015    [-0.334,-0.286]
    Note: This table shows the parameter estimates along with bootstrapped (standard errors) and [95% confidence intervals],
    based on 200 bootstrap iterations. The borough cost shifters are relative to Queens.


The mean search cost estimate is $79.718 with a large standard deviation of 62.352.
The coefficient that captures differential selection to brokers due to differences in
quantity is estimated as -0.309. This means that with each additional cu/yd cus-
tomers behave as if the total broker bill is reduced by about 31 cents. While this
effect does not matter for small quantity buyers it can be large for buyers with
high quantity and explains why I do not necessarily observe them searching by
themselves despite their steep incentives to do so.

   Table 5 shows the average cost - per cu/yd - for the contracts that are served
(i.e., the cost of "winning" carters) conditional on the borough and buyers' quan-
tity. Contracts with higher quantity for buyers have lower cost. This is mostly
because buyers with higher q have higher incentives to search, leading the cost to
be more selected. Figure 4 shows this effect graphically. Q a,b in Table 5 refers to
quantities from quantile a to b.

                                                                39
                     Table (5)       Expected $-cost for carter per cu/yd per month

                                   Bronx            Brooklyn               Manhattan               Queens
                 Q0,25              9.8                11.9                     9.5                   9.3
                                   (0.68 )            (0.665 )                (0.697 )              (0.694 )
                 Q25,50             8.9                 9.2                     9.5                   9.2
                                  (0.557 )            (0.746 )                (0.626 )              (0.627 )
                 Q50,75             7.9                 6.9                     7.8                   7.9
                                  (0.572 )            (0.666 )                (0.611 )              (0.709 )
                 Q75,100            5.4                 5.7                     5.5                   5.7
                                  (0.334 )            (0.415 )                (0.422 )              (0.376 )
                 Note: The table shows the average cost for different boroughs. To compute this cost I draw re-
                 peatedly (10000 times) from the distribution of bidders. Q a,b refers to quantities from quantile
                 a to b. Bootstrapped standard errors are provided in parentheses (200 iterations).




                                               Figure (4)         Carter cost



              0.20
                                                                             Population Cost
                                                                             Realized Cost (2.5 avg inquiries)
              0.15                                                           Realized Cost (9.5 avg inquiries)
    Density




              0.10


              0.05


              0.00
                     0                  5                  10             15                     20                  25
                                                             Carter Cost in $

              Notes: This figure shows the population distribution of carter cost and the realized distribution for two
      different equilibrium search weights, one with 2.5 and one with 9.5 inquiries on average.


   Table 6 gives a broad overview of customers' search costs. Buyers who contract
for higher quantity search more and therefore spend more on searching. However,


                                                               40
                                                    Table (6)       Search Cost and Inquiries

                                         Search Cost                                   Number of                      Total Search               Fraction
                                       Per Inquiry ($)                                   Searches                        Cost ($)                 of Total
Subset                  <¯ (searches)                  >¯ (brokers)                  <¯ (searches)                 <¯ (searches)                 Expenses

Bronx
Q0,25                     87.3 (23.865)                 220.1 (60.25)                    1.2 (0.33)                  93.0 (25.399)                   0.15
Q25,50                    81.5 (22.347)                194.7 (53.467)                   1.6 (0.434)                  99.1 (27.071)                   0.08
Q50,75                    83.2 (22.875)                200.7 (55.511)                   2.9 (0.794)                  163.0 (44.487)                  0.08
Q75,100                   72.1 (19.815)                170.3 (46.798)                   8.2 (2.248)                 536.5 (146.565)                  0.09
Brooklyn
Q0,25                      85.6 (23.36)                210.7 (57.478)                   1.2 (0.331)                  92.9 (25.372)                   0.15
Q25,50                    75.2 (20.491)                177.1 (48.274)                   1.7 (0.452)                   98.4 (26.86)                   0.08
Q50,75                    57.4 (16.229)                145.3 (40.462)                    3.8 (1.04)                  165.7 (45.244)                  0.08
Q75,100                   63.3 (17.237)                154.2 (41.995)                   8.7 (2.378)                 510.9 (139.083)                  0.08
Manhattan
Q0,25                      87.8 (24.01)                223.6 (61.208)                    1.2 (0.33)                  93.0 (25.406)                   0.15
Q25,50                    83.4 (22.856)                201.5 (55.336)                    1.6 (0.43)                  99.3 (27.119)                   0.08
Q50,75                    85.8 (23.502)                212.0 (58.309)                   2.8 (0.778)                  161.9 (44.192)                  0.08
Q75,100                   75.8 (20.764)                178.6 (48.977)                   8.0 (2.199)                  545.8 (148.95)                  0.09
Queens
Q0,25                     85.6 (23.368)                210.6 (57.514)                   1.2 (0.331)                  92.9 (25.372)                   0.15
Q25,50                    75.1 (20.517)                177.0 (48.335)                   1.7 (0.452)                  98.4 (26.864)                   0.08
Q50,75                    57.4 (16.027)                145.3 (40.175)                   3.8 (1.045)                  165.7 (45.251)                  0.08
Q75,100                    63.2 (17.29)                154.0 (42.081)                   8.7 (2.375)                 510.6 (139.278)                  0.08
Note: This table shows expected search cost per inquiry, the number if inquiries as well as total expenses for search. Bootstrapped standard errors are provided
in parentheses.




                                                                             41
as a fraction of the total expenses, which include contract expenses, their expenses
on search are lower.

     A separate look at the average search cost for customers that use brokers and
those that do not gives a sense of the selection into broker services. The search costs
for customers that use brokers are about two to three times as high as those who
contact carters directly. The estimates, therefore, reflect the high mark-ups charged
by brokers. The wedge that this markup generates between the broker market and
the non-brokered market is rationalized through higher search costs for buyers
that use broker services. For buyers with higher quantity, the equilibrium cut-off
type moves to the left. That is why the average cost per inquiry is lower both above
and below the cutoff for higher quantity buyers.

     Table 6 also gives an overview of the total costs that customers incur for search-
ing - i.e., their cost per inquiry times the equilibrium number of price solicita-
tions. They range from $93 for low-quantity waste generators up to $545 for high-
quantity waste generators, with an average number of inferred price inquiries of
about 3.5. To put these numbers into perspective: search costs are between 8% and
15% of buyers' total expenses (contract expenses + search expenses).

     The magnitude of the search cost is important for the city's current considera-
tion to move to a procurement system with exclusive territories. Such a mechanism
would force buyers to contract with one carter and, therefore, removes the ability
to search, but also the cost of searching. A full welfare evaluation should take into
account the search cost.36
  36 I have also made an effort to compare my estimates to the literature.   In Allen et al (2019) the authors compare the search
cost from different models (Honka (2014), Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004), Hong and Shum (2006)). To make the estimates
comparable across the different settings, they use the ratio of search cost to the standard deviation of payments. I build on
this comparison and compute the same ratio. Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004), at a median search cost of 5 basis points, the
ratio is 8%. Hong and Shum (2006) estimate an average search cost of $1.58 for the non-sequential search model, yielding
a ratio of 33%. Honka (2014) estimates the cost of searching for policies to be $28 per online search and $100 per offline
search in the auto insurance market. Depending on which of those estimates is used, her ratio range between 10% for online
transactions, and 35% for offline. In my setting I find a median ration of 26% and a mean of 34%. This is broadly in line with
the aforementioned papers.



                                                             42
8    Counterfactual Market without Intermediaries

This section discusses the key counterfactual, which explores what happens to the
market if buyers cannot make use of intermediaries. The absence of broker ser-
vices introduces several changes on both sides of the market. On the buyer side, it
changes the composition of search costs in the search market, as well as the market
price. This raises the overall expenses for the contract. It also increases the num-
ber of buyers that have to search. Brokers lose commissions, and carters' expected
profits change because buyers in the search market search less. Welfare declines
because of larger expenses for search and a higher average contract cost.

    Figure 5 and Figure 6 provide an example (based on the estimates for Man-
hattan and the highest quantity quartile) of the changes in the counterfactual and
illustrate several important points. First, Figure 5 shows a typical partition of the
search cost distribution into buyers who take different numbers of draws from the
price distribution. The solid lines are all the marginal  -types who are buying in
the search market when intermediation is still an option. The graph shows that
there are two separate effects that decrease the amount of search. The first is a se-
lection effect -- the search market in the counterfactual is populated by many more
buyers with high search cost. The new buyers entering the search market are all
the types above the cut-off type ("New marginal type"). The second is a response
to a changing price distribution and slightly more subtle. High search cost buyers
entering the market leads carters to raise prices. Importantly, low cost carters raise
their margins more than high cost carters, which flattens the bid function. A flat-
ter bid function means that the returns to searching go down, which leads those
buyers that were already in the search market to also search less. This effect com-
pounds the selection effect. In Figure 6, this response shows up as marginal types
moving to the left. The black dashed line ("Broker marginal") shows the type ¯,
who is indifferent between using a broker and searching on her own.


                                         43
                      Figure (5)      Cut-off types and counterfactual cut-off types

          0.008

                                                                                   Old Marginal Types
          0.006                                                                    New Marginal Types
                                                                                   Broker Marginal
Density




          0.004


          0.002


          0.000
                  0              50              100           150                200              250
                                                       Search Cost in $


             Notes: This figure shows an example of a search cost density along with the old and new marginal  types.



          Figure 6 compares the histogram of price inquiries, with and without brokers,
and shows that everybody to the left of the "Broker marginal" falls either into the
bin of one price inquiry. The old CDF of price inquiries strictly dominates the new
one meaning that there is strictly less search, which leads sellers to increase their
price.

          Table 7 provides the main overview of the changes in buyer and seller welfare
and in overall welfare. Figure 12 in Appendix E breaks the changes down for the
different estimation bins. Carters charge, on average, 4% higher prices and their
margin slightly increases. However, their overall profits decrease. Carter profits
decrease because high quantity buyers (in the highest quartile of quantity) have
incentives to use brokers that are unrelated to search cost, as measured by . These
buyers have strong incentives to search in the counterfactual, leading to more price
draws than brokers are soliciting through the auctions. Appendix E shows the
carter profit decrease is coming mainly from buyers with very high quantity, who
are responsible for an disproportionate percentage of profits.


                                                             44
                              Figure (6)           CDF of search of equilibrium search strategies
              0.4                                                                              1.0

              0.3                                      Broker
Probability




              0.2                                                                              0.8




                                                                      Cumulative Probability
              0.1
                                                                                               0.6
              0.0
                        2.5        5.0       7.5        10.0

              0.4
                                                                                               0.4
              0.3                                   No Broker

              0.2                                                                                                Broker
                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                 No Broker
              0.1

              0.0                                                                              0.0
                        2.5        5.0       7.5        10.0                                         2   4   6   8      10


                        Notes: The right panel shows the cumulative CDFs for the two original and the counterfactual search
                    strategy and the left panel the two histograms.



               Buyer expenses include both the contract and search expenses. Eliminating
brokers for buyers that were using their services means an increase in expenses of
$445, or about 11.7%. For buyers who were not using brokers prices rise by 4.46%,
and their overall cost increases by $64 or 2.5%. While this indirect effect is smaller,
it is important to note that the number of buyers that benefit from the externality
in the current market setting is much larger than the number of buyers that use
intermediaries. If we multiply by the number of respective buyers, the implied
loss for buyers who were using brokers is $3.2 million, while for those who were
contracting directly with sellers the total loss is nearly as large as $2.4 million.
Brokers, therefore, redistribute rents to a large extent through the externality and
I would miss 42% of their positive effect on consumer surplus if I did not account
for the externality.

               Regarding the overall welfare comparison, I need to deal with the fact that the
model does not produce an estimate for brokers' fixed cost. But it is possible to



                                                                                               45
                                                                       Table (7)       Counterfactual Overview

                                     Change in Buyer Expenses                                  Carter Margin                                            Welfare                    Welfare

                             Not                                                               (Not Quantity                   Carter                 Total Cost                  Total Cost
                         Brokered                Brokered                     All                 Weighted)                    Profits             Lower Bound                   Upper Bound

 Absolute                   $64.0                  $445.0                  $127.0                     $0.046                    $-11.1                    $4.28                     $12.61
SE                          (11.0)                (150.0)                   (30.0)                  (0.0285)                    (10.0)                   (1.06)                      (2.91)
95% CI                  [48.2,80.4]           [301.7,770.4]             [92.9,189.4]             [0.004,0.087]               [-29.5,0.3]              [3.37,6.81]                 [9.98,19.22]
 Percent                   2.52%                   11.7%                    4.6%                      1.95%                     -1.8%                    4.41%                      14.22%
SE                          (0.55)                 (1.91)                   (1.12)                    (1.19)                    (1.59)                   (1.16)                      (3.88)
95% CI                  [1.85,3.57]             [9.1,15.38]             [3.35,6.99]                [0.15,3.81]              [-4.63,0.04]              [3.44,7.25]                 [11.01,23.3]

Note: This table shows expected search cost per inquiry, the number of inquiries, as well as total expenses for search. Search cost changes are computed under the assumption that brokers' total
variable profits are equal to their fixed cost, which provides a lower bound on the change. Bootstrapped (standard errors) and [confidence intervals] based on 200 iterations.




bound these fixed costs and, therefore, the welfare change. The upper bound (on
the cost increase - i.e., welfare decrease) can be obtained by assuming that the fixed
costs are zero and the lower bound under the assumption that the total fixed costs
are equal to the total observed variable profits, which equals the total commission
payments. The formulas for the computation of the welfare changes are provided
in Appendix I. According to these calculations, the upper bound on the welfare
change is $12.6 Million and the lower bound $4.3 Million. At the lower end this
would imply a 4.4% decrease in welfare, and at the higher bound a 14.2% decrease.

        The welfare loss is a combination of higher search cost and a re-allocation effect.
The re-location effect means that without brokers the market engages in less search
and picks carters that are less well suited for customers, which results in a higher
average cost. The size of both effects varies depending on the quantity of waste for
buyers but on average the realized cost per cu/yd is 2.3% higher without brokers.


8.1           Robustness to Number of Bidders in the Auction

One data limitation is that is that I do not directly observe the bids in broker's
requests for proposals. Instead, I use the number of broker contacts to infer the
number of bidders. This is likely overestimating the number of bidders if not all


                                                                                                46
those carters participate in each auction. However, it could also underestimate
the number of bidders if there are additional bidders that bid but never win. To
probe the sensitivity of the counterfactual results I re-estimate the model and run
counterfactuals under the assumption that the number of bidders is, instead, one
third lower or one third higher. The results from this robustness check are shown
in Table 18.

   Under the more likely scenario where the number of bidders is underestimated,
the qualitative and quantitative conclusions are almost unchanged. The externality
of brokers leads to a slightly higher welfare loss for non-brokered customers under
the counterfactual, rising from 2.5% to 2.9%. For formerly brokered customers
expenses rise by 12.1% instead of 11.7%. The total welfare change is now bounded
between 4.6% and 14.4% instead of 4.4% and 14.2%. The largest difference is in the
outcome of carters, whose margin increases by 0.1% instead of 2.0%.

   Under the less likely scenario that the bids are overestimated by 30%, the changes
in outcomes would be larger. While the welfare benefits to buyers would be almost
unchanged, lowered from 4.6% to 4.5%, the total welfare gain would be larger and
bounded between 9.3% and almost 20%. Carters' margin would go up by 5.1%
instead of only 2%.

   What the results from this robustness check show is that the main conclusions
from the counterfactual would be qualitatively unchanged and while there are
changes in quantitative magnitudes, those changes are modest.


8.2   Summary and Discussion of Counterfactual Results

Intermediaries in this market redistribute rents from sellers to buyers. By keeping
high-search cost buyers away from the search market, they make it more compet-
itive for sellers. Buyers in the search market benefit from lower prices and lower
search expenses. Since there are more buyers in the search market, the transfer


                                        47
of rents to buyers is predominantly due to the externality. In general, these ser-
vices are therefore under-provided since intermediaries create social returns that
are not reflected in their private pay-offs. While this result provides a rationale
for policies that promote intermediation, it also highlights an important insight for
regulatory information provision and disclosure policies (for example, see Jin and
Leslie (2003)): it means that such policies can have large effects due to supply-side
responses, even if they only reach a fraction of customers.

     A natural question is whether these results apply to other markets with search
frictions and buyer-specific costs, a common feature of business-to-business mar-
kets. Quantitative results will necessarily depend on the exact primitives that gov-
ern behavior in other markets. However, one would expect that in many markets
that fall within this paradigm, search frictions are even more severe and, thus,
increase the welfare effect created by intermediaries. In markets for investment
goods, such as construction equipment or production lines, products are often or-
dered with extremely idiosyncratic specifications, and sellers in these markets are
often scattered over many countries, which increases the costs of search and nego-
tiations.37



9      Conclusion

This paper studies the competitive and welfare effects of intermediation in a decen-
tralized market. Such a structure is common in retail services markets, wholesale
trade markets, and markets for investment goods. Intermediaries can give rise to
search externalities that also benefit buyers who do not contract through interme-
diaries. The self-selection of buyers with high search costs into the intermediated
market changes the composition of buyers in the search market, thereby making
  37 Note,   however, that in markets with extremely idiosyncratic features buyers typically organize their own "request for
proposals". This is, for example, true for large architectural projects and capital equipment purchases.




                                                             48
it more competitive for sellers. To quantify these effects of intermediation, I use
a new and detailed dataset from the New York City trade waste industry, which
provides a comprehensive and rare insight into a decentralized market.

   Methodologically, this study contributes to the literature by introducing a new
search model that takes into account the idiosyncratic cost of servicing buyers. This
model combines elements from the empirical search and procurement-auction lit-
eratures. The identification of the model is challenging, since one needs to dis-
tinguish between the distribution of sellers' service-costs and buyers' search costs,
both of which are unobserved. This stands in contrast to previous empirical stud-
ies in the search literature, which estimate only a distribution of search costs under
a uniform cost assumption and posted prices. The joint data from the brokered and
the bilateral search markets together identify search and service costs. An impor-
tant institutional detail is that prices in the brokered market are formed according
to competitive bidding. This pins down the costs for carters. Known cost distribu-
tions can then be used in conjunction with prices in the search market to back out
the distribution of search inquires. The latter is then used to recover buyers' search
cost.

   The estimates reveal that buyers' search costs are an important factor to take
into account when designing policy, such as merger guidelines or the trade-off
between the existing decentralized market and a system of procurement with ex-
clusive territories, which New York City is contemplating.

   Counterfactuals show that intermediaries redistribute a sizable portion of rents
from sellers to buyers and improve overall welfare by reducing search costs and by
reallocating contracts to lower-cost suppliers. The results highlight the importance
of positive search externalities created by intermediaries.

   Several possible follow-up projects emerge from the analysis. The model cur-
rently abstracts from the competition between brokers, which might be important
to consider for some applications, such as finding the optimal subsidy to brokers.

                                         49
To find the optimal subsidy we would need to know how brokers pass on subsidy
payments and, hence, how they compete. Another possible direction for further
research is to extend the model to allow for differentiation in the quality of service
provision or the dynamic aspects of buyers' choice among sellers.




                                         50
References

Allen, Jason, Robert Clark, and Jean-François Houde, "The effect of mergers in
  search markets: Evidence from the Canadian mortgage industry," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2014, 104 (10), 3365­96.

  ,   , and   , "Search frictions and market power in negotiated-price markets,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (4), 1550­1598.

Armstrong, Mark, "Search and ripoff externalities," Review of Industrial Organiza-
  tion, 2015, 47 (3), 273­302.

Asker, John, "A study of the internal organization of a bidding cartel," The Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 2010, 100 (3), 724­762.

Athey, Susan and Philip A Haile, "Identification of standard auction models,"
  Econometrica, 2002, 70 (6), 2107­2140.

Bajari, Patrick, "Comparing competition and collusion: a numerical approach,"
  Economic Theory, 2001, 18 (1), 187­205.

  and Gregory Lewis, "Procurement contracting with time incentives: theory and
  evidence," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2009.

Burdett, Kenneth and Kenneth L Judd, "Equilibrium price dispersion," Economet-
  rica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1983, pp. 955­969.

Commission, Citizen Budget, "Taxes In, Garbage Out The Need for Better Solid
  Waste Disposal Policies in New York City," 2012.

Efron, Bradley and Robert J Tibshirani, An introduction to the bootstrap, CRC press,
  1994.



                                           51
Gavazza, Alessandro, "An empirical equilibrium model of a decentralized asset
  market," Econometrica, 2016, 84 (5), 1755­1798.

Gehrig, Thomas, "Intermediation in search markets," Journal of Economics & Man-
  agement Strategy, 1993, 2 (1), 97­120.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, "Dealer price discrimination in new car pur-
  chases: Evidence from the consumer expenditure survey," Journal of Political
  Economy, 1996, pp. 622­654.

Gonzalez, José Luis Moraga, Zsolt Sándor, and Matthijs R Wildenbeest, "Prices,
  Product Differentiation, and Heterogeneous Search Costs," 2014.

Guerre, Emmanuel, Isabelle Perrigne, and Quang Vuong, "Optimal Nonpara-
  metric Estimation of First-Price Auctions," Econometrica, 2000, 68 (3), 525­574.

Haile, Philip A, "Auctions with resale markets: an application to US forest service
  timber sales," American Economic Review, 2001, pp. 399­427.

  , Han Hong, and Matthew Shum, "Nonparametric tests for common values at
  first-price sealed-bid auctions," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research 2003.

Hendel, Igal, Aviv Nevo, and François Ortalo-Magné, "The Relative Performance
  of Real Estate Marketing Platforms: MLS versus FSBOMadison. com," American
  Economic Review, 2009, 99 (5), 1878­1898.

Hong, Han and Matthew Shum, "Using price distributions to estimate search
  costs," The RAND Journal of Economics, 2006, 37 (2), 257­275.

Honka, Elisabeth, "Quantifying search and switching costs in the US auto insur-
  ance industry," The Rand Journal of Economics, 2014, 45 (4), 847­884.




                                           52
  and Pradeep K Chintagunta, "Simultaneous or sequential? search strategies in
  the us auto insurance industry," Search Strategies in the US Auto Insurance Industry
  (April 29, 2014), 2014.

Hortaçsu, Ali and Chad Syverson, "Product differentiation, search costs, and com-
  petition in the mutual fund industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds," The
  Quarterly journal of economics, 2004, 119 (2), 403­456.

Jacobs, James B, Coleen Friel, and Robert Raddick, Gotham unbound: How New
  York city was liberated from the grip of organized crime, NYU Press, 2001.

Jin, Ginger Zhe and Phillip Leslie, "THE EFFECT OF INFORMATION ON
  PRODUCT QUALITY: EVIDENCE FROM RESTAURANT HYGIENE GRADE
  CARDS.," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (2).

Kelly, Robert J, "Dirty Dollars: The Carting and Waste Disposal Industries," in
  "The Upperworld and the Underworld," Springer, 1999, pp. 135­155.

Krasnokutskaya, Elena, "Identification and estimation of auction models with un-
  observed heterogeneity," The Review of Economic Studies, 2011, 78 (1), 293­327.

  and Katja Seim, "Bid preference programs and participation in highway pro-
  curement auctions," The American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (6), 2653­2686.

Krishna, Vijay, Auction theory, Academic press, 2009.

Li, Tong and Quang Vuong, "Nonparametric estimation of the measurement error
  model using multiple indicators," Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 1998, 65 (2),
  139­165.

   and Xiaoyong Zheng, "Entry and competition effects in first-price auctions:
  theory and evidence from procurement auctions," The Review of Economic Studies,
  2009, 76 (4), 1397­1429.


                                          53
Lizzeri, Alessandro, "Information revelation and certification intermediaries," The
  RAND Journal of Economics, 1999, pp. 214­231.

los Santos, Babur De, Ali Hortaçsu, and Matthijs R Wildenbeest, "Testing mod-
  els of consumer search using data on web browsing and purchasing behavior,"
  The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6), 2955­2980.

Matzkin, Rosa L, "Nonparametric identification," Handbook of Econometrics, 2007,
  6, 5307­5368.

McCall, John Joseph, "Economics of information and job search," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 1970, pp. 113­126.

Meilijson, Isaac, "Estimation of the lifetime distribution of the parts from the au-
  topsy statistics of the machine," Journal of Applied Probability, 1981, pp. 829­838.

Nguyen, Thuy TT and Bruce G Wilson, "Fuel consumption estimation for kerb-
  side municipal solid waste (MSW) collection activities," Waste Management &
  Research, 2010, 28 (4), 289­297.

Rubinstein, Ariel and Asher Wolinsky, "Middlemen," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 1987, pp. 581­594.

Rust, John and George Hall, "Middlemen versus Market Makers: A Theory of
  Competitive Exchange," Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 111 (2).

Salop, Steven and Joseph Stiglitz, "Bargains and ripoffs: A model of monop-
  olistically competitive price dispersion," The Review of Economic Studies, 1977,
  pp. 493­510.

Sorensen, Alan T, "Equilibrium price dispersion in retail markets for prescription
  drugs," Journal of Political Economy, 2000, 108 (4), 833­850.




                                          54
Spulber, Daniel F, "Market making by price-setting firms," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 1996, 63 (4), 559­580.

  , "Market microstructure and intermediation," The Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives, 1996, pp. 135­152.

Stahl, Dale O, "Oligopolistic pricing with sequential consumer search," The Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 1989, pp. 700­712.

Stigler, George J, "The economics of information," The journal of political economy,
  1961, pp. 213­225.




                                        55
A     Data Coding

A.1    Sample Construction

A.2    Definition of Brokered Contract and Number of Bidders

This section lays out the details of data coding and sample selection.


    · Definition of Brokered Contracts: There are two data fields from which a bro-
      kered contract can be inferred. The first one is a field that contains an indica-
      tor on how the contract was formed. A second field provides the name of the
      brokerage company. A contract is defined as brokered if either the first field
      indicates so or if the latter field contains an entry that does not disqualify as
      a broker company. A contract is defined as brokered if the broker indicator
      is one in either the first or second reporting period. Because I am only using
      the initial contract period I am not using any information broker variable af-
      ter the first year. The broker firm identifier is hand-coded from the second
      field, which is a string variable. In most cases it is straightforward to assign
      a given observation to a recurring broker-name. In some cases, however, the
      listed name might be an individual contact name and therefore not allow me
      to match this observation to a broker company. In this case, I would infer
      that such a "broker" has only one contract with one carter. Since the broker
      identifier is used to infer the number of bidders, I proceed with observations
      that have just one carter listed as follows: if a broker name only appears once
      I randomly impute the number of bidders from the remaining distribution
      of observations that can be unambiguously assigned. The data also shows
      whether a contract is closed after solicitation through a carter. I am currently
      ignoring this information although it could be interesting for future work to
      separately identify the search cost from haggling cost.

                                          56
    · Sample restrictions: The dataset has a panel structure. Each customer-carter
      relationship is documented biannually, leading to 1,184,641 panel observa-
      tions. Out of those I drop contracts with missing information on carters,
      prices, or quantity, which eliminates 256,874 observations. I only use con-
      tracts whose prices are quoted in volume. Discarding weights based con-
      tracts drops 237,334 observations. Due to its isolated geographic position I
      further drop contracts from Staten Island, which amounts to 42,692 obser-
      vations. I drop contracts with missing quantity information, which drops
      256,738 observations. After these restrictions I am left with 941,770 panel
      observations. I then only keep the first reporting period for new contracts,
      which leaves me with 170,232 initial relationships. Out of those I only keep
      contracts where the buyer falls within the retail category, leaving me with a
      final sample of 44417 observations.

    · Winsorizing: I winsorize the rate variable at the 1st and 99th percentile to deal
      with outliers. I winsorize the quantity variable at the 1st and 99th percentile
      in all reduced form exercises. For the structural exercise I further winsorize
      the quantity variable at the 95th percentile to prevent the average in the high-
      est quantity bin to be driven by a few very large customers.



B     Additional Details on the Identification

B.1    Illustrating lack of identification from prices alone

Figure 7 illustrates why prices in the search-market alone would not be enough to
tell search cost and carters' service cost apart. It shows simulated data from two
markets. The distribution of contract prices, shown in the top left corner, are the
same, and the two markets are therefore observationally equivalent. The underly-
ing primitives that give rise to these distributions are, however, very different. In

                                          57
      Figure (7)          Observationally equivalent markets with different primitives.
                                                                                                     Market 1
          0.4

          0.3                                                              750


          0.2                                                              500

          0.1
                                                                           250
          0.0
                $5          $10        $15        $20           $25
                                                                             0
                     Distribution of resulting contract price
                                                                                                     Market 2

          0.4
                                                                           750
          0.3
                                                                           500
          0.2

                                                                           250
          0.1


          0.0                                                                0
                $5          $10        $15        $20           $25                1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
                     Distribution of price quoted by sellers                        Distribution of number of price inquiries

                                                        type    Market 1         Market 2



            Notes: The four panels show data from two simulated markets. The top left panel is the contract price
        distribution observed by the econometrician and the bottom left panel the price offer distributions. The
        two right panels show the distribution of price inquiries for the two markets.



market 1 buyers have higher search cost and ask for fewer price quotes relative to
market 2. Market 1, on the other hand, is served by firms that have lower cost and
quote lower prices. This example shows that it will not be enough to observe just
one price distribution to tell apart the search cost for buyers and the cost of service
provision for carters.


B.2     Identification of Consumer Search Cost

Proof of Proposition 1: The dependence of the distribution functions for the unob-
served objects on observables is omitted for the proof.




                                                                  58
Step 1: Get Carter Cost from Broker Market

Building on Guerre et al. (2000) we can recover the cost of carters based on the
                                                           o ( ·) and cost. For
mapping between the distribution of observed winning bids Fb
the remaining argument we can therefore treat the carter cost distribution G (·) as
known.


                                       1 - Fbo pb | N
                                      b               b
                              c=p -               o  b
                                                                                             (11)
                                    ( Nb - 1) · f b p | Nb


B.2.1    Step 2: Show that the Bidding Function is Identified given G (·)

The second step of the argument shows that given the observed prices and the cost
distribution, one can recover the bidding function uniquely. The bidding function
is as following
                                                                                   m-1
                   S (c) = arg max( p - c)  wm 1 - G (- 1
                                                      S ( p ))                           .   (12)
                                  p                 m

and the distribution of prices is observable, with
                                                                           m
                          1 - F o ( p) =       wm        1 - G (- 1
                                                                S ( p ))       .             (13)
                                              m

The first order condition of the bidding problem in (12) is


            wm [1 - G (- 1
                       S ( p ))]
                                 m-1
            m
                                                                        d
           +( p - c)  wm (m - 1)[1 - G (- 1
                                        S ( p ))]
                                                  m-2
                                                      -                   G (-
                                                                             S
                                                                               1
                                                                                 ( p)) = 0. (14)
                      m                                                dp

Define
                            A( p) =  wm [1 - G (- 1
                                                S ( p ))]
                                                          m-1
                                                              .                              (15)
                                          m
From Equation (13),
                                                    1 - F o ( p)
                                  A( p) =                         ,                          (16)
                                                  1 - G (-  1
                                                         S ( p ))



                                                    59
and from Equation (14),
                                                                           d
  A( p) = ( p - - 1                           -1
                S ( p ))  wm ( m - 1 )[1 - G ( S ( p ))]
                                                         m-2
                                                                             G (- 1
                                                                                S ( p )) .   (17)
                                 m                                        dp
Furthermore, taking the derivative of (13) with respect to p and decomposing the
resulting term give

                                                         d
  f o ( p) =    wm (m - 1)[1 - G (- 1
                                  S ( p ))]
                                            m-1
                                                        dp
                                                           G (-
                                                              S
                                                                1
                                                                  ( p))
               m
                                                                               d
                                           +  wm [1 - G (- 1
                                                         S ( p ))]
                                                                   m-1
                                                                                 G (- 1
                                                                                    S ( p )) .
                                              m                               dp
Using Equation (17) for the first term and Equation (16) for the second term, we
can rewrite the above equation as

                              A( p)[1 - G (- 1
                                           S ( p ))]              d
                    o
                   f ( p) =                            + A( p)      G (-
                                                                       S
                                                                         1
                                                                           ( p)) .
                                     p - - 1
                                         S ( p)
                                                                 dp

Using Equation (16) we can further simplify the above equation to

               o    1 - F o ( p)           o          g(-  1
                                                          S ( p ))    d -1
           f ( p) =              + [ 1 - F   ( p )]                     ( p) .
                    p - -  1
                         S ( p)                     1 - G (-  1
                                                            S ( p ))
                                                                     dp S

Dividing by 1 - F o ( p) gives

                      f o ( p)      g(-  1
                                        S ( p ))      d -1             1
                                =                        S ( p ) +               .
                   1 - F o ( p)   1 - G (-S
                                            1
                                              ( p )) dp            p -  -1
                                                                        S  ( p )
Define the inverse bidding function as h( p) then the above equality defines the
following ODE
                              f o ( p)   1      1 - G (h( p))
               h ( p) =             o
                                       -                      =: ( p, h( p)).
                           1 - F ( p) p - h( p)   g(h( p))
The initial condition is h( p) = c, where p is the lowest price in the support of F o ( p)
and c is the lowest cost in the support of G (c). Since we only need  S ( p) on some
interval to identify the weights, the ODE only needs to be unique on some interval.
                                                                    ~ ] for some p
To argue formally for the uniqueness of h( p) on some interval [ p, p            ~>
p, pick some p and c such that c < c < p < p and F o ( p ) < 1. By the Picard-
Lindeløf Theorem the sufficient conditions for existence and uniqueness are that (i)

                                                  60
( p, h) is continuous in R = p, p × [c, c ], and (ii)  is Lipschitz-continuous in
h, that is for some L > 0: | ( p, h1 ) -  ( p, h2 )|  L |h1 - h2 |               ( p, h1 ) , ( p, h2 ) 
R. Let K be an upper bound of ( p, h) in R, then the ODE has a unique solution
h = h( p) defined on:
                                              c - c
                                     p, p +                 ~]
                                                    =: [ p, p
                                               K
   Being able to identify h( p) on a non-degenerate interval is enough for our
                                                   ~ ] and it should be strictly in-
purpose. Since this function is identified on [ p, p
creasing if the model is correct, the bidding function  = h-1 is identified on
    ~] for c
[c, c      ~ = h( p
                  ~ ). The argument for identifying the weights from the bidding
function still follows when I use the bidding function restricted to a proper in-
terval. Lastly, I will show that Lipschitz-continuity holds under some elementary
condition, which is that:
                                              1 - G (h)
                                                g(h)
is Lipschitz-continuous on [c, c ] with parameter L1 . Suppose that this holds true.
Fix any p  p, p . For any h1 , h2  [c, c ], then:



                               f o ( p)    1 - G ( h1 ) 1 - G ( h2 )
  ( p, h1 ) -  ( p, h2 ) =           o
                                                        -
                           1 - F ( p)        g ( h1 )          g ( h2 )
                           1                        1 - G ( h1 )               1 - G ( h2 )
              -                         ( p - h2 )                - ( p - h1 )              =
                 ( p - h1 ) ( p - h2 )                g ( h1 )                   g ( h2 )


     f o ( p)     1 - G ( h1 ) 1 - G ( h2 )                     p             1 - G ( h1 ) 1 - G ( h2 )
           o
                                -                 -                                         -
  1 - F ( p)         g ( h1 )         g ( h2 )        ( p - h1 ) ( p - h2 )     g ( h1 )          g ( h2 )
                    1                          1 - G ( h1 )          1 - G ( h1 ) 1 - G ( h2 )
     -                           ( h1 - h2 )                - h1                 -
          ( p - h1 ) ( p - h2 )                  g ( h1 )              g ( h1 )          g ( h2 )

   Therefore:




                                                 61
                                                               f o ( p)
  | ( p, h1 ) -  ( p, h2 )|                         max                        L1 +
                                                   p[ p, p ] 1 - F ( p )
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                               1                                          1 - G (h)                 
                                                   2
                                                       p L1 +        max                  + c L1       | h1 - h2 |
                                                                  h[c,c ]   g(h)
                            p - c
                                                                                                    


   Defining the terms in curly brackets as L completes this part of the proof.


B.2.2    Step 3: Identify Weights from Bidding Function  S ()

Suppose the cost function G (·) and the bidding function  S (·) are known. Sup-
                                   M
pose that two sets of weights {wm }m             M
                                     =1 and { m }m=1 both give rise to the bidding
function. This means for all c in the support:
              ¯
              c                                         ¯
                                                        c
                       ~))m-1 dc
        m wm c (1 - G (c        ~                                ~))m-1 dc
                                                   m m c (1 - G (c        ~
                          m - 1
                                  =  S ( c ) - c =                  m - 1
                                                                            .                                  (18)
         m wm (1 - G (c))                           m m (1 - G (c))

Multiplying the terms leads to
                                   ¯
                                   c
   LHS(c) =          wm                        ~))m-1 dc
                                       (1 - G (c       ~                    m (1 - G (c))m-1
                       m       c                                           m
                                ¯
                                c
               =     m                      ~))m-1 dc
                                    (1 - G (c       ~                     wm (1 - G (c))m-1        = RHS(c)(
                                                                                                           . 19)
                       m       c                                           m

Taking derivatives with respect to cost,

 d
 dc
    LHS(c) = -              wm (1 - G (c))m-1  m (1 - G (c))m-1
                           m                                         m
                                               ¯
                                               c
                   -        wm                             ~))m-1 dc
                                                   (1 - G (c       ~           (m - 1)m (1 - G (c))m-2 g(c)
                           m               c                                    m

and

d
dc
   RHS(c) = -               m (1 - G (c))m-1  wm (1 - G (c))m-1
                           m                                         m
                                           ¯
                                           c
                   -        m                          ~))m-1 dc
                                               (1 - G (c       ~               (m - 1)wm (1 - G (c))m-2 g(c)         .
                           m           c                                       m


                                                                62
Combining the derivatives gives
                                            c¯
m (m - 1)wm (1 - G (c))m-2     wm                    ~))m-1 dc
                                           c (1 - G (c       ~       m wm (1 - G (c))m-1
                         -
                             = m            ¯
                                            c                      =                     ,
m (m - 1)m (1 - G (c)) m   2
                              m m                    ~))m-1 dc
                                           c (1 - G (c       ~       m m (1 - G (c))m-1

where the last equality follows from Equation (18). This can be simplified to

       (m - 1)wm n (1 - G (c))m+n =  (n - 1)wm n (1 - G (c))m+n .                       (20)
      m n                                     m n

Note that each side of the above equation is a polynomial in 1 - G (c). If this equa-
tion holds on some interval of c and thus some interval of 1 - G (c) (given that G (·)
is strictly increasing so that the interval is not degenerate), then by the unisolvence
theorem for polynomials, the coefficients of each power term must equate.

   With m + n = 3,

                                                  w2  w
                          w2 1 = w1 2                = 1 =: r.
                                                  2   1
                                                    wl
Suppose that it holds for all l < L  M that         l    = r. Equating the coefficients for
m + n = L + 1, we have
                   L-1 L+1-m                                      L-1 L+1-n
 ( L - 1)w L 1 +               (m - 1)wm n = ( L - 1)w1  L +                  (n - 1)wm n .
                   m=2   n=1                                      n=2 m=1

Hence:


                                      wL  w
                                         = 1 =r
                                      L   1
                                         wn         wm
   That is, it holds inductively that    n    =     m    for all m, n. This, together with
m wm = m m = 1 means that wm = m for all m. This concludes the proof that
the weights are uniquely identified.


B.3    Dealing with Asymmetries

In this section I briefly describe a setup that could accommodate persistent cost
differences across carters. Such a setup would be important if one was worried

                                           63
about persistent cost differences across carters in the broker market and in the
search market. However, because the bidding functions in this setup do not have
a closed form solution, the identification strategy of the search-weights does not
extent to this setup. This selection will be accounted for by allowing for different
cost distributions, which are going to be indexed by L and H . The classification
into H and L would have to be based on observables, for instance the density of the
network, carter size, etc. One could then adjust for differences in composition of
high and low cost firms across the two markets. The maximization problem in the
broker auction and in the search market is given by the following two equations:


                           max( p - c) · G L (-  1
                                              b, L ( p ))
                                                          Nb, L
                                                                · G H (-  1
                                                                       b, H ( p ))
                                                                                   Nb, H -1
                              p

    and


                                                            NH -1
                              M-1             m    (Nk ) · ( m-k )
                                                      L
  max( p - c) ·                      wm ·    ·             NL -1
                                                                        · G L (- 1        k       -1
                                                                               S, L ( p )) · G H ( S, H ( p ))
                                                                                                               m-k
                                                                                                                   .
     p
                              m=1           k=0      ( NH +m     )
    Figure 8 illustrates the type of selection that one could account for. Since the
cost distributions are recovered from the brokered market, identification requires
that in this part of the market there are infinitely many auctions with at least one
firm of each type.

    Carter costs are identified according to Theorem 6 in Athey and Haile (2002),
which states that the distributions of valuations in asymmetric auctions can be
identified from the transaction price and the identity of the winner.38 Therefore,
one could treat Gk (·| z), k  { L, H } as known objects for all firms that bid in the
brokered market. Because the identity of the firms is known and under the as-
sumption of full support, i.e. that one observed infinitely many auctions for each
type of firm in the broker market, one could simply take the identified cost func-
tions from the broker market and adjust for the change in composition in L and
 38 This   is an application of the identification result in competing risk models presented in Meilijson (1981)


                                                               64
                                 Figure (8)         Selection in The Market
                                                 Brokered                          Non-Brokered

                                                        L2        L1                       L1
               Athey and Haile (2002)
                                                                  H1                       H1        H2


        Notes: This figure provides a graphical illustration of the type of selection that is allowed on the seller side.
    Firms L and H are both observed in the brokered markets. Due to arguments presented by Athey and Haile
    (2002), the costs are identified from observed contract prices in the brokered market. This, in turn, allows us to
    assign the already known cost functions from the broker market to firms of type L and H in the search market.



H firms in the search market. However, because the resulting bidding functions
are asymmetric, one would have to solve for equilibria using the approach in Ba-
jari (2001), which would require an approximation of the bidding function and the
first order condition through a polynomial. Bernstein polynomia are a natural can-
didate for such an approximation because they allow to impose shape constraints.



C     Dynamic Development of Prices

This project focuses on the static aspects of pricing in this market. Because cus-
tomers enter a relationship with carters they might be forward looking with regard
to the prices that carters charge in the future and this might affect their initial deci-
sion to search. Sellers might, for example, engage in bait and switch pricing, luring
customers with initial low rates and then increase their prices when the customer
is "locked in". This strategy works if customers have significant switching cost.
Another consideration might be that customers learn about the suppliers as time
passes and decreasing search cost is reflected in a decreasing price path. To give
a sense of the price developments of contracts across time I show results from a




                                                             65
   regression that includes the same controls as the price dispersion regressions:


      X = {business type FE, recyclables FE, time FE, zip code FE, transfer station FE,

                                                                               q, . . . , q5 Number of Pickup FE}.


        The variable of interest is now a time dummy, which summarizes how prices
   move across time holding the above characteristics fixed. These dummies show
   how prices develop within a customer carter relationship. Effects are shown rel-
   ative to the excluded category, which is the initial price. The reporting periods
   are six month. We can see that there is a small dip in the second reporting period
   and then a sustained change in prices after two years, which is the time at which
   customers must be able to switch without any penalty according to regulation.

                                             Figure (9)   Dynamic development of prices

                                     $0.40                                 q
            Price change relative




                                                                   q                q               q
                to initial price




                                     $0.20                                                  q



                                     $0.00   q            q                                                  q
                                                              q


                                    $-0.20
                                                  q

                                             1    2       3   4    5       6        7       8        9      10
                                                              Reporting Period

    Notes: This figure shows how the prices develop for buyers over time, relative to the initial price. A reporting period is a
half-year. The data points are time-dummy estimates, where the excluded variable is the dummy on the initial time period.




                                                                  66
D     Additional Graphs

D.1      Quantity Variation and Model Fit

The following graph illustrates why it would be hard to fit the variation across
consumers with different quantity if the search cost can not depend directly on
q. The graph shows the cut-off types both for buyers with q1 < q2 . Buyers with
q2 have higher incentives to search and their cut-off types in terms of search cost
therefore move up. Suppose that the true fraction of brokered contracts for buy-
ers with q2 is given by the gray area. Given a particular search cost distribution,

          Figure (10)   Restriction on Search Cost and Brokered Contracts

  h( )




                  q        q   q       q        q1                  Search Cost
                 m1       m2 m1-1     m2-1 ¯            ¯ q2
                                                        


the predicted cut-off type would be given by ¯ q2 , which would under-predict the
fraction of brokered contracts. This illustrates that without letting the search cost
distribution directly depend on q it would be hard to fit the fraction of buyers that
go to a broker under a given parametric assumption, which disciplines the tails of
the distribution. I will therefore allow the selection margin to brokers depend on
q. Letting the relative attractiveness of brokers depend on q has a natural interpre-
tation in this context. Larger more important buyers might, for example, receive

                                           67
additional services. Note that the alternative would be to estimate a search cost
distribution for each q. However, since the search cost has the interpretation of a
marginal cost, this is the less plausible interpretation.



E     Additional Tables

E.1   Breakdown of Business-types


                  Table (8)       Types of Businesses signed up with carters

             Business type                            Fraction of Total           Total Number
             Retail non - food                                  .410                     46514
             Retail - food                                      .138                     15660
             Wholesale non - food                               .015                      1648
             Wholesale - food                                   .010                      1048
             Restaurant/bar                                     .107                     12181
             Hotel - small                                      .003                      302
             Hotel-big                                          .002                      175
             Medical offices                                    .028                      3138
             Automobile repair                                  .027                      3100
             Office building - small                            .032                      3620
             Office building - medium                           .026                      2997
             Office building - large                            .015                      1675
             Light manufacturing                                .020                      2242
             Heavy manufacturing                                .003                      298
             Institution                                        .020                      2277
             Professional office                                .043                      4838
             None of the above                                  .104                     11883

             Note: Fractions and totals are averaged across the nine reporting periods. Missings are de-
             clared as "none of the above".


                                                        68
              Table (9)   Fraction of Contracts awarded through Broker.

Variable                             Brokered      Variable                Brokered

Types of business                                  Borough
Food, Retail/Wholesale                  14%        Bronx                     17%
Restaurants                             15%        Brooklyn                  14%
Hotels                                  14%        Manhattan                 14%
Office Building                         9%         Queens                    9%
Manufacturing/Repair                    10%        Quantity (percentile)
Institution (Hospital/University)       40%        q < 25%                   6%
Recyclables                                        25% < q < 50%             15%
No                                      13%        50% < q < 75%             14%
Yes                                     14%        q > 75%                   19%

Note: This table shows conditional percentages of broker usage.




                                          69
Table (10)         Documenting differences between brokered and un-brokered contracts. Depen-
dent rate-variable does not include broker commissions.

                                             (1)               (2)                  (3)                     (4)                    (5)
                                           OLS               OLS            Quantile 0.25           Quantile 0.5           Quantile 0.75
                                        pi jt (rate)      pi jt (rate)         pi jt (rate)            pi jt (rate)           pi jt (rate)
Contract brokered                        -1.550**          -1.559**             -1.775**                -1.000**                 -0.0821
                                          (0.158)           (0.160)             (0.0863)                (0.0404)                (0.0541)
q                                       -0.0113**         -0.0114**            -0.000431               2.22e-16                -0.000437
                                        (0.00159)         (0.00159)           (0.000503)              (0.000236)              (0.000316)
Recyclables                              0.451**           0.459**               0.520**                0.200**                  0.0867*
                                          (0.153)           (0.151)             (0.0689)                (0.0322)                (0.0432)
Carter deals /w broker                                       0.148
                                                            (0.193)
Observations                              35659             35659                 38135                  38135                    38135
Deals with Broker                           No                Yes                   No                     No                       No
Transfer FE                                 Yes               Yes                   No                     No                       No
R2                                         0.312             0.312

Note: + p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,   p < 0.01. All specifications include the following set of controls: quantity of waste, transfer-station fixed
effects, zip-code fixed effects, business-type fixed effects, length-of-contract fixed effects, recyclable materials fixed effects, reporting-date
fixed effects, number of weekly pickups, and the HHI index. The aggregate regressions at the zip-code level include the average quantity at
the zip-code level, the average number of pickups and the average number of customers that use recyclables. Standard errors are clustered
at the zip-code level.




                                                                      70
Table (11)         Documenting differences between brokered and un-brokered contracts. Dependent
rate-variable includes broker commissions.

                                              (1)                 (2)                    (3)                     (4)                     (5)
                                             OLS                 OLS            Quantile 0.25            Quantile 0.5           Quantile 0.75
                                        pi jt (rate +        pi jt (rate +         pi jt (rate +           pi jt (rate +           pi jt (rate +
                                             fee)                 fee)                  fee)                    fee)                    fee)
Contract Brokered                          1.912**             1.901**                0.242**                 2.590**                 4.732**
                                           (0.406)             (0.407)               (0.0882)                (0.0516)                 (0.0620)
q                                        -0.0139**            -0.0139**            -0.00142**                2.44e-15                -0.000335
                                         (0.00207)           (0.00207)             (0.000514)              (0.000301)               (0.000361)
Recyclables                                 0.410*              0.420*                0.594**                 0.180**                  0.0724
                                           (0.177)             (0.177)               (0.0704)                (0.0411)                 (0.0494)
Carter deals /w broker                                           0.185
                                                               (0.196)
Observations                                35659               35659                  38135                   38135                   38135
Deals with Broker                             No                  Yes                    No                      No                      No
Transfer FE                                   Yes                 Yes                    No                      No                      No
R2                                          0.324                0.324

Note: + p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,   p < 0.01. All specifications include the following set of controls: quantity of waste, transfer-station fixed
effects, zip-code fixed effects, business-type fixed effects, length-of-contract fixed effects, recyclable materials fixed effects, reporting-date fixed
effects, number of weekly pickups, and the HHI index. The aggregate regressions at the zip-code level include the average quantity at the zip-
code level, the average number of pickups and the average number of customers that use recyclables. Standard errors are clustered at the zip-
code level.




                                                                         71
F                  Restrictions Plot

These two plot show all the restrictions that the recovered weights impose on the
search cost distribution. Each line in the graph corresponds has a corresponding
known empirical CDF that is derived from the recovered weights. The probabil-
ity mass between each consecutive lines is therefore known. The firs graph shows
how finely the search cost distribution is identified without using variation in q.
The second graph shows all the marginal types across buyers with different quan-
tities. Since the quantity is not directly affecting the search cost, variation in q
imposes even more restrictions.

                                                     Figure (11)   Restrictions Plot
(a) Marginal Types holding Quantity Fixed                                                 (b) Exploiting all Marginal Types

           0.008                                                                  0.008



           0.006                                                                  0.006
 Density




                                                                        Density




           0.004                                                                  0.004



           0.002                                                                  0.002



           0.000                                                                  0.000
                   0   50   100           150          200   250                          0     50    100           150        200   250
                                  Search Cost in $                                                          Search Cost in $




                                                                   72
                        Figure (12)         Overview of Changes when Brokers are not available

                             Price              Baseline Brokered                  Baseline Not Brokered                           Carter
Subset                  Change (%)                  Expenses ($)                          Expenses ($)                      Profits (QW) ($)

Bronx
Q0,25                         0.25                        28.95                                  0.29                               -0.28
Q25,50                        0.27                       175.13                                  0.19                                2.4
Q50,75                        6.46                       267.53                                123.89                              29.31
Q75,100                       4.32                      1406.77                                138.53                              -74.13
Brooklyn
Q0,25                         0.19                       177.85                                  0.16                                0.1
Q25,50                        0.71                       319.46                                  2.25                               3.72
Q50,75                        18.3                       1220.0                                  164.4                             66.76
Q75,100                       6.07                      5217.15                                128.87                             -145.34
Manhattan
Q0,25                         0.22                        50.47                                  0.13                               -0.13
Q25,50                        0.29                        95.82                                  -0.14                              1.56
Q50,75                        5.57                        198.9                                110.23                              23.05
Q75,100                       3.49                      1295.03                                  97.19                             -55.44
Queens
Q0,25                         0.19                       419.11                                  0.16                                0.1
Q25,50                        0.62                        652.6                                  1.08                               4.12
Q50,75                       18.28                      2431.05                                139.02                              66.85
Q75,100                       6.09                      3729.27                                140.45                             -145.85
Note: This table gives an overview over absolute and percentage changes in the total cost (search cost + contract cost). For buyers that were formerly
already transacting directly with carters, the table provides a further breakdown into the changes in search expenses and contract expenses. For buy-
ers in the broker market such a breakdown does not make much sense since the initial broker expenses provide no logical separation into search and
contract expenses. All numbers are computed over the length of a contract, which is two years.




G         Equilibrium Uniqueness

In this section I show some examples to demonstrate that multiple equilibria do
not appear to be an issue in this setting. In each case, the first column shows
the starting set of weights and I show the maximal number of iterations that are
needed to satisfy the stopping criterion. The parameters that I use are the estimates
that I recover but I could have used other parameters as well. What the examples


                                                                        73
below show is that for a wide variety of starting values, the process converges to
the same set of weights and does so quickly.

                                  Table (12)         Example 1

                Weights   It 1    It 2      It 3          It 4      It 5     It 6    It 7

                  w1      0.0     0.286     0.219       0.201      0.198    0.197   0.197
                  w2      1.0     0.266     0.258       0.257      0.257    0.256   0.256
                  w3      0.0     0.148     0.16        0.163      0.164    0.164   0.164
                  w4      0.0     0.086     0.098       0.101      0.101    0.101   0.102
                  w5      0.0     0.051     0.06        0.062      0.063    0.063   0.063
                  w6      0.0     0.037     0.044       0.045      0.046    0.046   0.046
                  w7      0.0     0.022     0.027       0.028      0.028    0.029   0.029
                  w8      0.0     0.021     0.025       0.026      0.027    0.027   0.027
                  w9      0.0     0.013     0.017       0.017      0.018    0.018   0.018
                  w10     0.0     0.07      0.094       0.098      0.099     0.1     0.1



                                  Table (13)         Example 2

                Weights    It 1      It 2          It 3          It 4      It 5     It 6

                   w1       0.0     0.24       0.208             0.199     0.197    0.197
                   w2       0.0     0.267      0.258             0.257     0.257    0.256
                   w3       1.0     0.158      0.162             0.164     0.164    0.164
                   w4       0.0     0.094      0.099             0.101     0.101    0.101
                   w5       0.0     0.057      0.061             0.063     0.063    0.063
                   w6       0.0     0.04       0.045             0.046     0.046    0.046
                   w7       0.0     0.025      0.028             0.028     0.029    0.029
                   w8       0.0     0.023      0.026             0.027     0.027    0.027
                   w9       0.0     0.015      0.017             0.017     0.018    0.018
                  w10       0.0     0.082      0.096             0.099      0.1      0.1




                                                   74
                    Table (14)         Example 3

  Weights           It 1      It 2          It 3          It 4          It 5

       w1           0.0    0.195          0.197       0.197            0.197
       w2           0.0    0.261          0.257       0.257            0.256
       w3           0.0    0.166          0.164       0.164            0.164
       w4           0.0    0.102          0.101       0.101            0.101
       w5           1.0    0.063          0.063       0.063            0.063
       w6           0.0    0.045          0.046       0.046            0.046
       w7           0.0    0.029          0.028       0.029            0.029
       w8           0.0    0.026          0.027       0.027            0.027
       w9           0.0    0.017          0.018       0.018            0.018
       w10          0.0    0.097          0.099           0.1           0.1


                    Table (15)         Example 4

Weights      It 1      It 2          It 3          It 4          It 5         It 6

  w1         0.0      0.166          0.19      0.195         0.196        0.196
  w2         0.0      0.253      0.256         0.256         0.256        0.256
  w3         0.0      0.169      0.166         0.164         0.164        0.164
  w4         0.0      0.107      0.103         0.102         0.102        0.102
  w5         0.0      0.068      0.064         0.063         0.063        0.063
  w6         0.0      0.049      0.046         0.046         0.046        0.046
  w7         0.0      0.032      0.029         0.029         0.029        0.029
  w8         1.0      0.028      0.027         0.027         0.027        0.027
  w9         0.0      0.019      0.018         0.018         0.018        0.018
 w10         0.0       0.11      0.101             0.1           0.1           0.1




                                     75
                           Table (16)     Example 5

          Weights   It 1      It 2      It 3    It 4    It 5    It 6

            w1      0.0      0.182    0.187     0.194   0.196   0.196
            w2      0.0      0.222    0.255     0.256   0.256   0.256
            w3      0.0      0.169    0.166     0.165   0.164   0.164
            w4      0.0      0.11     0.103     0.102   0.102   0.102
            w5      0.0      0.069    0.064     0.063   0.063   0.063
            w6      0.0      0.05     0.047     0.046   0.046   0.046
            w7      0.0      0.033    0.029     0.029   0.029   0.029
            w8      0.0      0.029    0.027     0.027   0.027   0.027
            w9      0.0      0.02     0.018     0.018   0.018   0.018
            w10     1.0      0.116    0.103      0.1     0.1     0.1


                           Table (17)     Example 6

          Weights   It 1       It 2      It 3    It 4    It 5    It 6

            w1      0.113     0.146     0.183   0.194   0.196   0.196
            w2      0.175     0.239     0.255   0.256   0.256   0.256
            w3      0.026     0.171     0.167   0.165   0.164   0.164
            w4      0.101     0.112     0.104   0.102   0.102   0.102
            w5      0.032     0.072     0.065   0.063   0.063   0.063
            w6      0.082     0.053     0.047   0.046   0.046   0.046
            w7      0.166     0.034     0.03    0.029   0.029   0.029
            w8      0.157     0.031     0.027   0.027   0.027   0.027
            w9      0.105     0.021     0.018   0.018   0.018   0.018
           w10      0.043     0.121     0.103    0.1     0.1     0.1



H   Robustness Number of Bidders


                                        76
                                                        Table (18)        Robustness Check: Number of Bidders

                                       Change in Buyer Expenses                              Carter Margin

                                      Not                                                    (Not Quantity                Carter            Total Welfare               Total Welfare
                                  Brokered             Brokered               All               Weighted)                 Profits          Lower Bound                  Upper Bound



Baseline
 Absolute                            $64.0               $445.0             $127.0                 $0.046                  $-11.1                 $4.28                      $12.61
 Percent                            2.52%                11.7%               4.6%                  1.95%                   -1.8%                 4.41%                       14.22%


30% More Bidders
 Absolute                            $67.0               $374.0             $118.0                   $0.0                 $26.25                   $8.1                       $15.6
 Percent                             2.7%                11.57%             4.49%                  5.11%                   4.52%                 9.33%                       19.66%


30% Fewer Bidders
 Absolute                            $72.0               $407.0             $127.0                   $0.0                 $-30.92                 $4.16                      $11.93
 Percent                            2.93%                12.12%             4.86%                  0.08%                  -4.85%                 4.58%                       14.37%

Note: This table shows expected search cost per inquiry, the number of inquiries, as well as total expenses for search. Service costs are estimated to be negative for a few subsets with large
quantities, and percentage changes, therefore, not well defined. Search cost changes are computed under the assumption that brokers' total variable profits are equal to their fixed cost,
which provides a lower bound on the change. Bootstrapped (standard errors) and [confidence intervals] based on 200 iterations.




I         Welfare Calculations

The total change introduced by the in-availability of brokers can be composed into
different parts. Let CEs
                       t be customers' cost in when they were buying in the search

market initially. This equals search cost plus contract cost, CEs     s     s
                                                                t = SEt + CCt =

SEs        s                   b     b     b     b        b
  t + q · pt . Likewise, let CEt = SEt + CCt = SEt + q · pt -  · q be the expenses

in t for customers that were buying in the brokered market initially. The last term
accounts for the relative attractiveness of brokers as a function of q, which I inter-
pret as non-pecuniary benefits. Search cost in the broker market are defined as the
fraction of expenses that are marked as fees, i.e. SEb       b
                                                     t =  · pt · q. Let firms realized

profits for customers that were originally in the search market be ts = q · ( ps    s
                                                                               t - ct )

and tb = q · ( pb    b
                t - ct ) for those originally in the brokered market. Finally, let  be

the share of customers who contract in the search market. The upper bound on the


                                                                                            77
total welfare change, UBW , can then be computed as:




    UBW =  · ((q · ( ps    s       s        s              s    s       s        s
                      1 - c1 ) - SE1 - q · p1 ) - ( q · ( p0 - c0 ) - SE0 - q · p0 )

+ (1 - ) · ((q · ( pb    b       b        b                     b    b       b        b       b
                    1 - c1 ) - SE1 - q · p1 +  · q ) - ( q · ( p0 - c0 ) - SE0 - q · p0 ) - SE0 )


. In the last term an extra SEb
                              0 is subtracted since search cost in the brokered market
are just a transfer from buyers to brokers. Prices are eliminated from this expres-
sion to obtain the final expression for the upper bound on the welfare change:

 UBW =  · (q · cs     s        s     s                      b               b     b
                0 + SE0 - q · c1 - SE1 ) + (1 -  ) · ( q · c0 -  · q - q · c1 - SE1 )


By subtracting the broker variable profits the lower bound on the changes is ob-
tained:
                           LBW = UBW - (1 - ) · q ·  · pb
                                                        0

Since every buyer needs to contract in this market, total welfare in the market can
be measured in the total cost to provide the service plus the search cost that the
market incurs in order to produce matches between buyers and sellers.



J     Fit Plots

The plots below show the fit of simulated moments versus data moments. Each
graph shows the full set of five moments that are targeted in the estimation, condi-
tional on a quantity bin. Overall, the model matched the moments well. However,
for some bins it underestimates the broker price.




                                               78
                                              Figure (13)                Model Fit Plot
        (a) Customer quantity quartile: Q0,0.25                                       (b) Customer quantity quartile: Q0.25,0.5
        20                                                                                 20




        15                                                                                 15
Value




                                                                                   Value


        10                                                                                 10




         5                                                                                  5

                                                         Data                                                                              Data
                                                         Predicted                                                                         Predicted



        0                                                                                  0
        % Brokered   STD P.   STD P. Broker    Mean P.   Mean P. Broker (/w fee)           % Brokered   STD P.   STD P. Broker   Mean P.   Mean P. Broker (/w fee)



    (c) Customer quantity quartile: Q0.5,0.75                                         (d) Customer quantity quartile: Q0.75,1.0


                                                                                           25
        20



                                                                                           20
        15
Value




                                                                                   Value




                                                                                           15

        10

                                                                                           10



         5
                                                         Data                               5                                              Data
                                                         Predicted                                                                         Predicted



        0                                                                                  0
        % Brokered   STD P.   STD P. Broker    Mean P.   Mean P. Broker (/w fee)           % Brokered   STD P.   STD P. Broker   Mean P.   Mean P. Broker (/w fee)




                                                                        79
