                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    BANK SYNDICATES AND LIQUIDITY PROVISION

                                       Joao A. C. Santos
                                      S. Vish Viswanathan

                                      Working Paper 27701
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27701


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We thank Manuel Adelino, Teodora Paligorova and Murillo Campello for valuable comments.
The views stated herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joao A. C. Santos and S. Vish Viswanathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bank Syndicates and Liquidity Provision
Joao A. C. Santos and S. Vish Viswanathan
NBER Working Paper No. 27701
August 2020
JEL No. G21,G23,G3

                                           ABSTRACT

We provide evidence that credit lines offer liquidity insurance to borrowers. Borrowers are able
to extensively use their credit lines in recessions and ahead of credit line cuts. In fact drawdowns
and changes in drawdowns predict internal credit rating downgrades and credit line cuts,
suggesting substantial liquidity access before credit line cuts. Credit line cuts are concentrated on
borrowers who do not use credit lines, and when they occur they still leave borrowers with funds
to draw down. Building on this evidence, we develop a model where syndicates faced with
liquidity shocks continue to support credit line commitments due to the continuation value of
their relationship with borrowers. Our model yields a set of predictions that find support in the
data, including the substantial increase in the lead bank's retained loan share and in the
commitment fees on the credit lines issued during the financial crisis of 2008-09. Consistent with
the model, credit lines with higher expected drawdown rates pay higher commitment fees, and
lead banks often increase their credit line investments in response to the failure of syndicate
members, reducing borrowers' risk exposure to bank failures.


Joao A. C. Santos
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty St
New York, NY 10045
joao.santos@ny.frb.org

S. Vish Viswanathan
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
viswanat@duke.edu
1     Introduction

Do credit line commitments by syndicates provide liquidity to firms that need it? Or
does liquidity evaporate when firms need it the most? These questions have been the
subject of an intense debate in the academic world. Starting with Roberts and Sufi
(2009), a literature has emerged that shows that covenant violations lead to substantial
reductions in credit line commitments, suggesting that credit lines offer only limited
liquidity insurance. A related literature going back to Sufi (2009) arrives at a similar
conclusion by investigating firms' choices between cash and credit lines. However, this
body of research takes an ex post view of loan commitments and does not answer the key
question as to whether credit lines actually provide liquidity insurance. The key insight
from this literature raises a puzzle: why did firms not raise liquidity in a precautionary
way by drawing down credit lines before reporting the information that will trigger the
covenant violations leading to liquidity cuts? Is it possible that these firms did draw
down their credit lines preemptively? Further, these studies do not consider the supply
channel and investigate why and when banks keep their credit line commitments.
         These questions gained additional prominence with the wave of corporate draw-
downs following the Covid-19 outbreak in the US. Between March 12 and April 9, 2020,
452 corporations drew $218 billion on their credit lines according to S&P LCD. 110 of
those corporations experienced a credit downgrade or were put on rating agencies' watch
list. Among these, the drawdown rate was 0.77 for those that accessed their credit lines
before or on the day of rating agencies' action (downgrade or inclusion in the watch list)
and 0.75 for those that did it afterwards (Figure 1).1 While this is not a statistical test,
it is related to the key point we want to make in the paper, that substantial liquidity is
available to firms that need it via credit lines.
         Specifically, in this paper, we contribute to the literature on the liquidity insur-
   1 For the 342 borrowers that were not downgraded or were not in the rating agencies' watch list, the average drawdown

rate was 0.62.



                                                           1
ance role of credit line commitments. We begin by investigating a set of questions that
speak to the liquidity insurance role of credit commitments from an ex ante point of
view. Do borrowers accelerate drawdowns in a precautionary way anticipating events
that may impede them from accessing their credit lines? Do syndicates allocate credit
line cuts in a way to preserve credit lines to those firms that need them? We then
develop a theory of optimal syndicate formation in which syndicates receive liquidity
shocks but still provide liquidity insurance to firms. We end by testing some predic-
tions of our model about (i) the pricing of credit lines,(ii) the structure of credit line
syndicates, and (iii) the effect of shocks that inhibit syndicate members to meet their
liquidity commitments.
       We capitalize on data from the Shared National Credit (SNC) program to in-
vestigate the liquidity insurance role of credit lines. This program tracks credit lines
annually. This allows us to observe if and when borrowers draw down on their credit
lines, and when credit commitments experience cuts. Since our sample covers the 1998
to 2013 time period we are able to analyze credit lines' drawdowns and cuts over the
course of three recessions. Further, since our data contains comprehensive information
on credit line syndicates we are able to investigate lead banks' loan share decisions and
how shocks to syndicate members affect credit lines.
       We show that in aggregate firms draw down credit lines substantially more in
recessions and while credit lines experience cuts, these tend to occur towards the end of
recessions; suggesting that cuts occur subsequent to drawdowns. The drawdown result
is robust in a regression where we saturate our specification with borrower-, loan- and
bank-specific controls and allow for both bank and firm fixed effects. This shows that
firms are able to utilize their credit lines when they likely need them the most. While
the poor performance of firms leads to cuts in credit lines, these cuts appear to lag and
emerge after substantial liquidity has already been provided to firms. Indeed, we show
using a regression specification with controls that drawdowns and changes in drawdowns


                                            2
predict credit line cuts; i.e., there is information in the drawdown beyond that in the
controls and firm and bank fixed effects.
       The previous evidence focuses on borrowers' ability to utilize their credit lines.
A complementary way to ascertain the liquidity insurance role of credit lines it to look
at banks. Suppose that banks in credit line syndicates experience shocks and decide to
cut credit lines as a result, which credit lines do they cut? We show that cuts occur
more disproportionately on firms that do not drawdown; further even for such firms
there is substantial unused credit line capacity subsequent to the cut. This suggests
that firms that anticipate liquidity needs have had the opportunity to do so ahead of
credit line cuts. Consistent with this idea, we show that while cuts in credit lines are
contemporaneous with (or lag) internal credit line downgrades, drawdown rates increase
ahead of downgrades. This evidence clearly shows that borrowers are able to capitalize
on their credit lines before banks downgrade them and cut their size.
       Altogether, the evidence we present in the first part of our paper shows that
credit lines provide substantial liquidity to firms. This contrasts with the ex post view
prevalent in the literature that credit lines do not offer sufficient liquidity insurance
because banks cut them subsequent to negative news (often after covenant violations,
see for example Roberts and Sufi (2009) and Chodorow-Reich and Falato (2018)).
       In the second part of our paper, we build on this evidence and present a theory of
loan syndicates that speaks to the credibility of delivering liquidity insurance to borrow-
ers with credit lines and the allocation of credit lines and fees to the lead and syndicate-
member banks. We assume that syndicate members receive supply shocks (possibly net
worth shocks as in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) and Rampini and Viswanathan (2019a).
These supply shocks make the ex post provision of liquidity insurance at the commit-
ted interest rate difficult because they increase the syndicate member's ex post cost of
capital. Offsetting this cost hike is the continuation value of the relationship with the
firm to the syndicate member, which varies between the lead and the other members of


                                             3
the syndicate. Following Ray (2002) and Board (2011), we design the optimal syndicate
and show that it depends on the cost of capital for syndicate members after the supply
shock and how much they discount the future and care for their relationship with the
borrower.
       Our theory yields several predictions. For example, commitment fees should go
up after bank supply shocks (such as recessions) and larger loans should have larger
syndicates. Further, given lead banks tend to have relatively lower costs of capital
following supply shocks and relatively greater continuation value for the relationship,
then they should retain a larger portion of the credit line following supply shocks and
receive a greater share of the commitment fee. Further, given a fixed syndicate size, a
contraction in credit from non-leads in a syndicate should be partially offset by a credit
increase from the lead bank in a syndicate.
       In the last part of our paper, we provide supporting evidence for some predictions
of our model. For example, we document that larger credit lines have larger syndicates,
consistent with the sharing of supply shock risk in our model. Also consistent with
our model, we document that borrowers with a track record for using their credit lines
extensively pay higher commitment fees on new credit lines. Using recessions as our
proxy for bank supply shocks, we document that commitment fees, the price banks
charge for granting borrowers access to liquidity when they extend credit lines go up in
recessions. Additionally, we show that the share of the credit line that the lead bank
retains increases during recessions, consistent with our model insight on lead banks
response to supply shocks. These effects are particularly evident during the 2008-2009
recession when the banking system was under stress.
       Our last test builds on the failure of a syndicate member bank to investigate the
prediction of our model on shocks to non-lead banks. We show that in a substantial
number of cases, the syndicate lead provides additional funding to the credit, thereby
reducing the size of the credit line cut induced by non-lead bank failure. This is consistent


                                              4
with our model that suggests that leads will only partially offset the lost credit from non-
leads. Overall, our evidence shows that while the insurance they provide is incomplete,
syndicates play a key role in providing such liquidity insurance to borrowers, allowing
them to retain access to a higher fraction of their lines of credit when banks experience
shocks.
         Our paper contributes to the large debate on the liquidity insurance that credit
lines provide borrowers. A strand of this literature argues that lines of credit are distinct
from the committed lines of credit defined in the theoretical literature because they
are contingent on borrowers' performance. For example, Roberts and Sufi (2009) and
Sufi (2009) find that covenant violations lead to substantial reductions in credit line
commitments. Sufi (2009) documents that firms with high levels of cash flow rely on
lines of credit whereas firms with low levels of cashflow rely on cash and argues high
cash flow is critical to avoid covenant violations, which trigger reductions in the size of
unused credit lines. Chodorow-Reich and Falato (2018) argue that credit lines were cut
post the financial crisis of 2008-2009 for firms that had covenant violations.2
         Another set of studies argues that banks' inability (or willingness) to supply
funds hinders the liquidity insurance of credit lines. Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010a)
used Dealscan data and document an increase in drawdowns between mid-August 2008
and December 2008 and note that in several instances firms state that they drew on
credit lines to enhance their liquidity during the credit crisis. Huang (2010) finds that
credit lines of more distressed banks at the beginning of the crisis experienced lower
utilization rates. However, none of these studies has information about both borrowers
and their credit line providers, which makes it difficult to ascertain the effect of banks
on borrowers' access to liquidity under their lines of credit.3 Acharya et al. (2013) avoid
  2 See Flannery and Lockhart (2009), Yun (2009), Campello et al. (2010), Campello et al. (2011), Lins et al. (2010),

and Acharya et al. (2012) for other studies arguing that cash and credit line availability are not good substitutes.
   3 Berrospide (2012) find that large unused commitments were a key determinant of increased precautionary liquid

buffers that large US banks built during the 2008-09 financial crisis, suggesting that banks factor in their exposures to
the credit lines they granted.



                                                           5
this challenge by focusing on the role of the banking sector. They point out that credit
line use is subject to an aggregate liquidity risk because the banking sector is not able
to meet the liquidity demands of the entire corporate sector. Consistent with this idea,
Demiroglu et al. (2012) document that borrowers' access to lines of credit is contingent
on the banking sector's lending standards.
         Several studies have uncovered supporting evidence for the liquidity role of credit
lines. For example, Jim´
                       enez et al. (2009) and Norden and Weber (2010) document based
on Spanish and German data, respectively, that firms increase utilization of their credit
lines significantly in the period leading up to default. Chen et al. (2017) find, using data
on the actual draw down rates from US firms' 10-K reports, that firms are more likely
to draw down credit lines than obtaining new loans during times of greater short-term
financing needs. Kizilaslan and Mathers (2014) argue, based on a model they develop to
predict drawdowns, that unexpected drawdowns are predictive of decreased future cash
flows and covenant violations.4
         Our paper adds to this body of empirical research in several ways. Our paper
uses both bank and borrower information on credit lines and their utilization at a level of
detail not available previously. In contrast to those studies which evaluate the liquidity
insurance of credit lines based on borrowers' ex post access to credit lines, our evidence
based on an ex ante view of credit lines shows firms do receive substantial liquidity from
their lines of commitment. Our evidence adds support to those studies which argue that
the financial condition of banks affects the liquidity insurance of credit lines, but here too
our findings show the importance of factoring in borrowers' "precautionary drawdowns"
in assessing borrowers' exposure to the financial condition of their credit line providers.
Our findings also show the importance of accounting for the role of syndicate members,
in particular the lead bank, in fully accessing that exposure.
         Our paper also adds to existing studies of commitment fees on credit lines. Shock-
   4 See Ham and Melnik (1987), Agarwal et al. (2004) and Gao and Yun (2009) for indirect evidence in support of the

liquidity role of credit lines.


                                                         6
ley and Thakor (1997), Chava and Jarrow (2008), and Gatev and Strahan (2006) study
the role that borrower-specific factors and loan-commitment-specific factors play on
credit lines' undrawn fees. We control for those factors, but focus instead in identi-
fying how recessions, our proxy for bank shocks, affect the way banks set these fees. In
this regard, our paper is closer to Bord and Santos (2014) who document that banks
that experience a liquidity shock following the 2007 collapse of the asset-backed commer-
cial paper increased the undrawn fees on the credit lines they granted borrowers. We
also expand those studies by documenting that banks factor in borrowers' drawdown
experiences when they set the commitment fees on their credit lines.
       Lastly, our paper adds to the literature on credit line syndicates, in particular
studies of lead banks' loan shares. Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010b) documents that
lead banks retain larger shares of loans they originate during crises periods, in particu-
lar during the 2008-2009 recession, while looking at a sample of both syndicated term
loans and credit lines, and argue this is a contributing factor to amplify credit cycles.
Paligorova and Santos (2019), in turn, document that lead banks' term-loan shares have
evolved very differently from their credit-line shares, with the former depicting a dis-
tinct downward trend induced by the growing presence of shadow banks in term-loan
syndicates. We too find that lead banks retain larger shares of loans originated during
crises periods but based on a sample of credit lines, a finding we argue is consistent with
our theory of syndicates.
       The rest of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data and
characterizes our sample. Section 3 presents the results of a series of tests we developed
to show that credit lines do offer substantial liquidity to borrowers. Section 4 presents
a model where syndicates faced with liquidity shocks continue to support credit line
commitments due to the continuation value of the relationship with borrowers while
Section 5 presents evidence consistent with the predictions of our model. Section 6
concludes with some final remarks. Appendix 6 provides proofs of propositions in the


                                            7
paper while Appendix 6 provides the definition of empirical variables used in the paper.



2      Data and Sample Characterization

2.1         Data

The main data source for this project is the Shared National Credit (SNC) program
run by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Reserve, and the Office
of the Comptroller of the Currency. SNC tracks, at the end of each year, confidential
information on all syndicated credits -new as well as credits originated in previous years
-that exceed $20 million and are held by three or more federally supervised institutions.5
For each credit, the program reports the identity of the borrower, the credit type (credit
line vs. term loan), its purpose (working capital, debt repay, M&A, among others), orig-
ination amount and date, maturity date, bank rating, drawdown amount, and complete
information about the syndicate, including investors' loan shares. We use this data to
identify borrowers' with credit lines and to get information on their drawdowns. We
also use it to track changes in the loan rating and in the syndicate composition over the
life of the loan.
             We merge SNC with Compustat and the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP) to get information on borrowers financials and stock prices, respectively. SNC
contains loans from privately-held and publicly-held firms, but Compustat is dominated
by publicly-held firms. As a result, when we account for borrowers' financials we exclude
credit lines to privately-held firms from our sample. We also match SNC with Reports
of Condition and Income to get financial information for the lead bank in the syndicate.
Wherever possible we obtain bank data at the holding company level using the Y9C
reports. If these reports are not available we rely on Call Reports which have data at
the bank level.
    5 The   confidential data were processed solely within the Federal Reserve System for the analysis presented in this paper.



                                                                8
           We use NBER business cycle expansion and contraction dates to identify the
beginning and end of economic recessions during our sample period. We rely on FDIC
information on bank failures to investigate the impact a syndicate member failure on the
liquidity that credit lines offer their borrowers. We restrict this exercise to bank failures
because (with the exception of Bear Stern and Lehman) we do not have comprehensive
information on nonbank failures. This is not a problem because as we will see banks are
the dominant investors in credit line syndicates.
           Finally, given that SNC does not gather information on loan rates, we rely on
Loan Pricing Corporation's Dealscan to investigate the pricing of credit lines. In contrast
to SNC, Dealscan gathers information on all syndicated credits, though, only at the time
of their origination.6 As with SNC, we merge Dealscan with Compustat, CRSP and
Reports of Condition and Income.


2.2       Sample Characterization

Table 1 reports information on nonfinancial corporations' credit lines included in the
SNC data. The data cover 36,096 credit lines from 1988 to 2013 for a total of 109,592
loan-year observations; our unit of analysis is the loan-year. While the coverage of SNC
loans increases over time, on average we have three to six thousand credit lines each
year. A credit line may drop from the SNC data set before the maturity date for various
reasons, including not meeting the minimum reporting conditions, or being canceled by
the borrower or the lender. We are cognizant of this potential incompleteness in our
panel, but it is not clear it drives our key results. For example, it is likely easier for
banks to cancel credit lines that have not been tapped by borrowers, but that suggests
these borrowers did not need liquidity support. There are a total of 19,294 distinct
corporate borrowers represented in our data with 2,446 to 4,682 firms in any given year.
The number of lead banks varies from 113 to 260 over the sample period with a total of
  6 See   Bord and Santos (2012) for a comparison between the SNC and Dealscan databases.



                                                          9
588 unique banks.
         The top panel of Table 1 reports information on the credit lines and their syn-
dicates. The average drawdown rate is 38%, with the 10th and 90th percentiles being
0% and 100%, respectively. 13% of the credit lines are fully utilized (i.e. the borrower
has used at least 95% of the credit line). The average credit line is $223 million and has
three years left before it reaches its maturity date. About 88% of the credit lines are
rated PASS by the lead bank, and borrowers take out credit lines most often for working
capital purposes.7 On average, the lead bank owns 25% of the credit line, but the 10th
and 90th percentiles are 0% and 50%, respectively. There is also significant variation
in the size of syndicates. The average syndicate has 9 banks, but the 10th and 90th
percentiles have 3 and 9 banks, respectively.
         Turning to the middle panel, which reports information for the lead bank, we see
that the average bank has assets worth $527 billion, with the 10th and 90th percentiles
equal to $28 billion and $2 trillion, respectively. There is a large variation in the size of
lead banks in our sample, but it includes some of the largest banks in the country. The
average bank has an 8% equity-to-assets ratio, with the 10th and 90th percentiles equal
to 5% and 11%, respectively. In line with the assertion that banks have a comparative
advantage in granting credit lines because of their deposit funding, we see that the
average bank in our sample has a deposit-to-asset ratio equal to 58% and the 10th
percentile of the deposit distribution is equal to 40%.
         Finally, looking at the bottom panel of Table 1, which reports information for
the set of publicly listed borrowers in our sample, we see that the risk of the borrowers
is more disperse than what the high portion of loans rated as PASS may suggest. For
example, the average borrower has a leverage ratio of 33% with the 90th percentile
equal to 57%. Also, the 10th percentiles of the profit margin and stock returns are both
negative. Further, even though we have firm ratings for only about 18% of the sample,
  7 Banks rate loans (including portions of the loan) into five categories: PASS, SPECIAL MENTION, SUB STANDARD,

DOUBTFUL and LOSS, with PASS being the highest category.


                                                      10
we see that among these, 11% are rated investment grade with the remaining 7% being
rated below grade. This dispersion in risk is important because risky borrowers place
more value on the liquidity provided by credit lines than safer firms.



3    Do Credit Lines Provide Liquidity Insurance?

Data limitations have made it difficult to disentangle the demand and supply drivers
of borrowers' utilization of credit lines and thus ascertain the extent of the liquidity
insurance that credit lines provide borrowers. For example, if a borrower experiences a
cut in its credit line which is triggered by the violation of a covenant in the loan contract
that does not necessarily constitute evidence against credit lines' liquidity insurance role.
However, if in contrast, that cut emerges because the bank (or a member of the syndicate)
is experiencing financial difficulties, this would constitute evidence of a reduction in the
liquidity insurance role of credit lines.
       In this section, we present a set of novel results that are relevant to this debate
by looking at the joint behavior of credit line drawdowns and credit line cuts. We begin
by investigating the role of banks in the provision of credit lines. Next, we document
borrowers' ability to draw down their credit lines in recessions, arguably when they
need liquidity the most. We also show that credit line cuts tend to occur subsequent
to drawdowns and that firms avail of substantial credit prior to drawdowns even when
bank's internal ratings involve downgrades. After that, we study whether banks actively
manage their credit lines either by cutting their size or through their credit ratings and
how corporate borrowers respond. Thus, we provide novel evidence on both firm and
bank behavior to understand the dynamics of credit line drawdowns and cuts.




                                             11
3.1   Who funds Credit Lines?

Credit lines provide liquidity insurance to borrowers only to the extent that they are
funded by investors that will be able to meet borrowers' liquidity needs when they at-
tempt to utilize them. This likely explains why credit lines continue to be predominantly
funded by banks. Over the last two decades credit lines outgrew term loans in the US
(Figure 2, left graph). Despite that growth, and in contrast to term loans, banks con-
tinue to fund almost entirely all of the credit lines they grant corporations (Figure 2,
right graph). In 1988, banks funded 91% and 96% of outstanding term loans and credit
lines, respectively. By 2013, the percentage of term loans funded by banks had declined
to 42% while the percentage of bank-funded credit lines remained at 96%.
       Another important condition for credit lines to meet their liquidity function is for
them to maintain a stable investor base over their life. Indeed, over the last two decades
investor turnover in credit-line syndicates remained very low and driven by exchanges of
loan positions between banks (see Figure 3). This stands in sharp contrast with investor
turnover in term-loan syndicates, which kept increasing with the growth of the secondary
loan market and the growing presence of nonbank investors in this market.


3.2   Drawdowns During Recessions

A more direct way to ascertain whether credit lines provide liquidity insurance is to
investigate whether borrowers are able to use them when they need funding. As such,
we should see an increase in drawdowns during recessions. Indeed, there is a distinct
increase in both drawdown rates and the percentage of credit lines fully drawndown
during the three recessions the US experienced in the last two and a half decades (Figure
4). Importantly, these swings are not driven by potential changes in the size of the credit
line over time because as the figures show we continue to find a similar pattern when
we restrict the analysis to credit lines which size (i.e. the commitment amount) remains
unchanged from one year to the next.

                                            12
       We use the folllowing model to investigate the cyclical pattern of drawdowns
more closely:


     DRAW DOW N RAT Ef,l,b,t = c + RECESSIONt + Xf,t-1 + Yl,t-1

                                  + Zb,t-1 +     f,l,b,t ,                              (1)


where DRAW DOW N RAT Ef,l,b,t , is the drawdown rate at the end of year t by firm f
on credit line l it took out from bank b. The key variable of interest in that specification
is RECESSION, a dummy variable equal to 1 for the years that coincide with the
three NBER recessions during our sample period. We also break down this dummy
variable into three separate dummy variables, one for each of the three NBER recessions
(1990/91, 2001, and 2008/09). We attempt to identify the impact of recessions on
borrowers' drawdowns controlling for the borrower-, loan- and lead bank specific factors,
X, Y, and Z, respectively, reported in Table 2.
       The results of this investigation are reported in Table 2. The top panel reports
univariate results. The middle panel reports results of our multivariate analysis. In the
bottom panel, we modify (1) and replace the dependent variable with a dummy variable
equal to one if the borrower has fully drawndown its credit line. Throughout the three
panels, columns (1) and (4) report the results of a pooled analysis while columns (2)
and (5) report results estimated with bank fixed effects. Columns (3) and (6) report the
results when we consider bank-borrower fixed effects.
       Looking at the top panel of Table 2, we see that RECESSION is positive and
significant with coefficients ranging from 0.04 to 0.06. This shows that drawdown rates
increase during recessions by 4 to 6 percentage points, the equivalent of 10 to 16%
of the sample mean (38.25%). When we use separate dummy variables to isolate the
effects of the three recessions, we see that they all come out positive and significant with
coefficients ranging from 0.02 to 0.08. On close inspection, we see that the coefficients


                                            13
on the 1990/91 and 2008/09 recession dummy variables are always larger than those on
the 2001 variable, possibly because the latter recession was shorter and not as deep as
the other two.
       The key insights from the univariate analysis persist in our multivariate analysis
(middle panel of Table 2). The coefficient on RECESSION continues to be positive
and significant, albeit a bit smaller (0.03). Nonetheless, that increase of 3 percentage
points still corresponds to 12% of the sample mean used in the multivariate analysis
(26.08%). Looking at the columns with the separate variables for the three recessions,
we see that the dummy variable for the 2001 recession is never significant. The dummy
variable for the 1990/91 recession is always positive, but it is significant in only one of
the three models we consider. In contrast, the dummy variable for the 2008/09 recession
is positive and significant for all three models. According to our estimates, drawdown
rates increased by 5 percentage points during the 2008/09 recession, the equivalent of
19% of the sample mean.
       In the interest of space we do not report in Table 2 the controls we use in our
multivariate analysis, but those that are significant are consistent with our priors. For
example riskier borrowers, as captured by leverage, tangible assets, interest coverage
and stock volatility, have higher drawdown rates on their credit lines. In contrast, larger
borrowers or borrowers with higher liquidity have lower drawdown rates. Among the
bank controls, only size is systematically significant and indicates that borrowers of
larger banks on average have lower drawdown rates, a result likely driven by the fact
that larger borrowers (which tend to have lower drawdown rates) usually take out credit
lines from larger banks. With regards to the loan controls, we see that riskier credit
lines as defined by the bank rating, and credit lines with more years until maturity
have higher drawdown rates. Credit lines for M&A, capital expenditures and to repay
debt have higher drawdown rates. In contrast, credit lines to back up commercial paper
programs have on average lower drawdown rates.


                                            14
         Looking at the bottom panel of Table 2, we see that our results on fully drawn-
down credit lines mimic our findings on drawdown rates. There is an increase in the
incidence of credit lines that are fully drawndown during recessions. Again, we find
that this effect while present in the 1990/91 recession is more prevalent in the 2008/09
recession.
         In sum, our evidence that drawdown rates, in particular our finding that the
percentage of fully utilized credit lines, increases during recessions arguably when bor-
rowers need funding the most is suggestive that credit lines provide liquidity insurance
to borrowers. This evidence is not driven by potential reductions in the size of credit
lines that might occur during recessions.8 Further, it continues to hold when we do the
analysis within banks and also when we condition it to borrowers that have credit lines
from the same bank over time. Our findings, however, suffer from the limitation that is
common to most of the existing studies of credit lines' liquidity role: it is based on the
ex-post utilization of credit lines. In the next subsection, we present the results of some
tests that are less exposed to this limitation.


3.3     Do Banks Actively Manage Credit Lines?

Credit lines' drawdown rates are the outcome of both the demand for funding by bor-
rowers and banks' willingness to let borrowers utilize their credit lines. In what follows,
we investigate two variables which are more likely to be under banks' control, and which
affect borrowers' ability to access their credit lines: cuts to the size of credit lines and
banks' internal rating of credit lines.


3.3.1    Managing the Credit Line Size


In our data we are able to observe whether credit lines experience cuts in their commit-
ment amount. These cuts could be borrower driven (for example to save on the costs of
   8 The findings we report in Table 2 continue to hold when we restrict the sample to credit lines which size does not

change from one year to the next (see Table IA.1 of the Internet appendix).


                                                          15
maintaining a credit line) or bank driven (for example to reduce the liquidity pressure
from borrowers' drawdowns). Nonetheless, it is still worth investigating whether these
cuts tend to lead or lag borrowers' drawdowns. While the former suggests banks activity
manage borrowers' access to credit lines, the latter indicates borrowers are able to utilize
at least to some extent their credit lines before banks intervene to limit drawdowns.
       In the previous section, we documented that drawdown rates increase significantly
during recessions. Figure 5 plots both the annual time series of drawdown rates and
the percentage of credit lines that experience a cut. As we can see from that figure,
both drawdown rates and the incidence of cuts increase significantly during recessions.
However, the former reaches a maximum before the latter in all three recessions in our
sample, suggesting that borrowers are able to drawdown their credit lines before these
are cut.
       We investigate the hypothesis that credit line cuts leg borrowers' drawdown ac-
tivity more closely using the following model:


     CU Tf,l,b,t = c + DRAW DOW N RAT Ef,l,b,t-1 + Xf,t-1 + Yl,t-1

               + Zb,t-1 + Tt +     f,l,b,t ,                                            (2)


where CU T is a dummy variable equal to one if the credit line experiences a cut in its
size in year t. DRAW DOW N RAT E is the drawdown rate on the credit line at the
end of year t - 1. In another specification, we control instead for the drawdown rate at
the end of the year t - 2 and for the log of the additional dollar amount the borrower
draws down during year t - 1. We estimate model (2) controlling for our sets of loan-,
borrower- and bank-specific factors, X, Y, and Z, respectively, and for a set of year
dummy variables, T. Further, we estimate model 2 both without and with loan fixed
effects. We also consider a specification with loan and bank fixed effects.
       The results of this investigation are reported in Table 3. Columns (1) and (4)


                                               16
report the results of a pooled analysis while Columns (2) and (5) report results esti-
mated with loan fixed effects. Columns (3) and (6), in turn, report results estimated
with loan and lead-bank fixed effects. Looking at Columns (1) through (3) we see
that DRAW DOW N RAT Et-1 is always positive and statistically significant. A higher
(lagged) drawdown rate increases the odds of a future cut in the credit line. Turning our
attention to Columns (4) through (6) we see that DRAW DOW N RAT Et-2 is always
positive and statistically significant, and LDRAW N AM T, the log of the dollar amount
the borrower draws down between t - 2 and t - 1, is always positive and statistically
significant in two out of our three models. Borrowers that increase drawdowns in a year
are more likely to experience a reduction in the size of their credit line in the following
year. These results suggest banks are slow at cutting credit lines; by the time they
intervene, borrowers have already utilized to some degree their credit lines.9
          The previous analysis focuses on the incidence of cuts, but it is silent with regards
to the size of the cut. In particular, how much is left untapped in credit lines after the
cut? To get an answer to this question, we start by plotting in Figure 6, left graph,
the undrawn rate in the credit line after the cut against the undrawn rate the borrower
had beforehand.10 The average (median) undrawn rate before the cut is 51% (47%).
After the cut, these figures drop to 35% (28%). While the reduction in undrawn rates is
sizable, it is also the case that borrowers are still left with significant portions untapped
in their credit lines. Further, and importantly, as we can see from the graph the biggest
cuts are concentrated on credit lines with larger undrawn rates, arguably those held by
borrowers with lower liquidity needs.
          A potential concern with these results is that not all of the cuts that we observe
are bank driven. While we are unable to identify the driver of the credit line cut, we can
   9 An alternative interpretation for our findings is that borrowers' additional drawdowns trigger the cut. In this case,

borrowers are still able to capitalize on their credit lines.
   10 Since the undrawn rates are computed as the ratio of the dollar amount that is still unused and the size of the credit

line, we compute the post-cut rate as a function of the size of the credit line the borrower had beforehand. In this case,
the cut reduces only the numerator of the undrawn rate.



                                                            17
restrict our analysis to the subset of credit lines that are most likely to experience bank
cuts i.e. credit lines that experience both a cut and an increase in drawdowns during the
year. The average (median) undrawn rate for this subset of credit lines before the cut
is 68% (72%). After the cut, these figures drop to 23% (16%). By construction there
is a bigger decline in undrawn rates following the cut, but once again we see relatively
higher reductions in credit lines that had the highest undrawn rates (Figure 6, right
graph). This too suggests that when banks cut credit lines they target borrowers with
lower liquidity needs. Altogether, our evidence on credit line cuts is not consistent with
the idea that banks effectively manage their credit lines to limit borrowers' ability to
utilize them.
         We investigate this hypothesis more closely using the following model of undrawn
rates


        LU N DRAW Nl,b,t = c + LU N DRAW Nl,b,t-1 + CU Tl,b,t

        + CU Tl,b,t ×LU N DRAW Nl,b,t-1 + Xf,t-1 + Yl,t-1 + Zb,t-1 + Tt +                           l,b,t ,   (3)


where LU N DRAW Nl,b,t is the log of one plus the undrawn rate in year t (computed
over the size of the credit line in year t-1). CU Tl,b,t is dummy variable which takes the
value one if the credit line experiences a cut in year t. We also consider a variant of this
definition where we classify the credit line to experience a cut if its size declines and the
borrower increases drawdowns over the same time period. LU N DRAW Nl,b,t-1 is the
log of the undrawn rate in the credit line in year t-1 (also computed over the size of the
credit line in year t-1).11
         We consider a model of the log of undrawn rates because we want to confirm our
previous finding suggesting that cuts disproportionaly impact credit lines with larger
portions of undrawn funds. We estimate our model of undrawn rates controlling for
 11 We use the lagged size of the credit line to compute the undrawn rate in year t because otherwise a cut would

mechanically increase the undrawn rate.



                                                       18
our sets of loan-, borrower-, and bank specific factors as well as a set of year dummy
variables. To highlight the bank-driven effects we also report the results we obtain when
we estimate that model with bank-fixed effects and bank-year fixed effects.
         The results of this investigation are reported in Table 4. They are consistent
across all of the specifications we consider, including those that rely on the definition of
cut that is most likely bank driven (Columns 4-6). As expected, cuts reduce undrawn
rates: CU Tl,b,t is always negative and statistically significant. The coefficient on the
log of the lagged undrawn rate, LU N DRAW Nl,b,t-1 , is positive and smaller than one
across all specifications. Therefore, for credit lines that do not experience a cut the
current undrawn rate increases less than proportionally with increases in their lagged
undrawn rates. More importantly for our purposes, the coefficient on the interaction
term is negative and significant. This shows that for credit lines with a cut, the current
undrawn rates increases at an even slower rate with increases in their lagged undrawn
rates when compared to credit lines that do not experience a cut. This is consistent
with banks imposing larger cuts on credit lines with larger undrawn rates at the time of
the cut.12 While cuts arguably reduce the liquidity insurance provided by credit lines,
they are less costly had banks instead targeted credit lines that were already extensively
utilized at the time of the cut.


3.4     Managing the Credit Lines Rating

We are able to do an alternative test to banks' ability to manage borrowers' drawdowns;
one that speaks directly to the liquidity insurance credit lines offer borrowers. This
insurance is likely most valuable in periods when borrowers experience financial difficul-
ties because that is when it will be most difficult for them to find alternative sources
of external funding. This assumes borrowers are able to drawdown their credit lines on
  12 The other possibility for this result is that borrowers with larger undrawn rates draw down larger amounts in the

year they experience the cut on their credit line.




                                                         19
these occasions.13 We investigate this hypothesis in this section by looking at borrowers'
drawdowns ahead of banks downgrading the rating on their credit lines.
          We rely on the lead bank's internal loan ratings to identify credit lines that are
downgraded.14 We consider two alternative criteria to identify downgrades. The first
criterion is broad and classifies downgrades as any change in the rating that points to a
deterioration in the credit. The second criterion is narrower and classifies downgrades
only when the portion of the credit rated PASS, the highest rating, declines. This is
equivalent to a downgrade from investment grade to below grade. We identify 4,225
downgrades under the first criterion and 3,473 downgrades under the second one. We
use the same approach to identify upgrades and find 2,177 and 1,349 upgrades under
the two alternative criteria, respectively.
          Figure 7 plots the drawdown rate on credit lines that experience a downgrade (left
graph) and those that experience an upgrade (right graph) using our broad classification
to identify rating changes.15 There is a striking difference between the two graphs: there
is no evidence of a change in borrowers' drawdown rates in the years leading up to an
upgrade. In contrast, there is a sharp increase in borrowers' drawdown rates in the years
leading up to a downgrade. The average drawdown rate on the year the credit line is
downgraded is 59%. The year before, the average drawdown rate on these credit lines
was 41% and two years before it was only 36% In other words, in the two years leading
up to the downgrade, borrowers are able to increase the drawdown rates on their credit
lines by more than 50%. Importantly, these effects are not driven by potential reductions
in the size of the credit limes that may occur in the years leading up to the downgrade
because we get similar results if we drop those credit lines from our sample.
  13 Banks could intervene and limit borrowers' drawdowns and in extreme cases even evoke the material adverse clause

(MAC) that is common in credit line agreements and cancel the credit line. Berger and Udell (1995) note that banks are
reluctant to evoke these clauses because of reputational concerns and fair lending laws.
 14 Banks   rate credits into five continuous ratings: PASS, SPECIAL MENTION, SUBSTANDARD, DOUBTFULL and
LOSS.
 15 Our   results are similar when we use the narrower definition.




                                                            20
       We investigate borrowers' drawdown behavior around the time of the bank rating
downgrade using the following model:


       CU Tl,b,t = c + i   i=1   DGl,b,t-i + Yl,t-1 + Zb,t-1 + Tt +   l,b,t ,           (4)


where CU T is a dummy variable equal to one if the size of the credit line declines over
the year t. In another specification we replace CU T with DRAW DOW N RAT E, the
percentage of the credit line the borrower has drawndown on its credit line. DGl,b,t-i is
a set of dummy variables to isolate the years around the downgrade. We estimate these
models controlling for our sets of loan- and bank-specific factors, Y, and Z, respectively,
and yearly dummy variables, T. We do not use firm controls in this exercise because
it reduces our sample significantly. However, in addition to reporting the results of a
pooled analysis, we also estimate model (4) with loan-fixed effects and with loan- and
bank-fixed effects.
       The results of this investigation are reported in Table 5. The top panel reports
the results for the likelihood of a reduction in the size of the credit line, CU T, while
the bottom panel reports the results for the drawdown rate, DRAW DOW N RAT E.
Columns 1-3 in each panel report the results for our broad definition of rating downgrade
while Columns 4-6 report the results for our narrow definition of downgrade. In addition,
at the bottom of each column we report the p-value for the test that two consecutive
dummy variables DGl,b,t-i are equal. An examination of the p-values for these tests
reveals two important results. First, there is a clear increase in the likelihood of a
reduction in the size of the credit line in the year of the downgrade (t) and the subsequent
year (t+1). We can reject the hypotheses that DGt+1 = DGt and DGt = DGt-1 in all
of our models. In contrast, we do not find evidence of an increase in the likelihood of
a cut in the years leading up to a downgrade. We cannot reject the hypotheses that
DGt-1 = DGt-2 or DGt-2 = DGt-3 in any of our models.
       Second, in sharp contrast to this evidence on the likelihood of a reduction in the

                                             21
size of the credit line, we find strong evidence of an increase in drawdown rates in the
years leading up to the downgrade. We can reject the hypothesis that DGt-1 = DGt-2
in all of our models. There is even some evidence of an increase in drawdown rates from
year (t-3) to year (t-2) because we can reject the hypothesis DGt-2 = DGt-3 in four of
our models. It is worth noting that these findings on drawdowns continue to hold when
we drop all of the credit lines that experience a decline in their size during the sample
period. This proves that the increase in drawdown rates derives from an increase in
borrowers' utilization of their credit lines in the years leading up to a rating downgrade
by their bank.
       The sequencing we just documented provides strong evidence consistent with
what we presented in Table 3 showing that borrowers' drawdowns precede credit line
cuts. There is an important difference to the latest results: they build on a bank driven
action ­ downgrade of its internal credit line rating. Regardless of borrowers' motivation
behind this surge in drawdown rates, the fact that they are able to utilize their credit
lines so extensively right before their bank downgrades them adds important support to
the liquidity insurance role of these financial instruments.
       Summing up, the results we reported in this section suggest that while credit lines
may not be perfect substitutes for cash, they do provide liquidity insurance. Borrowers
are able to increase drawdowns in recessions, arguably when they need funding the
most. Further, their drawdowns tend to preceded credit line reductions, consistent with
the idea that they are able to capitalize on their credit lines before banks intervene
to cut their size. When banks cut credit lines they appear to target those with more
unused funds, likely linked to borrowers with lower liquidity needs. In addition, on
these occasions, banks still leave significant portions on undrawn funds in credit lines.
Consistent with the previous assertion that borrowers are able to front run banks, our
results show that borrowers significantly increase drawdowns on their credit lines before
banks downgrade them and adjust their size downwards.


                                            22
4     A Theory of Credit Line Syndicates

In this section, we build on the previous evidence and develop a model where credit lines
provide liquidity insurance. We assume (for reasons outside the model) that borrowers
value liquidity insurance. We also assume that banks face higher liquidity provision
costs during crisis (as, for example, in Rampini and Viswanathan (2019a) where there is
a net worth shock to financial intermediaries). The model is intended to offer a better
understanding of how incentive compatible syndicates are formed, and how syndicate
shares are assigned, two important questions in understanding credit line syndicates
that have not been considered in the prior literature. We pay particular attention to the
incentive constraint for liquidity provision and the asymmetry between the lead bank
and non-lead syndicate participants. We use the model to derive a set of empirical
predictions which we test in the following section.


4.1   The Borrower

We consider a setup where a borrower wishes to obtain a credit line at variable interest
rate R > r where r is the underlying benchmark rate for that risk class. Assume that
the amount of the loan commitment is L and the probability of a drawdown is p. Each
credit line is assumed to be a one period commitment, so each credit line consists of
a one time commitment fee, C, followed by an event whether the loan commitment is
drawn or not (with probability p). The borrower needs a flat rate R independent of any
bank liquidity event; they are insured against any ex-post variations in bank liquidity
costs. A loan commitment is a triple (R, C, N) where: C is the commitment fee, R is
the interest rate, and N is the number of banks in the syndicate.




                                           23
4.2     Liquidity Events and Lenders

Absent a liquidity event (which is an aggregate event), the cost of providing liquidity is r
and when liquidity events occur (which has probability q ) the cost of providing funding
of size L is given by r + m(L) where m (L) > 0 and m (L) > 0 (strictly convex funding
function). Also, we assume that m(0) = 0 and m (0) = 0. We assume that this liquidity
event is systemic and is the same across all banks in the syndicate.16
          Thus the syndicate receives a loan commitment fee C and an interest R if the
loan commitment is exercised. It pays a normal cost of providing liquidity of r and an
                                                                         L
additional cost of providing liquidity if a liquidity event occurs of m( N )L if there are N
members in the syndicate and a cost of making the syndicate of (N - 1)x where x is the
incremental cost of adding a participant (these could represent coordination costs).
          We are doing in a reduced form way what Holmstrom and Tirole (1997), Rampini
and Viswanathan (2019b) and others have noted that ex post the interest rate on the
commitment may be too low for it be incentive compatible. Holmstrom and Tirole (1997)
focus on the incentive issue of delivering the loan commitment in the cross section and
argue for a role for government bonds. Rampini and Viswanathan (2019b) focus on
the general equilibrium and show that a collateral shortage in general equilibrium may
reduce lending, increasing the cost today of a future loan commitment. Instead we focus
on the institutional features of syndicates and the continuation value of the future firm
relationship with syndicate members. We show that if that relationship has sufficient
value, the syndicate will continue to make the loan commitment to the firm even when
hit by liquidity shocks that increase the cost of supplying liquidity.
  16 It is clear that an idiosyncratic event that affects one bank does not matter; other banks can still provide liquidity at

cost r. Only systemic events that affect all banks are relevant.




                                                             24
        Let  be the profit of the whole syndicate. Then it will be defined by

                                                L
       = C + pRL - p(1 - q )rL - pq (r + m(       ))L - (N - 1)x
                                                N
                                 L
        = p(R - r)L + C - pqm(     )L - (N - 1)x.                                   (5)
                                 N

4.3    Credit Lines with No Syndicate Ex Post Incentive Constraints

We assume that the borrower has a profit function B (p(R - r)L, C ) that is maximized
at (0, 0), i.e. B (0, 0) > B (p(R - r)L, C ) for all C  0 and R  r. Further we assume
that the partial derivatives satisfy B                    B                    B
                                     R (p(R - r )L, C ) < C (p(R - r )L, C ) = C < 0

and B
    RR (p(R - r )L, C ) < 0. This implies that the borrower wishes to find (R, C ) that

maximizes B (p(R - r)L, C ) or equivalently


       B (0, 0) - B (p(R - r)L, C ) = H (p(R - r)L) + G(C )                         (6)


is a well defined convex cost function that can minimized with HR (p(R - r)L) > GC > 0
and HRR (p(R - r)L) > 0 and GCC = 0.
        Thus in a perfectly competitive market with no ex post constraints (first best)
the maximization problem for the firm (or the equivalent cost minimization problem) is
then given by


      min H (p(R - r)L) + G(C ),                                                    (7)
      R,C,N



such that

                                    L
      (F ) - pL(R - r) - C + pqm(     )L + (N - 1)x  0;                             (8)
                                    N
       (µ) - R;  -r

       ( ) - C ;  0                                                                 (9)




                                           25
where the first constraint is the positive profit (breakeven) constraint on banks. The
other two constraints require that the interest rate charged be greater than r and that
the loan commitment fee be positive.

Proposition 1 The first best syndicate size N  is determined by:

                 L   L2
      -pqm (       )       +x=0                                                                                 (10)
                 N  (N  )2

which increases in L, the loan commitment size. Further, if HR (0) > GC > 0, we have
that C > 0 and R = r; it is cheaper to put the cost of providing the first best loan
commitment in the commitment fee rather than the interest rate and thus the interest
rate will be r.17 The first best commitment fee is:

                    L
      C = pqm(        )L + (N  - 1)x.                                                                           (11)
                    N

         The first best solution will not be ex post incentive compatible if a liquidity event
occurs. When a liquidity event occurs, the marginal cost of providing liquidity is given
          L L
by r + m( N ) N , which must be less than the commtiment interest rate R. Ex post, the
commitment fee is sunk. Hence, ex post incentive compatibility requires that

                            L L
      R = r > r + m(         )                                                                                  (12)
                            N N

which is not true; thus, the credit line provides no liquidity insurance given the incentive
constraint.


4.4     The Syndicate Ex Post Incentive Constraint and Relationship Lending

We now extend our model to consider the syndication process in a repeated game setting.
As we will show, the repeated interaction of the syndicate with the firm can give rise to
  17 Implicit in searching for solutions where R = r is the idea that the firm desires intertemporal insurance that is

provided by the syndicate.



                                                         26
the appropriate incentives.
         Consider a stationary game (from Ray (2002), the self-enforcing contract must be
stationary) Let  represent the static per period profit of the syndicate. Then, ex post,
a syndicate member will provide the loan commitment if the ex post participation
constraint holds

                          L
      RL +         rL + m( )L.                                                                                  (13)
               1-         N

Equation (12) differs from Equation (13) by considering the discounted stream of profits
that a syndicate member earns accounting for the decision to participate or not. The
long run profit from being in the syndicate in the future (the relationship value) is
enough to make the ex post participation constraint bind. Implicit in this approach is
that a syndicate member who defects loses the long run profit and is not a member of
the syndicate going forward (the outside option is zero).18
         This leads to the following condition for a stationary game:

                      L      
      R  r + m(         )-     ;                                                                                (14)
                      N    1-L

essentially, the interest rate charged has to be weakly greater than the marginal cost
of financing minus the discounted long run profits earned by the syndicate. Thus, the
syndicate has to make a positive profit when there are participation constraints, which
implies the first best competitive equilibrium is not implementable. In the equilibrium,
                                                                                                         1-    L
we construct (where R = r), the syndicate will earn a profit per period equal to                          
                                                                                                            m( N );
the present value of these profits makes it incentive compatible for the syndicate to pro-
vide liquidity even when there are liquidity shocks to syndicates (events which occur over
the life of the relationship with probability pq ). Thus our construction has similarities to
Board (2011) in that delaying the rents to the syndicate over the life of the relationship
  18 There could harsher punishments, the lead could remove a non-lead who defects and does not provide liquidity from

all syndicates in which the non-lead participates with that lead.



                                                         27
allows the firm to receive liqudity not just the first time the liquidity shock hits both
firms and banks but for all such subsequent joint liquidity shocks.19


4.5        The Repeated Game

Now, we formally consider the repeated game and solve for the second best loan commit-
ment (Rt , Ct , Nt ) for all t. Following Ray (2002), the optimal self enforcing contract that
maximizes the firm payoffs must be stationary. Hence, we can write the firm's choice of
contract given the ex post constraint on the bank as given by the problem:


           min H (p(R - r)L) + G(C ),                                                                                (15)
          R,C,N


such that


          () -(R - r)L 1-(1
                         1-
                           -p)
                               -               
                                              1-
                                                             L
                                                    C - pqm( N                    L
                                                               )L - (N - 1)x  -m( N )L;                              (16)

          (µ)                                         -R  -r;

          ( )                                           -C  0.                                                       (17)


Proposition 2 The optimal syndicate size is given by

                  L L2  1-    L L2
          pqm (    ) 2+    m ( ) 2 = x;                                                                              (18)
                  N N         N N

     ^ > N  and as before N
                          ^ increases in L. If                          HR (0)       1-(1-p)         ^ > C  and
here N                                                                   GC
                                                                                 >      p
                                                                                                > 1, C
^ = r.
R

Thus dynamic incentive issues lead to a higher syndicate size and higher commitment
fees.20 We can show the following comparative statics:
  19 We note that if switching between syndicates is allowed and the syndicate is allowed to make up front transfers to

such a switching firm and if the switching cost s exceeds 1-
                                                           
                                                                 L
                                                              m( N ), no switching will occur. This is because if the firms
switches today, then the new syndicate will conjecture that it will also switch tomorrow and thus a new syndicate will
only pay the one period profit as rent which is insufficient to make to firm switch. As Board (2011) discusses in the
context of franchise relationships, such up front payments are not common in practice.
  20 If                                                       ^ > r and most likely C
          the condition in Proposition 2 does not hold we get R                     ^ > C.




                                                             28
                                                               ^+ > N
Proposition 3 Suppose either p+ > p or q + > q or  + <  , then N    ^ , the number
                                      ^+ > C
of syndicate members goes up. Further C    ^ , the total commitment fees go up.


Essentially, a higher probability of drawdowns or a higher probability of bank stress or
syndicates caring less for the future (for example, due to a crisis, banks are weaker and
care less for future profits) must lead to larger syndicates and a higher commitment
fee.21


4.6      Syndicate Shares and Syndicate Profits

In this subsection, we consider an extension where syndicate leads have greater ability
to provide liquidity in a stressed state. In particular, we assume the following liquidity
cost functions m(L) and n(L) for the lead and non-leads, respectively, are:


      m(0) = n(0) = 0;             m (0) = n (0) = 0
           m (t) < n (t);          m (t) < n (t) t > 0


Hence the lead bank has greater ability to provide insurance in a liquidity event than
non-leads. Nevertheless, diversification is valuable and lead banks will share the liquidity
risk with non-lead banks. Given a total loan size of L, let Lm be the lead share and Ln
be the total non-lead share. Also, let Cm be the commitment fee given the lead and Cn
be the total commitment fee given to the non-lead banks (and C = Cm + Cn be the total
commitment fee).
         When we allow for the incentive constraint that both the lead and non-leads
should have enough value from the relationship with the borrower for them not to walk
   21 We are assuming in the model that p is known and fixed. If we fix the syndicate size, we can allow for learning

about p from drawdowns since Equation (16) with R = r implies a commitment fee that is linear in p given fixed N ;
further Bayesian beliefs form a martingale. These two facts lead to a very similar dynamic model where p is replaced by
its expectation which changes over time. With an endogenous N, continuation utility is convex in p given learning and
need a more complicated set up. For the sake of brevity, we do not present these extensions.




                                                          29
away from the loan commitment when liquidity shocks hit, we obtain that

                    L
                RLm +   L  rLm + m(Lm )Lm ,                                           (19)
                  1 - L
        Ln      N L N L        Ln         Ln   Ln
     R      +               r      + m (     )     ,                                  (20)
       N - 1 1 - N L N - 1    N -1       N -1 N -1

where


        L = pLm (R - r) + Cm - pqm(Lm )Lm - (N - 1)x,                                 (21)
                                             Ln
     N L = pLn (R - r) + Cn - pqn(               )Ln .                                (22)
                                            N -1

             L                  N L
Let dL =    1-L
                  and dN L =   1-N L
                                     .   Then, the programming problem can be written as


        min H (p(R - r)L) + G(C );                                                    (23)
     R,C,N,Ln



such that


     (m ) - [1 + pdL ]Lm (R - r) - dL [Cm - pqm(Lm )Lm - (N - 1)x] - m(Lm )Lm  0;

                                                                                      (24)
                                                          Ln            Ln
     (n ) - [1 + pdN L ]Ln (R - r) - dN L Cn - pqn(           )Ln - n(      )Ln  0;
                                                         N -1          N -1
                                                                                      (25)

        (µ) - R  -r;

     (n ) - Cm  0;                                                                    (26)

     (n ) - Cn  0;                                                                    (27)


and we do not impose Ln  0 as the first order conditions will ensure this.
        The key comparative static that we focus on is what happens when  N L < 0
(the non-leads discount the future more). We can view this either as a failure by the
non-leads on an existing syndicate (as we will see they will want to reduce their liquidity

                                                 30
provision). Then for a given syndicate size, we are asking what is the lead's response
to a failure by non-leads. Alternatively, we can view this as designing a new incentive
compatible syndicate (we are allowing entry ).

Proposition 4 Suppose  L >  N L (and dL > dN L ) and R = r. Suppose n(t) = t ,  > 1
and in a liquidity event  N L < 0 (the non-leads discount the future more), then the
lead amount Lm (for fixed syndicate size) and lead share Lm /L (for a fixed loan size)
have to go up. Further if we assume that m(t) = t ,  >  > 1, given a fixed syndicate
size the commitment fee to the lead Cm and the total commitment fee Cm + Cn increases.
With a flexible syndicate size and with a fixed credit line size L, the condition Lm < Ln
(the share of the lead is less than or not much bigger than the total share of the non-
leads) suffices to obtain both an increase in Cm (the lead fee) and an increase in total
commitment fees Cm + Cn .

         Proposition 4 shows that if non-leads have a liquidity shock that reduces their
ability to credibly promise to provide liquidity in the future, the non-lead syndicate loan
amount in total must fall and the lead's syndicate credit line size and fractional share
must increase. If the lead share is not bigger than the total non-lead's share then for a
fixed syndicate size the total loan amount must contract though the lead partially offsets
the loss from the non-leads. If the loan size is fixed, then lead share and syndicate size
must increase and the total commitment fees must go up. We consider these implications
empirically next.


5     Supporting Evidence for our Model's Predictions

Our model generates several empirical implications. In this section we aim at testing
five of these implications. The first implication is that supply shocks (as in recessions)
increase credit lines' financing costs (Proposition 2).22 Secondly, Proposition 3 implies
  22 This insight is not unique to our model; Rampini and Viswanathan (2019a) also suggest a similar effect of a supply

shock.


                                                          31
that a higher probability of drawdowns leads to higher commitment fees. If syndicates
were to learn about the probability of drawdowns from past drawdowns (see footnote
21), then past drawdowns imply higher commitment fees. Further, our model has pre-
dictions on the endogenous number of syndicate members and the allocation of shares
across syndicate members. Specifically, it predicts that larger credit lines should have
larger syndicates (Proposition 2). Additionaly, it predicts that lead banks should re-
tain a larger share of the credit lines they extend during crises periods (Proposition 4).23
Lastly, our model suggests that when syndicate member failure occurs, the lead bank will
offset the decrease in the syndicate member credit amount partially but not completely
(Proposition 4).


5.1     Pricing of Credit Lines over the Business Cycle

The first empirical implication of our model that we test is that the price banks charge
to grant liquidity through credit lines increases in response to supply shocks akin to
those we observe in recessions. The pricing structure of a credit line usually includes
a commitment fee and a credit spread. The commitment fee compensates the bank for
the liquidity risk it incurs by guaranteeing the firm access to funding at its discretion
over the life of the credit line and up to the total commitment amount. In contrast,
the credit spread compensates the bank for the credit risk it incurs when the borrower
draws down on its credit line.
         Given that borrowers' risk of failure and, as we saw in our investigation of draw-
down rates, their liquidity needs tend to increase in downturns we would expect both
commitment fees and credit spreads to increase in recessions. However, once we account
for the drivers credit risk and liquidity risk as well as banks' costs of hedging these risks,
our model suggests that supply shocks similar to recessions should have a larger impact
  23 We do not have data to compare the cost of a credit line with equivalent private lending. Schwert (2020) compares

bank loans with equivalent public debt and argues that for non-investment grade firms the average premium over public
debt is 1.4% to 1.7% or about half of the all-in-drawn spread.



                                                         32
on credit lines' commitment fees than on their credit spreads (Proposition 2).
         To test this hypothesis, we rely on Dealscan, the most comprehensive data source
on syndicated loan prices, which reports information on undrawn fees and all-in-drawn
spreads. The undrawn fee reflects the commitment fee, but it also includes other fees
borrowers pay when they take out credit lines.24 Similarly, the all-in-drawn spread,
which is defined over Libor and equals the annual cost to a borrower for drawn funds,
accounts for the credit spread but it also reflects other fees borrowers pay when they
draw down their credit lines.
         As documented in Figure 8, both undrawn fees and credit spreads tend to go up
during recessions. This is particularly evident in the 2008/09 crisis. While both prices
appear to move in tandem it is unclear from that figure their increases in recessions are
comparable. To investigate this question we start by comparing their changes using a
univariate analysis. The results of this analysis are reported in Table 7. The top panel
reports the results for undrawn fees while the bottom panel reports the results for all-in-
drawn spreads. In both panels Columns (1) and (4) report results of a pooled regression,
while Columns (2) and (5) report the results estimate with borrower-fixed effects, and
Columns (3) and (6) report results estimated with bank-borrower fixed effects.
         According to the left-hand side columns in the top panel, on average undrawn
fees increase by 6 bps during recessions, which corresponds to 21% of the mean undrawn
fee (28 bps). The bottom panel shows that all-in-drawn spreads increase by 31-37 bps
during recessions, which corresponds to 20-24% of the sample mean (156 bps).
         Looking at the right-hand models in both panels we see that, and consistent with
Figure 8, the biggest impacts occured during the 2008/09 crisis. During this recession,
undrawn fees increased by 13-15 bps, which corresponds to 46-54% of the sample mean.
All-in-drawn spreads, in turn, went up by 74-96 bps, which corresponds to 47-62% of
the sample mean. As in the case of the average effects of recessions, we see that during
  24 Dealscan uses the wording all-in-undrawn spread when referring to the price firms pay on undrawn commitments, but

in reality that price is not a spread because the fees are not markups over market interest rates.


                                                         33
the 2008/09 recession the rise in undrawn fees is of "similar" magnitude to the rise in
all-in-drawn spreads.
         Of course these are based on univariate comparisons and do not account for the
drivers of these prices. For that reason, we investigate banks' pricing of credit lines over
the business cycle using the following pricing model:


      P RICEf,l,b,t = c + RECESSIONt + Xf,t-1 + Yl,t + Zb,t-1 +                                f,l,b,t ,     (28)


where P RICEf,l,b,t is either the undrawn fee or the all-in-drawn spread on credit line l
of firm f from bank b at issue date t. The key variable of interest in that specification
is RECESSION, a dummy variable equal to 1 for the years that coincide with the
three NBER recessions during our sample period. We also break down this dummy
variable into three separate dummy variables, one for each of the three NBER recessions
(1990/91, 2001, and 2008/09).25
         We investigate the impact of recessions on banks' pricing of credit lines controlling
for borrower-, loan- and arranger-specific factors, X, Y, and Z, respectively. These sets
of controls are similar to those we used in our investigation of drawdown rates in Section
3.2, except for some differences resulting from differences between the SNC dataset
which we used in that investigation and Dealscan which we use to investigate credit
lines' prices. For example, Dealscan contains information on loan covenants and so we
include here in our set of controls dummy variables to distinguish whether the borrower
pledged collateral and whether it was subject to dividend restrictions. In addition, and
following the relationship lending literature, we distinguish whether the borrower has a
relationship with that bank by including a dummy variable equal to one if it also took
the previous loan from that bank. As in our univariate analysis, we estimate our pricing
model using a pooled regression, with borrower fixed effects, and with bank-borrower
 25 Given we have information on the origination date of each credit date, in this analysis we use information from

NBER's peak and trough dates to identify the begining and the end of each recession.



                                                        34
fixed effects.
       The results of this investigation, reported in Table 8, depict a similar picture
to the results of our univariate analysis but with somewhat smaller magnitudes. On
average, during recessions undrawn fees go up by 2 to 3 bps, which corresponds to 7-11%
of the sample mean. All-in-drawn spreads, in turn, increase by 6 bps, which corresponds
to 4% of the sample mean. These results are driven by the 2008/09 recession. During
this recession, undrawn fees went up by 6 bps (21% of the mean) while all-in-drawn
spreads increased by 15 to 25 bps (10 to 16% of the mean).
       In total, our pricing results suggest that the effect of bank supply shocks are
quite large in the 2008-2009 recession, consistent with Proposition 2. Further, and also
consistent with Proposition 2, our results show that during recessions the increase in
undrawn fees is higher than the increase in all-in-drawn spreads. The fact that this
difference persists when we account for bank-borrower fixed effects, i.e. by comparing
the pricing of credit lines from banks to the same borrowers in and out of recessions,
adds impoortant support to that proposition.


5.2   Drawdowns and the Pricing of Credit Lines

The second implication that we test is whether borrowers which utilize their credit lines
extensively pay higher commitment fees on their credit lines. We merge Dealscan, our
source of undrawn fees, with SNC, our source of information on borrowers' drawdown
rates, to investigate this hypothesis. Figure 9 plots the undrawn fees on new credit lines
against their borrowers' one-year lagged drawdown rates. Clearly, firms that drawdown
more in the past pay higher undrawn fees on their new credit lines. While at a 10%
past drawdown rate the undrawn fees are around 30 basis points, at the a 90% past
drawdown rate the undrawn fees are around 40 basis points. This is consistent with
Proposition 3; to the extent that past drawdowns is in line with a higher probability of
future drawdowns.


                                           35
       To further test that proposition, we run a regression of the undrawn fees on new
credit lines against the borrower's drawdowns in its oustanding credit line in the prior
year. In another specification, we consider the drawdown rate two periods ago and the
change in the drawdown rate from two periods ago to one period ago. This is ensure that
we are not only capturing level effects. In both specifications, we control for the sets of
borrower-, loan- and arranger-specific factors, X, Y, and Z, respectively, that we use in
the previous section to investigate loan prices over the business cycle. Table 9 shows the
results of this investigation. Columns (1)-(3) report results for the one-period lagged
drawdown rates while Column (5)-(6) report results for the two-year lagged drawdown
rates. Columns (1) and (4) show the results of a pooled analysis, while Columns (2) and
(5) account for bank fixed effects. Columns (3) and (6) in turn show the results when
we account for bank-firm fixed effects.
       As we can see from Columns (1)-(3), borrowers with higher past (one year lagged)
drawdown rates pay higher undrawn fees on their new credit lines. This association is
robust. Note that the lagged drawdown rate is significant at a 1% even with bank-
firm fixed effects (Column 3). According to that model, a one percent change in the
drawdown rate leads to 4 basis point change in the fees; clearly the lagged drawdown
rate matters. As Columns (4)-(6) show, this is not just a level effect: when we control
for the drawdown rate two years ago, we see that borrowers who increase their credit
line utilization from period -2 to period -1 pay higher undrawn fees on new credit lines
they take out in period 0. To the extent that past drawdowns predict the probability of
future drawdowns, this evidence is consistent with the insight from Proposition 3 that
credit lines with a higher probability of drawdown carry carry higher commitment fees.


5.3   Number of Investors in Credit Line Syndicates

A key prediction of our model is that larger credit lines should have larger syndicates.
We use the SNC database that we described in Section 2 to investigate this hypothesis


                                            36
because it allows us to control for the arranger's loan share, arguably an important
factor in the number of investors the lead bank will be able to attract to the syndicate.
Information on the lead bank's loan share is missing for the vast majority of the credits
in Dealscan.
       Figure 10 shows the scatter plot of the log of the number of investors in the
syndicate and the log of the loan amount at origination. Based on the fitted line, there
is a distinct positive correlation between the size of the syndicate and the size of the
loan. A one-percent increase in the size of the loan translates into a 0.38 percent increase
in the number of investors in the loan syndicate.
       Of course that figure does not account for many other factors that likely explain
the size of the syndicate for a credit line. To account for these factors, we estimate the
following model:


     LIN V EST ORSf,l,b,t = c + LAM OU N Tf -t,b,t + Xf,t-1 + Yl,t

                           + Zb,t-1 + Tt +       f,l,b,t                               (29)


where LIN V EST ORS is the log of the number of syndicate participants at the time of
the credit line origination. Our key variable of interest is LAM OU N T, the log of the
loan amount. We investigate the relationship between these variables controlling for sets
of borrower-, loan-, bank-specific factors, X, Y and Z, respectively, that we used in our
study of drawdown rates in Section 3.2. In addition, we include time fixed effects, T.
       The results of this investigation are reported in Table 10. Column 1 reports
the results of a pooled analysis while Column 2 adds bank fixed effects. Colum 3 in
turn uses bank-firm fixed effects. Columns 4 through 6 repeat this analysis, but control
additionally for the lead bank's loan share, LEADSH.
       As we can see from the six models, LAM OU N T is positive and highly statistically
significant. Controlling for the lead bank's loan share reduces the size of the coefficient


                                            37
on LAM OU N T, but it does not alter its statistical significance. Interestingly, contrary
to the idea that retaining a larger share of the loan helps the lead bank attract more
investors to the syndicate, we find a negative relationship between the LIN V EST ORS
and LEADSH. Of course, it is possible this is driven by the endogeneity of LEADSH.
For example, arrangers may retain larger loan shares in riskier loans which also tend
to have fewer investors in the syndicate. As for the economic magnitude, we see that
a one-percent increase in the size of the loan leads to an increase in the number of
investors that varies between 0.19% (Column 6) and 0.37% (Columns 1 and 2).26 These
findings support to the result of Proposition 2 that larger credit lines should have larger
syndicates because this increases the insurance capacity of the credit line.


5.4     Lead Bank's Retained Loan Share

Another specific prediction of our model pertains to the allocation of syndicate shares.
In particular, a key insight from our theory of loan syndicates is that lead banks retain
a larger share of the credit lines they arrange during crises periods (Proposition 4). As
with the tests in Section (5.3) we test this hypothesis using data from the SNC database
because it reports complete information syndicate participants' loan shares, including
the lead bank.
          Figure 11 plots the average loan share the lead bank retains at the time of orig-
ination for credit lines over the period 1988-2013. It shows a distinct v-shape over our
sample period. Lead banks use to retain about 33% of the credit lines they originated
in the late 1980s. Starting in 1989, this ratio began to decline reaching its minimum of
18% by 1999. Since then this ratio has been trending up reaching 29% at the height of
the 2008/09 crisis, and going further up to 31% by 2012.
          According to Figure 11, there does not seem to exist an increase in the lead bank's
  26 We have done a similar analysis using data from Dealscan but without controlling for the lead bank's loan share. The

results, which we report in the Internet Appendix Table A.2, confirm a strong positive correlation between the number
of investors and the size of the loan with a higher economic effect ­ the estimated elasticity varies between 0.20 and 0.31.



                                                            38
loan share for the credit lines originated in the first two recessions during our sample
period. However, it is clear that lead banks kept a larger share of the credit lines they
originated during the 2008/09 crisis. We investigate the insight from our theory on lead
banks' credit line shares formally using the following model:


       LEADSHf,l,b,t = c + RECESSIONt + Xf,t-1 + Yl,t + Zb,t-1 +                                           f,l,b,t ,    (30)


where LEADSH, is the lead bank's loan share at the time of the credit line origination.
As in our previous tests, we control for sets of loan-, borrower- and arranger-specific
factors, which we believe could influence the lead banks' loan investment decision. The
results of this investigation are reported in Table 11. Columns 1 through 3 use a single
dummy variable to identify recessions while Columns 4 through 6 use separate dummy
variables for each recession during our sample period. Columns 1 and 4 report the results
of a pooled analysis while Columns 2 and 5 report the results estimated with bank fixed
effects. Finally, models 3 and 6 report the results estimated with bank-firm fixed effects.
          Looking at the first three columns we see that our RECESSION dummy vari-
able is positive, but it is not statistically significant. Turning to the next set of columns,
however, we see that indeed lead banks retained a larger share of the credit lines they
originated during the 1990/91 and the 2008/09 recessions. These results hold both in
our pooled model and when we use bank fixed effects, but not in the most restrictive
specification estimated with bank-firm fixed effects. The latter was to be expected since
only a reduced number of listed firms take out multiple credit lines from the same bank
during the sample period.27 According to Column 5, lead banks on average increased
their loan share by five and two percentage points on the credit lines they originated
during the 1990/91 and 2008/09 recessions, respectively, when compared to their loan
shares on the credit lines they originated during good times. These results add support
  27 By design we opted for not including in our sample of new credit lines, renegotiations of existing credit lines. Doing so

increases our sample size by about 17%, but it does not affect our key findings, see Table IA.3 in the Internet Appendix.



                                                             39
to the key insight from our model (see Proposition 4) that lead shares should increase
after recessions that result in changes in the long run survivability of syndicate members
and the hence the ability of syndicate members to provide liquidity insurance.


5.5     Liquidity Impact of a Syndicate Member Failure

Perhaps the biggest risk to the liquidity insurance provided by credit lines is the risk of
failure of a syndicate member. This is because in a credit line legal arrangement, each
syndicate member commits only to its loan investment. As a result, the failure of a
syndicate member will result in a reduction of the credit line and limits the borrower's
drawdown ability, unless other banks step in and take on the investment of the failed
bank. The theory we present (Proposition 4) suggests that reductions in non-lead's
shares will only be partially offset by the lead bank. We test this empirical implication
below using the lead bank response to the failure of a syndicate member.
         We capitalize on the failure of 91 non-lead banks in our loan syndicates; these
banks were present in 656 credit lines at the time of their failure.28 Figure 12 plots the
time series of those bank failures (left graph) and the number of credit lines in which they
were present in the year they failed (right graph). As one would expect, bank failures
cluster around recessions, in particular the recession of 1998/99 and that of 2008/09.
         Figure 13, left graph, plots for the 522 credit lines in which a syndicate member
bank fails, the percentage of them that experience a decline in the years around the
failure year.29 As we can see from that graph, while in the year before the failure of the
syndicate member, 15% of the credit lines experience a decline in their size, in the year
of failure that percentage goes up to 32%. Part of this increase is likely attributable
to the bank failure, but it may also be driven by the increase in the incidence of credit
  28 We restrict this exercise to bank failures (including Bear Stern and Lehman Brothers) because we do not have a

comprehensive database on nonbank failures. However, as noted above credit line syndicates are dominated by banks.
  29 We do not use in these graphs all of the 656 credit lines that experience a syndicate member failure because we drop

those that were fully drawndown the year before the failure as well as those that we do not observe the year before the
failure. We need the latter information to ascertain if there is a reduction in the credit line at the time of the failure.



                                                            40
line cuts during recessions. Regardless of the rationale for that increase, 68% of the
credit lines exposed to bank failures do not experience a cut in the year of failure. That
percentage drops to 50% if we account for cuts in the year after the failure, which still
leaves half of the credit lines unaffected by the failure.
       This evidence suggests that credit lines are partially exposed to the risk of a
syndicate member failure. This is partly due to the lead banks' response to the failure
because they often increase their loan investments following the failure of a syndicate
member bank (Figure 13, right graph). For example, while in the year before the failure,
lead banks increase their investments in 16% of the credit lines, that percentage goes up
to 25% in the year of failure. Further, lead banks' additional loan investments reduce
the impact of the failure on the credit line. This is apparent in Figure 14, that plots
the size of the credit line cut against the size of the investment the failed bank had in
the credit line. While the size of the credit line cut is positively correlated with the
investment the failed bank had in the credit line, the cut is always smaller when the
lead bank increases its loan investment. Thus the lead arrangers' response does appear
to reduce borrowers' liquidity risk associated with the failure of a syndicate member.
       We take a closer look at these effects using the following model:


CU Tl,b,t = c + LLEADUl,b,t + i         i=1   F AILl,b,t-i + i   i=1   F AILl,b,t-i ×LLEADUl,b,t-i

                                    +Yl,t-1 + Zb,t-1 + Tt +        l,b,t ,                      (31)


where CU T is a dummy variable equal to one if the size of the credit line declines over
the year t. In another specification we replace CU T with LCU T, the log of one plus the
dollar amount reduction in the size of the credit line over the year t. F AIL is a set of
dummy variables to isolate the years around the failure of the syndicate member. We use
the year before the member failure as the control group. LLEADU is the log of one plus
the additional dollar amount investment the lead bank makes on the credit line over the
year. We estimate these models controlling for the sets of loan- and bank-specific factors

                                               41
that we use in Section in Section 3.2 as well as year dummy variables. Additionally, we
control for the share of the credit line that used to be owned by the failed bank(s) and
the share owned by the lead bank as well as the portion of the credit line that was still
undrawn at the time of the failure. We do not use firm controls in this exercise because
it reduces our sample significantly. However, in addition to reporting the results of a
pooled analysis, we also estimate that model with loan fixed effects and with loan- and
bank-fixed effects.
       Table 12 reports the results of this investigation. Columns (1) through (3) report
the results for the likelihood that the credit line experiences a cut over the year. Columns
(4) through (6), in turn, report the results for the log of one plus the credit line cut.
An examination of the results reveals two important findings. First, in the year of the
failure the borrower is more likely to experience a reduction in the size of its credit line
and to endure a larger reduction compared to the prior year (the control group). Note
that F AILU RE 0, the dummy variable which isolates the year of failure, is positive and
statistically significant across all models. Consistent with these effects being driven by
the failure, we do not find evidence of reductions in the size of the credit line in the year
after the failure (F AILU RE 1 is never statistically different from 0).
       Second, lead banks offer some, but only partial, insurance against that risk of
failure of a syndicate member bank. Note that LLEADU, the log of one plus the
additional investment the lead arranger makes on the credit line over the year, and
F AILU RE 0×LLEADU are both negative and statistically significant across all of our
models. However, on close inspection we see that F AILU RE 0 + F AILU RE 0×LLEADU
is always positive when computed at the mean of LLEADU.
       In other words, the failure of a syndicate member bank increases both the odds
borrowers will experience a reduction in their credit lines and face larger reductions on
their credit lines. However, lead banks often (but not always) respond by increasing
their investments in credit lines, thereby reducing the adverse effect of the failure of


                                             42
syndicate member banks. This is consistent with Proposition 4 that suggests that leads
will only partially offset the decline in credit triggered by non-leads' reduction in loan
investments.



6   Conclusion

In this paper, we argue that credit lines represent commitments by syndicates and pro-
vide substantial liquidity insurance to borrowers. Empirically, we show that borrowers
are able to increase significantly their draw downs during recessions, arguably when they
need liquidity the most. While credit lines do experience cuts, these cuts tend to lag
surges in drawdowns and occur at the end of recessions. Further, syndicates tend to
target relatively less used credit lines and leave some slack for borrowers to draw down.
Cuts can be bank or borrower driven, but in the case of internal bank rating downgrades
we know that they are the result of a bank action. Importantly, we find that internal
bank rating downgrades tend to lag a surge in borrowers' drawdown activity, suggesting
that borrowers are able to obtain substantial credit before credit line cuts.
       Building on that evidence, we provide a theory where supply shocks make liquid-
ity provision difficult ex post but the long run value of the relationship provides benefits
to syndicates supporting the credibility of credit line provision. Our theory predicts
that credit lines with higher expected drawdown rates carry higher commitment fees,
and larger credit lines have larger syndicates. It also predicts that both commitment
fees and lead bank's retained loan shares are higher for credit lines issued during reces-
sions. Last, reductions in non-lead's loan shares will only be partially offset by the lead
bank and thereby affect the liquidity insurance role of credit lines. We find support for
these predictions in the data. The evidence is particularly strong during the 2008-09
recession which had a large negative impact on the banking industry. In line with the
last prediction of our theory, when a syndicate member bank fails we find that this does


                                            43
not always translate into a commensurate decline in the size of the credit line because
the lead bank often steps in and increases its loan investment.
       Taken together, our empirical evidence shows that credit lines are commitments
and that firms receive substantial liquidity from credit lines, particularly during re-
cessions when they need it the most. While bank syndicates do suffer supply shocks,
syndicate leads who value their credit relationship with borrowers often step in to offset
the lost credit line share. Overall, our results are supportive of Holmstrom and Tirole
(1997) and Rampini and Viswanathan (2019b) insight that the credibility of credit lines
is a critical aspect of liquidity provision. Our paper thus provides evidence supporting
an ex ante view of credit lines ­ they are commitments that provide substantial liquidity,
albeit imperfect.




                                           44
                                   Figure 1: Credit line drawdowns during Covid-19 outbreak




                                                           1
                                                           .8
                                                     Drawdown Rate
                                                       .4  .2
                                                           0  .6
                                                                     -20               -10                 0              10                20
                                                                                       Days since Earlier of Downgrade/Watchlist

                                                                                       Prior Values                 Fitted Prior Values
                                                                                       Post Values                  Fitted Post Values



This figure plots drawdowns rates between March 12 and April 9, 2020 for corporations that experienced a credit rating
downgrade or were put on a watch list by SP or Moody's' Source: LCD



                       Figure 2: New credit lines and term loans & and banks' funding over time

                              Annual volume of new credits (Dealscan)                                          1
                                                                                                                   Shares of term loans and credit lines funded by banks (SNC)
              1000
              800




                                                                                                               .8
                 600
           Billions




                                                                                                           Share
        400




                                                                                                               .6
              200




                                                                                                               .4
              0




                       1988      1993     1998                  2003            2008          2013                  1988           1993     1998          2003            2008   2013
                                                 Year                                                                                              Year

                                        Term loans                         Credit lines                                                   Term loans             Credit lines



Left figure plots the time series of annual volumes of credit lines and term loans taken out by nonfinancial corporations.
Source: Dealscan. Right figure plots the time series of shares of credit lines and term loans taken out by nonfinancial
corporations that are funded by banks. Source: SNC.




                                                                                                      45
                                   Figure 3: Investor turnover in term loans and credit lines over time

                                     Percent of new investors in the syndicate (SNC)                                                                           Percent of new investors that are nonbanks (SNC)


                  .5




                                                                                                                                       .5
                  .4




                                                                                                                                       .4
          Mean percentage




                                                                                                                               Mean percentage
                      .3




                                                                                                                                           .3
           .2




                                                                                                                                .2
                  .1




                                                                                                                                       .1
                  0




                                                                                                                                       0
                            1988      1993                     1998              2003                 2008              2013                     1988           1993              1998              2003                 2008   2013
                                                                          Year                                                                                                               Year

                                                             Term loans               Credit lines                                                                              Term loans               Credit lines




Left figure plots the mean annual percentage of new syndicate investors year over year. Right figure plots the mean
percentage of new investors that are nonbanks. Source: SNC.


                                       Figure 4: Drawdowns on credit lines over the business cycle

                                                                 Drawdown rate                                                                                    Percentage of fully drawndown credit lines
                  .5




                                                                                                                                       .5
                  .4




                                                                                                                                       .4
                  .3




                                                                                                                                         .3
                                                                                                                                Percentage
          Rate
                  .2




                                                                                                                               .2
                  .1




                                                                                                                                       .1
                  0




                                                                                                                                       0




                            1988      1993                     1998              2003                 2008              2013                     1988           1993              1998              2003                 2008   2013
                                                                          Year                                                                                                               Year

                                                     All credit lines            Credit lines without cuts                                                              All credit lines            Credit lines without cuts




These figures plot the time series of the average annual drawdown rate and percentage of credit lines fully drawdown for
all credit lines and for those whose commitment size does not change from one year to the next. Source: SNC


                                    Figure 5: Drawdowns and credit line cuts over the business cycle
                                             .5
                                             .4
                                        Percentage
                                        .2   .1
                                             0  .3




                                                     1988                        1993                            1998                                   2003                      2008                         2013
                                                                                                                               Year

                                                                                                             Drawdown rate                              Percentage of cuts



This figure plots the time series of the average annual drawdown rate and percentage of credit lines that experience a
reduction in their size from one year to the next. Source: SNC



                                                                                                                          46
       Figure 6: Undrawn rates after the credit line cut by deciles of lagged undrawn rates

                                                          All credit lines with a cut                                                                  Restricting to credit lines with an increase in drawdowns



                 1




                                                                                                                                         1
                 .9




                                                                                                                                         .9
                 .8




                                                                                                                                         .8
                 .7




                                                                                                                                         .7
                 .6




                                                                                                                                         .6
            After




                                                                                                                                     After
             .5




                                                                                                                                      .5
                 .4




                                                                                                                                         .4
                 .3




                                                                                                                                         .3
                 .2




                                                                                                                                         .2
                 .1




                                                                                                                                         .1
                 0




                                                                                                                                         0
                        0      .1         .2        .3          .4       .5            .6       .7          .8       .9     1                   0       .1        .2       .3          .4       .5            .6       .7          .8       .9     1
                                                                       Before                                                                                                                 Before




Left figure plots undrawn rates after credit lines experience a cut by deciles of undrawn rates prior to the cut. Right
figure restricts the sample to credit lines that experience both a cut and an increase in the drawdown on the same year.
Undrawn rates computed off the size of the credit line prior to the cut. Source: SNC

                                                 Figure 7: Drawdowns around downgrades and upgrades

                                                 Drawdown rates around downgrades                                                                                        Drawdown rates around upgrades
               1




                                                                                                                                      1
               .9




                                                                                                                                      .9
               .8




                                                                                                                                      .8
               .7




                                                                                                                                      .7
                  .6




                                                                                                                                         .6
          DD rate




                                                                                                                                 DD rate
            .5




                                                                                                                                   .5
               .4




                                                                                                                                      .4
               .3




                                                                                                                                      .3
               .2




                                                                                                                                      .2
               .1




                                                                                                                                      .1
               0




                                                                                                                                      0




                       -4            -3                  -2              -1                 0                    1          2                  -4            -3                 -2              -1                 0                    1          2
                                                                Years around DG (0)                                                                                                    Years around UG (0)




These figures plot the drawdown rates in credit lines that experience a downgrade (left figure) or an upgrade (right figure).
Rating change occurs at year 0. Downgrades (upgrades) are determined by the lead bank and are defined as any rating
change that are indicative of a deterioration (improvement) in the rating of the borrower. Source: SNC

                                    Figure 8: Fees and spreads on credit lines over the business cycle

                                                   All-in-undrawn fees (Delascan)                                                                                        All-in-drawn spreads (Dealscan)
               400




                                                                                                                                      400
               350




                                                                                                                                      350
               300




                                                                                                                                      300
               250




                                                                                                                                         250
                                                                                                                                 Spreads
          Fee
          200




                                                                                                                                   200
               150




                                                                                                                                      150
               100




                                                                                                                                      100
               50




                                                                                                                                      50
               0




                                                                                                                                      0




                        1988              1993                1998              2003                 2008            2013                       1988              1993               1998              2003                 2008            2013
                                                                       Year                                                                                                                   Year




Left graph plots the annual average of undrawn fees on new credit lines over time. Right graph plots the annual average
of all-in-drawn spreads over Libor on new credit lines over time. Source: Dealscan


                                                                                                                                47
                                Figure 9: Past drawdowns and undrawn fees

                                                                     Fees by borrower drawdowns' twentiles




                                             45
                                             40 35
                                    Undrawn fee
                                        30   25
                                             20
                                             15

                                                          0     .1     .2        .3    .4    .5     .6         .7         .8    .9    1
                                                                                        Drawdown rate


This figure plots undrawn fees against past drawdowns by the firm. Source: SNC, Dealscan




                            Figure 10: Number of investors and credit line size
                                             6       4
                                    Log of investors
                                           2 0
                                             -2




                                                          0                  5                10                    15                20
                                                                                       Log of credit line

                                                                        Log of investors                Log of credit line



This figure plots the log of the number of investors and the credit line size at origination. Source: SNC




                Figure 11: Lead bank loan share at origination over the business cycle
                                             .5
                                             .4
                                             .3
                                    Percentage
                                    .2       .1
                                             0




                                                         1988         1993            1998           2003                2008        2013
                                                                                             Year


This figure plots the average arranger loan share at loan origination. Source: SNC



                                                                                         48
                                     Figure 12: Credit lines that experience a syndicate-member failure

                                                  Time series of the number bank failures                                                                         Time series of the number credits with bank failures



                 100




                                                                                                                                         400
                 90
                 80




                                                                                                                                         300
                 70
                 60
          Number




                                                                                                                                  Number
                                                                                                                                   200
            50   40
                 30




                                                                                                                                         100
                 20
                 10
                 0




                                                                                                                                         0
                           1987   1989    1991   1993   1995   1997   1999 2001        2003   2005   2007   2009    2011   2013                    1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997   1999 2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011   2013
                                                                         Year                                                                                                                    Year




Left figure plots the time series of syndicate member failures (including Bear Sterns and Lehman Brothers). Source:
FDIC Right figure plots the number of credit lines these banks were present at in the year they failed. Source: SNC

                            Figure 13: Incidence of cuts on credit lines when a syndicate-member fails

                                         % of credit lines with a size reduction when a bank fails                                                   % of credit lines the lead bank increases investment when a bank fails
                 .4




                                                                                                                                         .4
                 .35




                                                                                                                                         .35
                 .3




                                                                                                                                         .3
                     .25




                                                                                                                                             .25
          Percentage




                                                                                                                                  Percentage
              .2




                                                                                                                                      .2
                 .15




                                                                                                                                         .15
                 .1




                                                                                                                                         .1
                 .05




                                                                                                                                         .05
                 0




                                                                                                                                         0




                           -2                      -1                    0                           1                      2                      -2                     -1                       0                    1                     2
                                                                        Year                                                                                                                      Year




Left figure plots for the credit lines with the failure of a syndicate member bank, the percentage of them that experience
a reduction in size around the year of failure (year 0). Right figure plots that same set of credit lines, the percentage of
them that experience an increase in the lead arranger loan investment around the year of the syndicate member failure
(year 0). Source: SNC

                                                    Figure 14: Credit line cuts when syndicate members fail
                                                                             15
                                                                             13
                                                                             11   9
                                                                         Log of cut
                                                                        5    7
                                                                             3
                                                                             1
                                                                             -1




                                                                                      -1        1           3           5       7          9                        11           13          15
                                                                                                                   Log of exposure to failed bank

                                                                                                 Log of cut                                                       Lead increases invest
                                                                                                 Lead does not increase invest



This graph plots the log of one plus the cut in credit lines on the year of the syndicate-member failure against the log of
the loan investment that member bank held in the year prior to its failure. Fitted lines are for the credit line cuts when
the lead bank increases and does not increase its loan investment in the year of failure, respectively. Source: SNC


                                                                                                                                49
    Table 1 Summary statistics for the credit lines in SNCa
    Variables                 N       Mean      SD      10th        50th      90th     Variables      0%      1%
    DRAWDOWN RATE          109,592     0.38     0.37     0.00        0.30      1.00    FULLY DRAWN   87.43   12.57
    UNDRAWN RATE           109,592     0.62     0.37     0.01        0.70      1.00    LOANIG        11.58   88.42
    AMOUNT($M)             109,592    222.9    474.3     20.0        90.0     500.0    CPBCKUP       96.19    3.81
    MATURITYLEFT           109,592        3     2.08        1           3         6    WORKCAP       52.03   47.97
    LEADSH                 108,573     0.25     0.19     0.00        0.22      0.50    M&A           91.78    8.22
    LENDERS                109,592        9    12.68        3           6        19    RECAP         98.36    1.64
                                                                                       PROJFIN       97.33    2.67
                                                                                       CAPEXP        98.07    1.93
                                                                                       DEBT REPAY    98.30    1.70

    ASSETSbk($B)            95,530   527.44   679.53    28.15      186.93   1,822.07
    CAPITALbk               95,530     0.08     0.02     0.05        0.08       0.11
    ROAbk                   95,036    0.003    0.002     0.00       0.004       0.01
    LIQUITYbk               95,275     0.07     0.04     0.03        0.06       0.12
    DEPOSITSbk              94,431     0.58     0.15     0.40        0.60       0.75

    SALES($B)               31,727     5.93    20.32      0.20       1.36     12.51    AAA           99.85    0.15
    LEVERAGE                31,380     0.33     0.19      0.09       0.31      0.57    AA            99.40    0.60
    TANGIBLES               32,363     0.68     0.42      0.09       0.70      0.99    A             96.14    3.86
    PROFMARGIN              31,686     0.04     0.13     -0.05       0.04      0.15    BBB           93.53    6.47
    LINTCOV                 26,294     2.01     0.92      1.04       1.90      3.16    BB            95.48    4.52
    LIQUIDITY               32,344     0.06     0.09    0.004        0.03      0.17    B             97.61    2.39
    STOCKRET                35,617   0.0003    0.002   -0.002      0.0002     0.002    CCC           99.83    0.17
    STOCKVOL                35,613    0.001    0.002   0.0001       0.001     0.002
a This table reports summary statistics for the credit lines in SNC data that we use in our paper. See Appendix B for
the definitions of the variables.




                                                              50
            Table 2 Borrowers' drawdown on credit lines over the business cyclea
            Panel A: Drawdown rates: univariate analysis
            Variables               1            2                  3          4           5            6
            RECESSION             0.06***      0.06***            0.04***
                                    (5.13)       (8.83)             (6.26)
            RECESSION9091                                                    0.08***     0.07***      0.04***
                                                                               (6.74)      (6.53)       (5.13)
            RECESSION01                                                         0.03*    0.04***      0.02***
                                                                               (1.74)      (3.75)       (3.96)
            RECESSION0809                                                    0.06***     0.07***      0.05***
                                                                               (2.91)      (5.61)       (3.70)
            constant              0.37***       0.37***     0.37***          0.37***     0.37***      0.37***
                                   (74.60)     (131.59)    (242.81)          (74.60)    (131.55)     (245.26)
            Observations           112086        112086      112086           112086      112086       112086
            R-squared                0.004         0.076       0.637            0.004       0.077        0.637
            Bank FE                    NO           YES          NO               NO         YES           NO
            Bank-Firm FE               NO            NO         YES               NO          NO          YES
            Panel B: Drawdown rates: multivariate analysis
            Variables                1            2           3                4           5            6
            RECESSION             0.03***       0.03***     0.03***
                                    (3.34)        (3.67)      (3.74)
            RECESSION9091                                                        0.02     0.02**          0.02
                                                                               (1.34)      (2.02)       (1.05)
            RECESSION01                                                         -0.00       -0.00         0.00
                                                                              (-0.10)     (-0.38)       (0.24)
            RECESSION0809                                                    0.05***     0.05***      0.05***
                                                                               (4.40)      (4.01)       (4.52)
            constant               0.76***       0.44***          0.51***    0.79***     0.51***      0.59***
                                   (11.82)         (4.28)           (3.24)   (12.19)       (4.97)       (3.84)
            Observations             24293         24293            24293      24293       24293        24293
            R-squared                 0.221         0.246            0.620      0.221       0.246        0.621
            Bank FE                     NO           YES               NO         NO         YES           NO
            Bank-Firm FE                NO            NO              YES         NO          NO          YES
            Panel C: Fully drawdown credit lines
            Variables                1             2                3          4           5            6
            RECESSION               0.01**        0.01**          0.01***
                                     (2.07)        (2.44)           (2.98)
            RECESSION9091                                                     0.03**         0.02         0.01
                                                                               (2.12)      (1.48)       (0.41)
            RECESSION01                                                         -0.00        0.00         0.00
                                                                              (-0.45)      (0.44)       (0.39)
            RECESSION0809                                                       0.01*     0.01**      0.02***
                                                                               (1.67)      (2.19)       (4.63)
            constant                 0.64***      0.36***         0.44***    0.64***     0.37***      0.48***
                                       (9.88)       (4.46)          (3.68)     (9.81)      (4.47)       (4.03)
            Observations               24293        24293           24293      24293       24293        24293
            R-squared                   0.079        0.110           0.496      0.079       0.110        0.496
            Bank FE                       NO          YES              NO         NO         YES           NO
            Bank-Firm FE                  NO           NO             YES         NO          NO          YES
a The dependent variable in Panels A and B is DRAW DOW N RAT E, the drawdown rate on the credit line at the end
of the year. The dependent variable in Panel C is F U LLY DRAW N, a dummy variable equal to one if the credit line
is fully drawndown (the borrower has drawdown at least 95% of the credit line). RECESSION is a dummy variable
equal to one for the three recessions as classified by NBER during our sample period (1988-2013). RECESSION 9091,
RECESSION 01 and RECESSION 0809 are dummy variables for the recessions that occurred in 1990/91, 2001 and
2008/09, respectively. All of the models in Panels B and C include the sets of borrower-, loan-, and bank-specific factors
reported in Table 1 as well as dummy variables to account for the borrower activity as defined by 1-digit SIC codes.
Models estimated with robust standard errors clustered by bank and by firm. We report t statistics in parentheses. ***
denotes 1% significant level, ** denotes 5% significant level, and * denotes 10% significant level.




                                                             51
         Table 3 Borrowers' drawdowns and future credit line cutsa
         Variables                         1            2            3            4            5            6
         DRAW DOW N RAT E-1              0.10***      0.06***      0.06***
                                           (8.22)       (3.26)       (3.80)
         DRAW DOW N RAT E-2                                                     0.09***      0.07***      0.07***
                                                                                  (7.06)       (3.02)       (3.59)
         LDRAW AN AM T-1                                                            0.00      0.00**       0.00**
                                                                                  (1.15)       (2.14)       (2.46)
         constant                        0.41***        0.91*         0.74      0.44***         0.99*         0.95
                                           (4.89)      (1.81)       (1.49)        (4.57)       (1.70)       (1.62)
         Observations                      16984       16984        15239         12328        12328        11027
         R-squared                          0.081       0.434        0.358         0.078        0.445        0.368
         Credit line FE                       NO         YES          YES            NO          YES          YES
         Bank FE                              NO          NO          YES            NO           NO          YES
a The dependent variable in this table is a dummy variable, which is equal to one in years when the credit line experiences
a cut. DRAW DOW N RAT E-1 and DRAW DOW N RAT E-2 are the drawdown rates on credit lines at the end of year
t-1 and t-2, respectively. LDRAW N AM T-1 is the log of one plus the dollar amount the borrower draws done on its
credit line during year t-1. All of the models include the sets of borrower-, loan-, and bank-specific factors reported in
Table 1 as well as dummy variables to account for the borrower activity as defined by 1-digit SIC codes, and year dummy
variables. Models estimated with robust standard errors clustered by credit line. We report t statistics in parentheses.
*** denotes 1% significant level, ** denotes 5% significant level, and * denotes 10% significant level.




                                                            52
      Table 4: Avaliable funds after a credit line cuta
      Variables                               1              2           3            4            5            6
      LU N DRAW N AM T-1                    0.55***        0.53***     0.54***      0.57***      0.56***      0.56***
                                            (23.18)        (22.04)     (21.67)      (27.45)      (26.30)      (25.90)
      CUT                                  -0.11***       -0.12***    -0.11***
                                             (-7.88)        (-8.07)     (-7.59)
      CU T ×LU N DRAW N AM T-1             -0.14***       -0.14***    -0.14***
                                             (-5.77)        (-5.58)     (-5.48)
      CUTn                                                                         -0.19***     -0.19***     -0.20***
                                                                                     (-8.09)      (-8.16)      (-7.77)
      CU T n×LU N U SEDRAT-1                                                       -0.16***     -0.15***     -0.13***
                                                                                     (-3.30)      (-3.15)      (-2.61)
      constant                                 0.01           0.10        0.04         -0.04         0.05        -0.01
                                             (0.12)         (0.56)      (1.44)       (-0.72)       (0.29)      (-0.20)
      Observations                           16984          16984       16558         16984        16984        16558
      R-squared                               0.324          0.333       0.364         0.303        0.311        0.342
      Bank FE                                   NO            YES          NO            NO          YES           NO
      Bank-Year FE                              NO             NO         YES            NO           NO          YES
a Dependent variable: Log of one plus the undrawn rate in the credit line computed the ratio of undrawn funds at the
end of year t over the size of the credit line at year t-1. CU T : dummy variable equal to one if the credit line experiences
a reduction in year t. CU T n : dummy variable equal to one if the credit line experiences a reduction in year t and the
borrower increases the amount drawdown during that same year. LU N U SEDRAT-1 : Log of one plus the undrawn
rate in the credit line computed the ratio of undrawn funds at the end of year t-1 over the size of the credit line at
year t-1. All of the models include the sets of borrower-, loan-, and bank-specific factors reported in Table 1 as well as
dummy variables to account for the borrower activity as defined by 1-digit SIC codes, and year dummy variables. Models
estimated with robust standard errors clustered by borrower and by bank. We report t statistics in parentheses. ***
denotes 1% significant level, ** denotes 5% significant level, and * denotes 10% significant level.




                                                              53
            Table 5: Cuts and drawdowns around bank downgrade of credit line's ratinga
            Panel A: Likelihood of cut
            Variables                   1            2             3            4            5            6
            DG+1                   0.337***      0.243***      0.231***     0.296***     0.216***     0.201***
                                     (27.74)        (8.99)        (8.74)      (22.71)       (7.70)       (7.30)
            DG                     0.289***      0.272***      0.265***     0.236***     0.243***     0.232***
                                     (31.26)       (10.54)       (10.40)      (23.61)       (8.82)       (8.51)
            DG-1                  -0.021***          0.024         0.022   -0.017***         0.032        0.026
                                      (-4.39)       (1.10)        (1.00)      (-3.23)       (1.45)       (1.15)
            DG-2                     -0.013*         0.015         0.015    -0.015**         0.016        0.013
                                      (-1.80)       (0.69)        (0.69)      (-2.09)       (0.74)       (0.57)
            DG-3                       -0.010        0.021         0.023       -0.005        0.027        0.026
                                      (-1.80)       (0.69)        (0.69)      (-0.53)       (1.24)       (1.20)
            constant               0.206***      3.429***      4.100***     0.199***     3.482***     4.162***
                                       (7.86)      (15.57)       (18.83)       (7.56)      (15.79)      (19.04)
            Observations               91263        68377         68366        91263        68377        68366
            R-squared                   0.122        0.488         0.494        0.110        0.484        0.491
            Credit line FE                NO          YES           YES           NO          YES          YES
            Bank FE                       NO           NO           YES           NO           NO          YES
            p value for H0:
            DG+1 =DG                  0.0004        0.0279        0.0127      0.0000       0.0672       0.0388
            DG=DG-1                   0.0000        0.0000        0.0000      0.0000       0.0000       0.0000
            DG-1 =DG-2                0.2506        0.3382        0.4773      0.7730       0.1038       0.1858
            DG-2 =DG-3                0.8128        0.6641        0.5209      0.3995       0.4178       0.3018
            Panel B: Drawdown rate
            Variables                   1            2             3            4            5            6
            DG+1                   0.068***      0.114***      0.115***     0.061***     0.096***     0.101***
                                       (7.26)       (5.10)        (5.14)       (6.29)       (4.15)       (4.37)
            DG                     0.045***      0.090***      0.091***     0.033***     0.079***     0.084***
                                       (5.80)       (4.20)        (4.22)       (4.07)       (3.48)       (3.69)
            DG-1                   0.083***      0.068***      0.069***     0.090***     0.065***     0.069***
                                     (12.96)        (3.46)        (3.45)      (12.82)       (3.26)       (3.41)
            DG-2                   0.037***          0.015         0.015    0.040***         0.011        0.013
                                       (4.03)       (0.77)        (0.75)       (4.35)       (0.53)       (0.65)
            DG-3                        0.015       -0.004        -0.004        0.016       -0.005       -0.002
                                       (1.19)      (-0.19)       (-0.18)       (1.26)      (-0.26)      (-0.12)
            constant               1.012***       0.331**        0.274*     1.008***     0.369***      0.315**
                                     (26.33)        (2.33)        (1.78)      (26.22)       (2.60)       (2.06)
            Observations               91263        68377         68366        91263        68377        68366
            R-squared                   0.155        0.750         0.752        0.155        0.750        0.751
            Credit line FE                NO          YES           YES           NO          YES          YES
            Bank FE                       NO           NO           YES           NO           NO          YES
            p value for H0:
            DG+1 =DG                  0.0035        0.0011        0.0009      0.0012       0.0366       0.0339
            DG=DG-1                   0.0000        0.0105        0.0096      0.0000       0.2330       0.1911
            DG-1 =DG-2                0.0000        0.0000        0.0000      0.0000       0.0000       0.0000
            DG-2 =DG-3                0.0595        0.0749        0.0800      0.0385       0.1478       0.1518
a Dependent variable: Drawdown rate on the credit line at the end of the year. DG+1 , DG, DG-1 , DG-2 and DG-3
are dummy variables equal to one for the year after, year of, year before, two years before, three years before the rating
downgrade, respectively. Models 1 through 3 estimated for all rating downgrades. Models 4 through 6 estimated for
downgrades from investment grade to below investment grade. All of the models in Panels A and B include the sets of
loan-, and bank-specific factors reported in Table 1 as well as dummy variables to account for the borrower activity as
defined by 1-digit SIC codes, and year dummy variables. Models estimated with robust standard errors clustered by the
credit line. We report t statistics in parentheses. *** denotes 1% significant level, ** denotes 5% significant level, and *
denotes 10% significant level.




                                                             54
            Table 7 Cost of credit lines over the business cycle: Univariate resultsa
            Panel A: All-in-undrawn fees
            Variables                 1             2               3            4            5            6
            RECESSION              6.28***        6.32***         5.73***
                                     (4.37)         (4.63)          (4.08)
            RECESSION9091                                                      8.52***      4.36***          0.57
                                                                                 (3.84)       (2.76)       (0.28)
            RECESSION01                                                          -2.07*        -1.13        -0.08
                                                                                (-1.75)      (-1.37)      (-0.06)
            RECESSION0809                                                     14.82***     14.68***     13.17***
                                                                                 (8.69)       (9.26)       (9.00)
            constant               27.14***      27.13***     27.18***        27.14***     27.13***     27.17***
                                     (26.08)      (96.72)     (236.75)         (26.08)     (101.46)     (398.76)
            Observations              24305         24305        24305           24305        24305        24305
            R-squared                  0.009        0.079        0.781            0.024        0.092        0.787
            Borrower FE                  NO          YES           NO               NO           NO          YES
            Bank-borrower FE             NO           NO          YES               NO           NO          YES
            Panel B: All-in-drawn spreads
                                       1            2            3               4            5            6
            RECESSION              36.96***      33.95***     30.87***
                                      (4.63)        (4.49)       (4.27)
            RECESSION90/91                                                         7.52         5.95       -13.19
                                                                                 (0.69)       (0.62)      (-0.79)
            RECESSION01                                                          -10.44        -7.66         0.42
                                                                                (-1.24)      (-1.12)       (0.06)
            RECESSION08/09                                                    95.97***     85.80***     74.14***
                                                                               (10.98)      (11.60)      (10.11)
            constant               153.42***    153.66***    153.90***       153.42***    153.67***    153.89***
                                     (24.39)     (120.26)     (265.84)         (24.38)     (129.68)     (460.51)
            Observations               27041        27041        27041           27041        27041        27041
            R-squared                  0.009        0.115        0.773            0.027        0.129        0.778
            Borrower FE                  NO          YES           NO               NO           NO          YES
            Bank-borrower FE             NO           NO          YES               NO           NO          YES
a  Dependent variable in Panel A is the undrawn fee borrowers pay when they take out a credit line. Dependent variable
in Panel B is the All-in-drawn spread over Libor that borrowers pay on the funds they drawdown on their credit lines.
RECESSION is a dummy variable equal to one for the three recessions as classified by NBER during our sample period
(1988-2013). RECESSION 9091, RECESSION 01 and RECESSION 0809 are dummy variables for the recessions that
occurred in 1990/91, 2001 and 2008/09, respectively. All of the models in Panels A and B include the sets of borrower-,
loan-, and bank-specific factors reported in Table 1 as well as dummy variables to account for the borrower activity as
defined by 1-digit SIC codes. In addition, we control for the triple-B over triple-A bond spread at the time of the credit
line origination. Models estimated with robust standard errors clustered by borrower and by bank. We report t statistics
in parentheses. *** denotes 1% significant level, ** denotes 5% significant level, and * denotes 10% significant level.




                                                             55
          Table 8 Cost of credit lines over the business cycle: Multivariate resultsa
          Panel A: All-in-undrawn fees
          Variables                 1               2               3           4             5             6
          RECESSION              2.53***          2.38***         2.28***
                                   (3.33)           (3.41)          (3.04)
          RECESSION9091                                                           1.63          0.91         -0.01
                                                                                (1.20)        (0.75)       (-0.00)
          RECESSION01                                                            -0.57         -0.33         -0.57
                                                                               (-0.69)       (-0.42)       (-0.82)
          RECESSION0809                                                       6.21***       5.82***       6.25***
                                                                                (4.94)        (5.05)        (5.24)
          constant                12.96**            -0.46          -4.58     13.52**           1.65         -1.53
                                    (2.00)         (-0.06)        (-0.62)       (2.11)        (0.20)       (-0.21)
          Observations              24305           24305          24305        24305         24305         24305
          R-squared                  0.546           0.560          0.841        0.548         0.561         0.842
          Borrower FE                  NO             YES             NO           NO            NO           YES
          Bank-borrower FE             NO              NO            YES           NO            NO           YES
          Panel B: All-in-drawn spreads
                                    1               2               3           4             5             6
          RECESSION                  6.43*            2.82         6.34**
                                    (1.77)          (0.93)         (2.17)
          RECESSION9091                                                      -18.12**          -5.69        -18.60
                                                                               (-2.17)       (-0.62)       (-0.95)
          RECESSION01                                                            -4.49         -5.76         -2.30
                                                                               (-1.00)       (-1.38)       (-0.67)
          RECESSION0809                                                      24.83***       15.04**      21.87***
                                                                                (3.20)        (2.26)        (3.86)
          constant                     -7.09   -231.63***    -417.97***          -1.84   -223.15***    -403.47***
                                     (-0.11)       (-2.93)       (-8.89)       (-0.03)       (-2.82)       (-8.66)
          Observations                27041         27041         27041         27041         27041         27041
          R-squared                    0.577         0.611         0.860         0.579         0.611         0.860
          Borrower FE                    NO           YES            NO            NO            NO           YES
          Bank-borrower FE               NO            NO           YES            NO            NO           YES
a  Dependent variable in Panel A is the All-in-undrawn fees borrowers pay when they take out a credit line. Dependent
variable in Panel B is the All-in-drawn spread over Libor that borrowers pay on the funds they drawdown on their credit
lines. RECESSION is a dummy variable equal to one for the three recessions as classified by NBER during our sample
period (1988-2013). RECESSION 9091, RECESSION 01 and RECESSION 0809 are dummy variables for the reces-
sions that occurred in 1990/91, 2001 and 2008/09, respectively. All of the models in Panels A and B include the sets of
borrower-, loan-, and bank-specific factors reported in Table 1 as well as dummy variables to account for the borrower
activity as defined by 1-digit SIC codes. In addition, we control for the triple-B over triple-A bond spread at the time of
the credit line origination. Models estimated with robust standard errors clustered by borrower and by bank. We report
t statistics in parentheses. *** denotes 1% significant level, ** denotes 5% significant level, and * denotes 10% significant
level.




                                                             56
       Table 9 Undrawn fees versus borrowers' drawdownsa
       Variables                            1             2            3            4            5            6
       DRAWDOWN1                          1.96***       1.98***      3.86***
                                            (2.88)        (2.97)       (3.91)
       DRAWDOWN2                                                                  2.54***      2.57***       3.67**
                                                                                    (3.28)       (3.41)       (2.35)
        DRAWDOWN                                                                   1.45**       1.39**      3.24***
                                                                                    (2.08)       (2.01)       (3.34)
       constant                          25.77***       16.90**     44.53***     33.14***     24.64***     37.85***
                                            (4.42)       (2.41)        (4.30)       (7.40)       (3.25)       (2.82)
       Observations                         16841         16841        16841        15135        15135        15135
       R-squared                             0.642        0.649         0.867        0.648        0.654        0.873
       Bank FE                                 NO          YES            NO           NO          YES           NO
       Bank-Firm FE                            NO           NO           YES           NO           NO          YES
a The dependent variable is the undrawn fee on the credit line. DRAW DOW N 1 (DRAW DOW N 2) year-end drawdown
rate in the credit line the borrower has outstanding the year (two years) before the origination of the new credit line.
DRAW DOW N = DRAW DOW N 1 - DRAW DOW N 2. All of the models include the sets of loan-, and bank-specific
factors reported in Table 1 as well as dummy variables to account for the borrower activity as defined by 1-digit SIC
codes. In addition, we control for the triple-B over triple-A bond spread at the time of the credit line origination. Models
estimated with robust standard errors clustered by bank and by firm. We report t statistics in parentheses. *** denotes
1% significant level, ** denotes 5% significant level, and * denotes 10% significant level.




                                                            57
           Table 10 Number of loan investors and loan sizea
           Variables                  1           2               3            4           5           6
           LAMOUNT                  0.37***     0.37***         0.26***     0.28***     0.27***      0.19***
                                    (28.92)     (29.14)           (4.75)     (24.56)     (23.75)       (4.92)
           LEADSH                                                          -1.87***    -2.20***     -2.39***
                                                                            (-27.85)    (-29.42)      (-5.13)
           constant                -2.93***    -2.69***          -4.69*    -0.63***         -0.09       -0.18
                                    (-11.86)     (-4.01)        (-1.70)      (-2.73)     (-0.14)      (-0.09)
           Observations                 4852        4852           4852         4830        4830         4830
           R-squared                   0.621       0.652          0.957        0.741       0.774        0.971
           Bank FE                       NO         YES             NO           NO         YES           NO
           Bank-Firm FE                  NO          NO            YES           NO           NO         YES
a The dependent variable in this table is the log of the number of investors in the syndicate at the time of the loan
origination. LAM OU N T is the log amount of the credit line. LEADSH is the share of the credit line the lead bank
retains. All of the models in Panels A and B include the sets of borrower-, loan-, and bank-specific factors reported
in Table 1 as well as dummy variables to account for the borrower activity as defined by 1-digit SIC codes, and year
dummy variables. Models estimated with robust standard errors clustered by bank and by firm. We report t statistics in
parentheses. *** denotes 1% significant level, ** denotes 5% significant level, and * denotes 10% significant level.




                                                           58
            Table 11 Lead bank's loan share at origination over the business cyclea
            Variables                  1            2               3          4           5            6
            RECESSION                    0.01        0.01            0.00
                                       (0.89)      (0.91)          (0.35)
            RECESSION9091                                                       0.03*    0.05***          0.03
                                                                               (1.67)      (3.05)       (1.20)
            RECESSION01                                                         -0.03    -0.03**         -0.01
                                                                              (-1.31)     (-2.11)      (-0.69)
            RECESSION0809                                                    0.04***      0.02**         -0.00
                                                                               (3.29)      (2.10)      (-0.10)
            constant                 0.87***      1.18***         1.34***    1.02***     1.18***      1.31***
                                     (11.71)        (9.12)          (3.71)   (13.49)       (8.94)       (3.53)
            Observations                4830          4830            4830       4830        4830         4830
            R-squared                  0.347         0.498           0.959      0.311       0.502        0.960
            Bank FE                      NO           YES              NO         NO         YES           NO
            Bank-Firm FE                 NO            NO             YES         NO          NO          YES
a The dependent variable in this table is the arranger loan share at the time of the loan origination. RECESSION
is a dummy variable equal to one for the three recessions as classified by NBER during our sample period (1988-2013).
RECESSION 9091, RECESSION 01 and RECESSION 0809 are dummy variables for the recessions that occurred in
1990/91, 2001 and 2008/09, respectively. All of the models include the sets of borrower-, loan-, and bank-specific factors
reported in Table 1 as well as dummy variables to account for the borrower activity as defined by 1-digit SIC codes.
Models estimated with robust standard errors clustered by bank and by firm. We report t statistics in parentheses. ***
denotes 1% significant level, ** denotes 5% significant level, and * denotes 10% significant level.




                                                             59
          Table 12 Cuts around the failure of a syndicate member banka
                                                 Likelihood of cut                       Log of one plus cut
          Variables                       1               2             3            4             5            6
          FAILURE                            0.03                                    0.44*
                                          (1.24)                                    (1.86)
          FAILURE0                        0.09**       0.14***        0.14***       1.04**      1.56***      1.59***
                                          (2.51)          (3.75)        (3.73)      (2.53)        (4.18)       (4.21)
          FAILURE1                           0.02           0.03          0.03         0.10          0.24         0.22
                                          (0.63)          (0.95)        (0.84)      (0.27)        (0.68)       (0.62)
          LLEADUP                      -0.01***       -0.01***       -0.01***    -0.14***      -0.12***     -0.12***
                                        (-38.35)       (-25.53)       (-25.33)    (-38.04)      (-24.62)     (-24.28)
          FAILURE-1xLLEADUP                 -0.00           0.00          0.00        -0.04          0.02         0.02
                                         (-0.25)          (0.85)        (0.82)     (-1.18)        (0.28)       (0.27)
          FAILURE0xLLEADUP             -0.02***         -0.01**      -0.01***    -0.20***      -0.15***     -0.15***
                                         (-4.33)         (-2.57)       (-2.62)     (-4.76)       (-3.31)      (-3.37)
          FAILURE1xLLEADUP                  -0.00           0.00          0.00        -0.02          0.00         0.00
                                         (-0.10)          (0.30)        (0.32)     (-0.28)        (0.07)       (0.09)
          LEADSH                       -0.09***       -0.24***       -0.25***    -1.10***      -2.34***     -2.39***
                                         (-6.14)       (-11.59)       (-11.54)     (-8.22)      (-10.89)     (-10.77)
          BK FAILSH                          0.15          -0.35         -0.34         0.38       -4.51*       -4.33*
                                          (0.62)         (-1.46)       (-1.37)      (0.15)       (-1.83)      (-1.69)
          UNUSEDRAT                    -0.15***       -0.07***       -0.06***    -1.33***      -0.62***     -0.61***
                                        (-24.06)         (-9.12)       (-8.94)    (-23.57)       (-8.41)      (-8.24)
          constant                      0.89***       -1.49***       -1.58***     5.43***     -20.34***    -21.17***
                                         (16.32)         (-8.43)       (-7.18)     (10.57)      (-11.24)      (-9.44)
          Observations                     63079          63079         63079        63079        63079        63079
          R-squared                        0.133           0.555         0.492       0.129         0.525        0.464
          Credit line FE                      NO            YES           YES           NO          YES          YES
          Bank FE                             NO             NO           YES           NO            NO         YES
a  Dependent variable in models (1) through (3) is a dummy variable on whether the credit line experiences a reduction
during the year. Dependent variable in models (4) through (6) is the log of one plus the reduction in the size of the credit
line during the year. FAILURE is a dummy variable for the credit lines that experience a failure of a syndicate member
bank. FAILURE0 and FAILURE1 are dummy variable for the year in which the failure occurs and the year after. The
control group is the year before the failure. Included in the regressions are dummy variables for the remaining years of
the credit line. LLEADUP is the log of one plus the additional dollar amount investment the lead arranger does on the
credit line over the year. LEADSH is the lagged share of the credit line retained by the lead arranger BK FAILSH is the
lagged share of the credit line owned by the bank(s) that fail prior to the year of failure. UNUSEDRAT is the lagged
portion of the credit line that was still undrawn. All of the models include the sets of loan-, and bank-specific factors
reported in Table 1 as well as dummy variables to account for the borrower activity as defined by 1-digit SIC codes, and
year dummy variables. Models estimated with robust standard errors. We report t statistics in parentheses. *** denotes
1% significant level, ** denotes 5% significant level, and * denotes 10% significant level.




                                                             60
References

Acharya, V., Almeida, H., and Campello, M. (2013). Credit lines as monitored liquidity insurance:

  Theory and evidence. Journal of Finance, 68:2059­2116.

Acharya, V., Almeida, H., and Ippolito, F. (2012). Credit lines as monitored liquidity insurance: Theory

  and evidence. Journal of Financial Economics, 112(3):287­319.

Agarwal, S., Chomsisengphet, S., and Driscoll, J. (2004). Loan commitments and private firms. Board

  of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Working Paper.

Berrospide, J. (2012). Liquidity hoarding and the financial crisis: An empirical evaluation. Board of

  Governors of the Federal Reserve, Working Paper.

Board, S. (2011). Relational contracts and value of loyalty. American Economic Review, 101(7):3349­

  3367.

Bord, V. and Santos, J. (2012). The rise of the originate-to-distribute model and the role of banks in

  financial intermediation. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, pages 21­34.

Bord, V. and Santos, J. (2014). Banks' liquidity and the cost of liquidity to corporations. Journal of

  Money, Credit and Banking, 46(1):13­45.

Campello, M., Giambona, E., Graham, J., and Harvey, C. (2011). Liquidity management and corporate

  investment during a financial crisis. The Review of Financial Studies, 24(6):1944­1979.

Campello, M., Graham, J., and Harvey, C. (2010). The real effects of credit constraints: Evidence from

  a financial crisis. Journal of Financial Economics, 97(3):470­487.

Chava, S. and Jarrow, R. (2008). Modeling loan commitments. Finance Research Letters, 5:11­20.

Chen, Z., Hu, Y., John, K., and Mao, C. (2017). How much liquidity insurance do credit lines provide?

  SSRN, Working Paper.

Chodorow-Reich, G. and Falato, A. (2018). The loan covenant channel: How bank health transmits to

  the real economy. Working Paper, Harvard University.

Demiroglu, C., James, C., and Kizilaslan, A. (2012). Bank lending standards and access to lines of

  credit. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 44(6):1063­1089.


                                                  61
Flannery, M. and Lockhart, B. (2009). Credit lines and the substitutability of cash and debt. Working

  Paper, University of Florida.

Gao, P. and Yun, H. (2009). Commercial paper, lines of credit, and the real effects of the financial

  crisis of 2008: Firm-level evidence from the manufacturing industry. Working Paper, Notre Dame

  University.

Gatev, E. and Strahan, P. (2006). Banks' advantage in hedging liquidity risk: Theory and evidence

  from the commercial paper market. Journal of Finance, 61:867­892.

Ham, J. and Melnik, A. (1987). Loan demand: An empirical analysis using micro data. Review of

  Economics and Statistics, 69:704­709.

Holmstrom, B. and Tirole, J. (1997). Private and public supply of liquidity. Journal of Political

  Economy, 106(1):1­40.

Huang, R. (2010). How committed are bank lines of credit? experiences in the subprime mortgage

  crisis. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Working Paper.

Ivashina, V. and Scharfstein, D. (2010a). Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008. Journal of

  Financial Economics, 97(3):319­338.

Ivashina, V. and Scharfstein, D. (2010b). Loan syndication and credit cycles. American Economic

  Review Papers and Proceedings, 100(2):57­61.

Jim´
   enez, G., Lopez, J., and Saurina, J. (2009). Empirical Analysis of Corporate Credit Lines. Review

  of Financial Studies, 22(12):5069­5098.

Kizilaslan, A. and Mathers, A. (2014). Strategic credit line usage and performance. Journal of Financial

  Research, 37(2):243­265.

Lins, K., Servaes, H., and Tufano, P. (2010). What drives corporate liquidity? an international survey

  of cash holdings and lines of credit. Journal of Financial Economics, 98(1):160­176.

Norden, L. and Weber, M. (2010). Credit Line Usage, Checking Account Activity, and Default Risk of

  Bank Borrowers. Review of Financial Studies, 23(10):3665­3699.

Paligorova, T. and Santos, J. (2019). The side eects of shadow banking on liquidity provision. SSRN,

  Working Paper.

                                                  62
Rampini, A. and Viswanathan, S. (2019a). Financial intermediary capital. Review of Economic Studies,

  86(1):413­445.

Rampini, A. and Viswanathan, S. (2019b). Financing insurance. Duke University, Working Paper.

Ray, D. (2002). The time structure of self-enforcing agreements. Econometrica, 70:547­582.

Roberts, M. and Sufi, A. (2009). Renegotiation of financial contracts: Evidence from private credit

  agreements. Journal of Financial Economics, 93:159­184.

Schwert, M. (2020). Does borrowing from banks cost more than borrowing from the market? Journal

  of Finance, 75(2):905­947.

Shockley, R. and Thakor, A. (1997). Bank loan commitment contracts: Data, theory and tests. Journal

  of Money, Credit, and Banking, 29(4):517­534.

Sufi, A. (2009). Bank lines of credit in corporate finance: An empirical analysis. Review of Financial

  Studies, 22(3):1057­1088.

Yun, H. (2009). The choice of corporate liquidity and corporate governance. Review of Financial

  Studies, 22(4):1447­1475.




                                                  63
Appendix A: Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1: It is clear that the zero profit constraint (Equation 8) for banks must bind,

hence F > 0, thus (here N  is the first best syndicate size)

                             L
     pL(R - r) + C = pqm(      )L + (N  - 1)x                                                     (32)
                             N

which says that the expected revenues to the syndicate must be equal to the expected costs. The first

order condition with respect to N can be rewritten as

              L   L2
     -pqm (    
                )  2 +x=0                                                                         (33)
              N (N )

and the second order condition

              L 2L2           L   L3
     pq m (     )       + m (   )            >0                                                   (34)
              N  (N  )3       N  (N  )4

and thus there is a unique perfectly competitive maximum (first best). Further since HR (0) > GC > 0,

we must have C > 0 and R = r; it is cheaper to put the cost of providing the first best loan commitment

in the commitment fee rather than the interest rate; hence the interest rate will be r. Thus the

commitment fee is given by

                L
     C = pqm(     )L + (N  - 1)x                                                                  (35)
                N

Proof of Proposition 2: This is a standard convex programming problem with an objective being

minimized that is convex in C and R and a constraint set that is affine in R and C and convex in N .

The first order conditions are:

                                                 
     (w.r.t to R)     HR (p(R - r)L)pL - L - pL 1-  -µ=0                                          (36)
                                              
     (w.r.t to C)                 GC (C ) -  1-  - =0                                             (37)
                                        2                   2
                               L L                      L L
     (w.r.t to N)  - 1-  pqm ( N ) N 2 +    1- x   - m (N ) N2 = 0                                (38)


plus the complementary slackness conditions that

                    1 - (1 - p)              L                  L
      -(R - r)L                 -    C - pqm( )L - (N - 1)x + m( )L = 0                           (39)
                       1-         1-         N                  N



                                                    64
plus µ(R - r) = 0 and C = 0. It is clear that the participation constraint must bind and  > 0, hence
      ^ is the second best syndicate size):
(here N

                 1 - (1 - p)              L      ^ - 1)x = m( L )L
      (R - r)L               +    C - pqm( )L - (N                                                                  (40)
                    1-         1-         ^
                                          N                   ^
                                                              N

                            ^ > N  (more syndicate members) because Equation (38) can be rewritten
         First we note that N

as

               L L2       1-   L L2
      pqm (      )      +    m( )      =x                                                                           (41)
               ^ (N
               N   ^ )2           ^ )2
                               ^ (N
                               N

where the second term in Equation (41) did not exist without participation constraints (compare to

Equation (33)) and is a positive term (the left hand side is decreasing in N and the right hand side is
                   ^ > N  follows. Note that increasing L increases N
a constant). Hence N                                                ^.

         The first order conditions in Equations (36) and (37) can be merged to obtain:

       HR (p(R - r)L)        GC (C )
           1-(1-p)
                                
                                                                                                                    (42)
            p(1- )             1-



         To obtain tighter results we make the following assumption:30 If we assume that

       HR (0)   1 - (1 - p)
              >             >1                                                                                      (44)
        GC           p

for all  , we still obtain R = r and C > 0.

         We can then show the following; the profit condition implies


      pL(R - r) + C
             L       ^ - 1)x) because expected revenues exceed costs
       > pqm(  )L + (N
             ^
             N
             L
       > pqm(  )L + (N  - 1)x) because costs are minimized at N 
             N

  30 There is an tension between increasing R and increasing C in the second best. From an incentive perspective it is

easier to increase R, but from a firm utility perspective, increases in C are preferable to increases in R since the firm
wants insurance in the interest rate. In Equation (42) this incentive issues shows up as
           1         1
       1-(1-p)
                 >    
                                                                                                                    (43)
        p(1- )       1-

and reflects the fact that increasing R directly improves the ex post participation constraint, the syndicate member is
                                                                      ^ > r and most likely C > c.
more likely to participate. If our condition we provide does not hold R



                                                           65
                                                                                                HR (0)
which basically states that the budget line must move outwards and given our assumptions that    GC      >
1-(1-p)                    ^ > C and R
                                     ^  R.
   p    ,   we obtain that C

Proof of Proposition 3:

         To provide comparative statics, we rewrite Equation (41) as

                       1-
     pqm ()()2 +          m ()()2 = x                                                               (45)
                        

         L
for  =   N;   thus only the ratio is identified. Clearly if p+ > p, then  = L/N must fall, hence the

number of syndicate members must go up (since L is fixed). A similar argument holds for q + > q . If

 + <  , we must have that ^+ > ^ which implies that for fixed L, N
                                                                 ^+ > N
                                                                      ^.

Proof of Proposition 4: The first order conditions for the maximization are:


       (w.r.t to R) HR (p(R - r)L)pL - m p1 + pdL ]Lm - n [1 + pdN L ]Ln - µ = 0                    (46)

     (w.r.t to Cm ) GC (C ) - m dL - m = 0                                                          (47)

      (w.r.t to Cn ) GC (C ) - n dN L - n = 0                                                       (48)
                                               Ln        L2
                                                          n
      (w.r.t to N )     - n 1 + dN L pq n (        )         + m dL x = 0                           (49)
                                              N - 1 (N - 1)2

      (w.r.t to Ln ) m (R - r)(1 + dL p) - (1 + dL pq )(m(Lm ) + m (Lm )Lm )
                                                                           Ln        Ln   Ln
                            - n (R - r)(1 + dN L p) - (1 + dN L pq ) n(        )+n(     )                =0
                                                                          N -1      N -1 N -1

         Since  L >  N L (and dL > dN L ), the lead has a higher probability of long run survival and

cares for the future more than the non-leads. In this case, using Equations (47) and (48), we obtain

that (since Cn > 0 and Cm > 0)

                 dL        dL
     n = m        N L
                      with N L > 1                                                                  (50)
                d         d

which then leads to (assuming R=r)

                       1 + dN L pq     Ln     L2n
      (w.r.t to N )        N L
                                   n(      )         x                                              (51)
                          d           N - 1 (N - 1)2
                      1 + dL pq
     (w.r.t to Ln )             [m(Lm ) + m (Lm )Lm ]
                         dL
                               NL
                         1 + d pq        Ln           Ln   Ln
                      =       N L
                                    n(       )+n(        )                                          (52)
                            d           N -1        N -1 N -1



                                                    66
                                               1+dN L pq
            Suppose dN L goes down, then         dN L
                                                           goes up and from Equation (51) above, we have that
 Ln
N -1   has to go down. However from Equation (51) then, if given that n(t) = t ,  > 1, we obtain that
                                                                  x(1+(1/ ))
the right hand side of Equation (52) above becomes               (Ln /(N -1))   and consequently Lm has to go up. So

the lead commitment and the lead share has to go up if the discount rate of the non-leads goes down.

            What happens to the commitment fees Cm and Cn . If we set R = r to simplify, then using

Equations (20) and (22) we obtain that

        Cn    1 + dN L pq     Ln   Ln   x
            =     N L
                          n(     )     = if n(t) = t ,  > 1                                                          (53)
       N -1      d           N -1 N -1  

Hence the non-lead commitment fees stay the same. However the lead commitment fees goes up given

a fixed syndicate size N as Equation (52) yields that

            1                                  x(1 +  )
       (      + pq ) [m(Lm ) + m (Lm )Lm ] =                                                                         (54)
           dL                                (Ln /(N - 1))

and since the right hand side goes up and dL is constant, we have already shown that Lm must go up

and thus we obtain that

                  1
       Cm = (       + pq ) (m(Lm )Lm + (N - 1)x)) ;                                                                  (55)
                 dL

the lead's commitment fee must go up given N . Thus given a fixed syndicate size both the lead

commitment fee Cm and the total commitment fee Cm + Cn go up.

            If Lm < Ln , then the number of non-lead syndicate members must increase in response to

the change  N L < 0 and then we can show using Equation (55) that Cm goes up and also Cm + Cn

goes up.31




 31 If the condition does not hold then, the incentive effect raises the commitment fee but the number of non-leads falls,

making the syndicate fixed cost lower, which is a countervailing effect. In the data, the condition Lm < Ln is met.


                                                            67
Appendix B: Variable Definitions

This table provides definitions of the variables used in the empirical analysis.


    VARIABLE                DEFINITION                                                                         SOURCE
                                            FIRM CONTROLS
    SALES                   Sales in billions dollars                                                          Compustat
    LEV ERAGE               Debt over assets                                                                   Compustat
    M KT OBOOK              Market to book value                                                               Compustat
    P ROF M ARGIN           Net income over sales                                                              Compustat
    LIN T COV               Log of interest coverage truncated at 0                                            Compustat
    LIQU IDIT Y             Cash over asset                                                                    Compustat
    T AN GIBLES             Share of assets in tangibles                                                       Compustat
    RELAT ION SHIP          Dummy variable equal to one if the borrower took out loans from the lead           Dealscan
                            bank over the past three years
    R&D                     Research and development expenses over sales                                       Compustat
    ADV ERT ISIN G          Advertising expenses over sales                                                    Compustat
    ST OCK V OL             Standard deviation of the borrower's stock return                                  CRSP
    EX RET                  Return on the borrower's stock over the market return                              CRSP
    AA, AA, ....C           Credit rating of the borrower                                                      Compustat
                                            LOAN CONTROLS
    ALL - IN - DRAW N       All-in-drawn spread on the credit line at origination                              Dealscan
    AM OU N T               Loan amount in million dollars                                                     Dealscan
    CP BCKU P               Dummy variable equal to 1 if the credit line is for a CP program                   Dealscan
    CU T                    Dummy variable equal to 1 if the credit line experiences a reduction in its size   SNC
                            over the year
    DEBT REP AY             Dummy variable equal to 1 if the credit line is to repay existing debt             Dealscan
    DIV IDEN D REST         Dummy variable equal to 1 if there are dividend restrictions                       Dealscan
    DG                      Dummy variable equal to 1 if the lead arranger downgrades the credit line          SNC
                            rating over the year
    DRAW AM T               Amount the borrower drew down on the credit line over the year                     SNC
    DRAW N RAT E            Percentage of the credit line already drawn down                                   SNC
    F AILU RE               Dummy variable equal to 1 there was a failure of a syndicate member bank           FDIC
                            over the year
    F AILU RE SH            Percentage of the crerdit line the failed bank(s) owned at yearend prior to its    SNC
                            failure
    F U LLY DRAW N          Dummy variable equal to 1 for credit lines with a drawdown rate equal or           SNC
                            larger than 95%
    GU ARAN T OR            Dummy variable equal to 1 if the borrower has a guarantor                          Dealscan
    LEADSH                  Lead arranger's share of the loan                                                  SNC
    LEAD U P                Additional additional dollar amount investment the lead arranger does on the       SNC
                            credit line over the year
    LEN DERS                Number of lenders (including the lead arranger) in the loan syndicate              SNC
    LOAN IG                 Dummy variable equal to 1 if the loan is rated PASS by the lead arranger           SNC
    M &A                    Dummy variable equal to 1 if the credit line is for M&A activity                   Dealscan
    M AT U RIT Y            Maturity of the loan at origination in years                                       SNC
    M AT U RIT Y LEF T      Maturity left in the loan in years                                                 SNC

                                                             68
VARIABLE           DEFINITION                                                                   SOURCE
P ROJF IN          Dummy variable equal to 1 if the credit line is for project finance          Dealscan
REF IN AN CE       Dummy variable equal to 1 if the loan is to refinance an existing loan       Dealscan
SECU RED           Dummy variable equal to 1 if the loan is secured                             Dealscan
SEN IOR            Dummy variable equal to 1 if the loan is senior                              Dealscan
U N DRAW N AM T    Amount left in the credit line that is still unused                          SNC
U N DRAW F EE      Undrawn fee on the credit line at origination                                Dealscan
U N DRAW N RAT E   Percentage of the credit line still unused                                   SNC
W ORK CAP IT AL    Dummy variable equal to 1 if the credit line is for working capital          Dealscan
                                 BANK CONTROLS
CAP IT ALbk        Shareholders' equity capital over assets                                     Y9C
ASSET Sbk          Bank assets in billion dollars                                               Y9C
ROAbk              Net income over assets                                                       Y9C
ROA V OL           Standard deviation of the quarterly ROA computed over the last three years   Y9C
SU BDEBT           Subdebt over assets                                                          Y9C
LIQU IDIT Y        Cash plus securities over assets                                             Y9C
                        MACROECONOMIC CONTROLS
RECESSION 90/91    Dummy variable equal to 1 for years of 1990 and 91                           NBER
RECESSION 01       Dummy variable equal to 1 for year 2001                                      NBER
RECESSION 08/09    Dummy variable equal to 1 for years of 2008 and 2009                         NBER




                                                    69
