                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         WHEN UNCLE SAM INTRODUCED MAIN STREET TO WALL STREET:
       LIBERTY BONDS AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF AMERICAN FINANCE

                                           Eric Hilt
                                      Matthew S. Jaremski
                                         Wendy Rahn

                                       Working Paper 27703
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27703


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Eric Hilt, Matthew S. Jaremski, and Wendy Rahn. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Uncle Sam Introduced Main Street to Wall Street: Liberty Bonds and the Transformation
of American Finance
Eric Hilt, Matthew S. Jaremski, and Wendy Rahn
NBER Working Paper No. 27703
August 2020
JEL No. N12,N22,N42

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the effects of the liberty bond drives of World War I on financial intermediation in the
1920s and beyond. Using panel data on U.S. counties we find that higher liberty bond
subscription rates led to an increase in the number of investment banks, stronger local
competition between investment banks and commercial banks, and a relative contraction in
commercial bank assets. We also find that individuals residing in states with higher liberty bond
subscription rates were more likely to report owning stocks or bonds in the late 1930s. Finally,
we find that this shift in financial intermediation away from commercial banks was correlated
with slower growth in the number of manufacturing enterprises and farms at the county level.
Although they were conducted to support the American effort in World War I, the liberty loan
drives reshaped American finance.

Eric Hilt                                       Wendy Rahn
Wellesley College                               University of Minnesota
Department of Economics                         1414 Social Science
106 Central Street                              267 19th Ave. South,
Wellesley, MA 02481                             Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER                                        wrahn@polisci.umn.edu
ehilt@wellesley.edu

Matthew S. Jaremski
Utah State University
Department of Economics and Finance
3565 Old Main Hill
Logan, UT 84322
and NBER
matthew.jaremski@usu.edu
1. Introduction

         The first three decades of the twentieth century witnessed a transformation of American financial
markets. Whereas commercial bank loans had long been the dominant instrument through which financial
intermediation occurred in the United States, during the 1920s securities markets became increasingly
important. This growth in securities markets was accompanied by an expansion in the number of American
investment banks, which totaled more than 6,000 in 1929 and competed aggressively with commercial
banks for the savings of businesses and households. The expansion of securities markets was also
accompanied by an even more substantial expansion of securities ownership; the total number of
individuals owning corporate stock in the United States grew from less than one million in 1910 to more
than 10 million by the early 1930s.1 Financial historians have long suggested that the liberty loan drives of
World War I played an important role in these changes, but the lack of disaggregated data has prevented
direct tests of their effect. Using unique county-level data, we provide the first empirical analysis of this
hypothesis.
         The liberty loan drives enlisted millions of volunteer salespeople, as well as the entire commercial
and investment banking industries, and were supported by massive propaganda campaigns, parades, and
rallies. At least 23 million Americans subscribed to the bonds, and in doing so, most of them were
introduced to security ownership for the first time. In addition to teaching households about bond
investing, the campaigns taught investment banking firms how to market bonds and other securities to
middle-income households. In the 1920s the industry used what it learned to expand into new locations,
and market securities using new methods, including print advertising campaigns and sponsored radio
programing. As William Z. Ripley's (1927: vi-vii) Main Street and Wall Street argued, "without the
Liberty Loan campaigns leading to the great increase of popular investment," the rise of "very widely
held" corporations in the 1920s would not have occurred on the same scale.
         Arguments such as these have been repeated frequently in the literature, but no study to our
knowledge has empirically analyzed the effects of liberty bonds on American financial development.
Typically, such claims are backed by little more than references to aggregate data or scattered anecdotal
evidence. A careful empirical analysis, however, is important as a number of other nation-wide factors also
likely contributed to the deepening of financial markets and the expansion of shareholding during the
1920s. According to Means (1930: 591), tax policies introduced during World War I drove firms that had


1
  No comprehensive data on corporate shareholding exist for this period, and definitive counts of total numbers of
U.S. shareholders should be treated with skepticism, as they are generally unsubstantiated. Several scholars, including
Warshow (1924), Means (1930), Berle and Means (1932), and Bernheim and Schneider (1935), have produced
reasonable estimates of the total number of shareholdings from samples of public corporations. Rutterford and
Sotiroupolos (2017: 500) use those data to estimate that there were 0.81 million shareholders in 1907, and 10 to 12
million in 1932.

                                                          1
previously relied on wealthy investors to search out "persons of moderate means." And as Nicholas (2008)
notes, a number of public companies in the 1920s produced new revolutionary consumer goods such as
radios, mechanical refrigerators, and nylon. It would not be unreasonable to imagine that the securities of
those enterprises may have been particularly attractive to ordinary households. To the taxation and
technology-driven explanations, one might add another one based purely on returns. O'Sullivan (2016)
argues that the war effort provided a stimulus to manufacturing companies, producing rapid growth and
strong dividends in the 1920s. And then beginning around 1927, the entire stock market offered
extraordinary returns, potentially drawing in many new investors (Galbraith 1954; Nicholas 2008; White
1990). In order to assess the role that the liberty bond drives played in the changes in American financial
markets, one must isolate their effects from such other factors.
        This paper provides a quantitative analysis of the role of the liberty loan drives in the
transformation of American finance in the 1920s and beyond. We use panel data on U.S. counties and a
difference in differences design to estimate the effects of liberty bond subscriptions on the commercial and
investment banking industries. This approach enables us to isolate the effects of the liberty bonds from
those of other changes that would have been felt nationally, such as tax policy changes, the proliferation of
listed high-tech firms, and the high returns offered by the stock market. It also enables us to investigate
whether the changes we observe in counties with high liberty bond subscription rates were the product of
pre-existing county conditions or trends.
        The results indicate that the liberty bond drives were an important factor in the transformation of
American finance. We find that higher liberty bond subscription rates led to a relative contraction in the
growth of commercial bank assets and an increase in the number of investment banks in a county during
and after the liberty bond campaigns. We also find that the effect of the presence of investment banks on
the assets of commercial banks in the same county dramatically increased in size during and after the
liberty bond campaigns. We then use survey data from the late 1930s, the earliest available samples of
households containing information on securities ownership, to analyze the effects of the liberty loan
campaigns on the rates at which households owned stocks and bonds. Our estimates indicate that
individuals residing in states with higher liberty bond subscription rates were more likely to report owning
those assets, even conditional on a broad range of household and economic characteristics.
        Finally, we analyze the effects of this shift in financial intermediation using census data on
agriculture and manufacturing. We use liberty bond subscriptions to instrument for the change in
commercial bank assets in a county between 1920 and 1929. Our estimates imply that the decline in the
growth of commercial bank assets produced by the liberty bonds led to a contraction in the number of
manufacturing enterprises and farms at the county level. Although the growth in securities markets in the



                                                       2
1920s aided the development of large, public companies, the shift away from local commercial banks
likely reduced the availability of loans to smaller enterprises.
        A source of concern regarding these results could be that counties with high liberty bond
subscription rates differed from other counties in characteristics that may have contributed to their
subsequent financial development. We use several different approaches to address this concern. First, in all
of our analysis we control for a variety of time-varying county characteristics that were correlated with
liberty bond subscription rates, and use county-fixed effects and Federal Reserve District-by-year effects to
sweep out unchanging differences across counties as well as differential trends across districts. Second,
and more importantly, we explicitly test for differential trends across counties with different liberty bond
subscription rates, and find no evidence of such trends in any of the outcomes we study using our county
panel data. Finally, we analyze the most plausible effects resulting from unobserved county characteristics,
and find that they typically bias our estimates in the opposite direction of the effects we observe.
        The results of this paper confirm the importance of financial literacy and trust for participation in
financial markets. The liberty bond drives can be thought of as massive interventions aimed in part at
shaping households' attitudes toward investing in securities and providing information that increased
financial literacy. Through speeches, rallies, and ubiquitous advertisements, households were presented
with messages indicating that investing in government bonds was safe and appropriate not just for
speculators, but for all citizens (Ott, 2011). The campaigns enlisted women and children, and trained them
as sales agents with materials that included basic facts about bonds as well as the principles of interest
calculation and thrift. Exposure to holding liberty bonds also gave tens of millions of individuals first-hand
experience with securities investing, and likely increased their willingness to invest in other securities as
their bonds matured. Studies of modern data have shown that financial knowledge reduces barriers to
investing in the stock market (Haliassos and Bertaut, 1995; Vissing-Jorgensen, 2004; Van Rooij, Lusardi,
and Alessie, 2011) and encourages planning for the future (Lusardi, 2004; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007,
2008; Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy, 2003; Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2012). Other work has shown
that trust influences stock market participation (Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2008). We advance this
literature by analyzing the effects of a major historical campaign that sought to provide financial
knowledge and inculcate a feeling of trust in financial markets in American households.
        Our analysis also contributes to the literature on competition between commercial banks and
financial markets (Allen and Gale, 1997; Song and Thakor, 2010). Studies of modern data have found that
increases in the level of households' participation in the stock market reduces the demand for bank
deposits, and that this decline in deposits reduces the availability of bank loans (Lin, 2020). We show that
this effect occurred on a large scale in the 1920s, as households became more interested in participating in
securities markets after being exposed to the liberty loan campaigns, and that the resulting decline in

                                                       3
commercial bank assets contracted local economic activity. Despite the different empirical framework and
source of variation, these latter results are generally consistent with other analyses of the effects of banks
that focus on historical periods (e.g., Jaremski, 2014; Fulford, 2015; Rajan and Ramcharan, 2015, 2016;
Carlson, Correia and Luck, 2020) and modern data (e.g., King and Levine, 1993; Jayaratne and Strahan,
1996; Cetorelli and Gambera, 2001; Beck and Levine, 2004; Chodorow-Reich, 2014; Gilje, Loutskina, and
Strahan, 2016; Brown and Earle, 2017; Gertler and Gilchrist, 2018).
        Our results also contribute to the literature on the participation of ordinary households in securities
markets in the 1920s (e.g., Warshaw, 1924; Means, 1930; Edwards, 1938; Haven, 1940; Friend et al.,
1958, 1967; Calomiris, 1995, 2002; Baskin and Miranti, 1997; Calomiris and Raff, 1995; Mitchell, 2007;
O'Sullivan, 2007, 2016; Rutterford and Sotiropoulos, 2017; and Calomiris and Oh, 2018). Several of these
works have argued that the liberty loan campaigns created the pre-conditions for the proliferation of
securities ownership over subsequent years. The most detailed presentation of this argument is Ott's
(2011), who focused on the ideological content of the campaigns, and argued that they changed
Americans' perceptions of investing, and contributed to the emergence of employee stock purchase plans
and other changes that expanded shareholding. We advance this literature by giving empirical content to
this hypothesis, and distinguishing the effects of the loan campaigns from other explanations of the
changes that occurred in the 1920s. We also go well beyond the arguments advanced in those works, and
explore the effects of the loan drives on the commercial banking system, on the growth and
competitiveness of investment banks, and on local access to finance.
        Finally, the results of this paper present an example of the role that wars have played in the
financial development of nations (Saint-Paul, 1996). England's financial revolution, for example, was a
product of the demands of war finance (Dickson, 1967), and the War of Independence and Civil War led to
significant changes in the financial markets and institutions of the United States (Sylla, 2002; Thomson,
2016). The analysis of this paper suggests that the American effort in World War I introduced millions of
households to bond ownership, and in doing so, contributed to the expansion of the investment banking
industry and securities investing in the 1920s that likely helped fuel the large-scale expansion in American
industry of the mid-twentieth century.




2. The Liberty Loan Campaigns


        The American effort in World War I led to a 25-fold increase in federal government expenditures,
presenting an unprecedented challenge for the Treasury. Economists and financiers offered divergent
views regarding the optimal mix of taxation and borrowing to produce the needed revenues, but ultimately

                                                       4
Treasury Secretary McAdoo decided to fund most of the cost of the war with borrowing (see Garbade,
2012; Kang and Rockoff, 2015; Sutch, 2015; and Hall and Sargent, 2019). In addition to avoiding the
imposition of extraordinarily high tax rates, McAdoo believed that borrowing offered another advantage:
selling government bonds to the public would give ordinary Americans a financial stake in the war effort.
McAdoo (1931: 378) even likened the bond sales campaigns to a military operation, arguing that those
"who could not serve in the trenches in France might nevertheless serve in the financial trenches at home."
         Rather than selling bonds continuously, the liberty loan campaigns consisted of four distinct bond
drives from May 1917 through October 1918, and an additional victory loan drive conducted following the
end of the war in April and May 1919. These campaigns, with specific deadlines and goals for the amount
of subscriptions to be obtained, were designed to generate interest in the press, and enthusiasm among the
public. The Treasury delegated management of the loan drives to the Federal Reserve Banks, with each
supervising the drives within their districts. The Federal Reserve Banks' liberty loan committees then
created various sub-committees, including those to head the sales effort in particular states, which in turn
selected local notables to comprise county- and city-level organizations. Essentially all of civil society was
enlisted by these committees, and diverse groups such as fraternal societies, religious organizations, the
boy scouts, and women's clubs contributed to the effort.
         The conduct of the campaigns was focused on the dual goals of raising the necessary funds, and
obtaining subscriptions from the largest possible share of the population, in order to strengthen public
support for the war effort. In pursuit of the former goal, pressure was applied directly to wealthy
individuals and financial institutions.2 Many liberty loan committees sent letters to financial institutions
with specific quotas for the amounts of subscriptions they were expected to generate, from their own
accounts and from their customers. In total, the liberty loans raised about $22 billion for the federal
government, equivalent to more than $5 trillion today (as a constant share of GDP).
         In order to achieve the broadest possible participation in the bond drives, massive rallies and
parades were held, which were led by celebrities, politicians, and members of the military; war exhibit
trains brought relics from the battlefields of France to far-flung American cities and towns; retailers were
encouraged to create patriotic displays and large businesses created payroll deduction programs for


2
  For example, the New York Liberty Loan Committee formed a "Large Investors Committee," which compiled a
confidential a list of wealthy individuals, estates, and corporations from whom large subscriptions were to be
solicited. The list was probably created from the securities underwriting records of the investment bankers on the
committee. (Box 13, Folder 3, Second District Subscriptions, Liberty Loan Committee Records (MC 089), Mudd
Manuscript Library, Princeton University.) It is likely that the subscriptions obtained from a relatively small number
of large financial institutions and wealthy individuals accounted for the majority of the funds raised. For example, for
the second liberty loan in the 2nd (New York) district, the largest 1,168 subscriptions accounted for 54 percent of the
$1.55 billion raised; the subscriptions raised from 2.2 million other individuals and institutions accounted for the
remaining 46 percent of the total. ("Analysis of Subscriptions in Second Federal Reserve District," Correspondence
and Circulars Re Liberty Bond Campaigns, Benjamin Strong Papers, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Archives.)

                                                           5
subscriptions; tens of thousands of canvassers went door-to-door soliciting subscriptions; and an enormous
amount of advertising was produced for magazines and newspapers. It is likely that these were some of the
very first advertisements for investments in financial assets that appeared in some publications. Even the
design of the bond issues, and the fulfillment of subscriptions, reflected the goal of attracting as many
unique subscribers as possible. For example, the bonds were sold with par values as low as $50, and
subscriptions could be fulfilled through installment plans. In addition, all of the issues were
oversubscribed, and the Treasury weighted allotments toward small investors, in order to ensure the
broadest possible participation in the drives.
        A summary of the different loan drives is presented in Table 1. The Treasury collected separate
totals for the subscribers of each issue, but did not attempt to determine the number of households or
individuals who subscribed to at least one liberty bond. The number of subscribers to the largest loan, the
fourth--22.8 million--therefore represents the minimum possible number of total liberty loan subscribers,
and the true total was likely higher. This represented a substantial portion of the adult population (i.e.,
there were about 66.4 million individuals aged 18 or older in 1920), and the proportions are even larger
when considering the proportion of households that purchased a bond. Indeed, a survey by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics in 1918-19 found that nearly 70 percent of urban, middle-income households had
subscribed to a liberty bond within the past year (authors' calculations from data in Olney 1995). Given
how uncommon the ownership of financial assets was before the war, it is quite likely that for most
subscribers, their liberty bonds were the first financial assets other than a checking or savings bank account
that they had ever owned.


2.1 Effects on Financial Institutions
        Financial institutions were enthusiastic participants in the liberty loan drives, and their efforts were
critical to the campaigns' success. Yet the loan drives had many significant short- and long-term
consequences for those institutions.
        Commercial banks benefitted in the short run. Subscriptions to the loans could only be submitted
to the Treasury through one of those institutions, and the funds received for subscriptions were typically
left on deposit until needed by the Treasury. The Treasury and Fed quickly learned that it was necessary to
permit subscribers to buy the bonds on credit to raise the required sums, and in response, the "borrow and
buy" program was created, which operated through commercial banks, and in a sense created a new line of
business for them. A circular distributed to commercial banks in 1917 explained the program:
        It has not been the custom of the average banker to solicit loans, but it is his patriotic duty
        to go to his customers and offer to make loans to them against purchases of Liberty
        Bonds. This action on the part of the banker will enable every community to liberally



                                                       6
        subscribe and of course if necessary with such loans, accompanied by the 90-day note of
        the borrower, may in turn be rediscounted with the Federal Reserve Banks.3

The Federal Reserve banks discounted such loans at favorable rates, making them an attractive business
opportunity for commercial banks.
        Yet these lending opportunities were abruptly curtailed by the Federal Reserve in the post-war
years. The expansion of Federal Reserve credit through rediscounts contributed significantly to the
increase of the money supply during the war years, and in the spring of 1920, total indebtedness of
member banks to the Federal Reserve was $2.5 billion, an historically unprecedented amount regarded as
alarming by Fed officials (Wicker, 1966). In an effort to restrict these credits and induce a period of
contraction and deflation, the Federal Reserve Banks raised their discount rates substantially in 1919 and
1920, with some districts imposing "progressive discount rates" that made the rate applied to rediscounts
an increasing function of the amount borrowed (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963; Rieder, 2019). This
resulted in a significant contraction in member bank borrowing from the Federal Reserve.
        With investment banks, the effects of the liberty loan drives was likely the opposite. Leading
investment bankers coordinated the sales campaigns; the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's liberty loan
committee, which consisted of many of that city's most prominent financiers, was the most influential
body in the national sales effort.4 But the Treasury did not pay commissions on the sales of liberty bonds,
despite investment banks devoting considerable time and resources to the bond drives. Prominent
investment banks also stopped marketing some of their regular securities in order to encourage more
people to purchase liberty bonds. In addition, because subscriptions were fulfilled through commercial
banks, the investment bankers' efforts to market the liberty bonds did not immediately produce any new
accounts for their firms.
        Many prominent investment bankers, however, perceived that the industry would enjoy a longer-
term benefit from its participation in the loan drives. "The only commercial reward in view," said Charles
Mitchell, the President of National City Company, "is that which may come from the development of a
large, new army of investors in this country, who have never heretofore known what it means to own a
coupon bond and who may in the future be developed into savers and bond buyers."5 The incoming
president of the Investment Bankers Association of America, Warren S. Hayden, even observed "the


3
  "Read And Act Immediately: To The Banks of America," 12 October 1917, Correspondence and Circulars Re
Liberty Bond Campaigns, Benjamin Strong Papers, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Archives.
4
  The committee was formed during the first loan campaign, and subsequently expanded. Its membership included,
among others, J.P. Morgan, of J.P. Morgan & Co.; Jacob H. Schiff, of Kuhn Loeb & Co.; Frank A. Vanderlip, of
National City Bank; George F. Baker, of First National Bank; Seward Prosser, of Bankers' Trust; Charles H. Sabin,
of Guaranty Trust Company; and Allen B. Forbes, of Harris Forbes & Co.
5
  "Sound Inflation," Magazine of Wall Street, 296, June 9 1917. National City Company was the securities affiliate of
National City Bank.

                                                          7
activities of investment banking have been paused ...but it remains true that in respect to thrift, and bonds
as a form of investment, the government will have done in a year or two what our private enterprise as it
was before the war could not have done in decades."6 The investment bankers also gained unique insight
into marketing as they were able to observe which households and institutions subscribed for large
amounts of liberty bonds. In essence, their lists of liberty bond subscribers constituted a natural base of
potential customers they could later approach with offers of corporate bond and stock issues.
         In the post-war years, the investment banking industry found the American public receptive to its
marketing efforts.7 Their involvement in the liberty loan drives had taught them how to mass market
securities, and they began to advertise in popular magazines, and even sponsor weekly radio shows
(Quinn, 2019: 114). Some of the private bankers who had been involved in the liberty loan committees
founded new retail-oriented investment banks in the post-war years. The Federal Securities Corporation, a
major investment banking firm with an extensive branch network, for example, was founded in Chicago in
1919 by some of the bankers who had led the liberty loan campaigns there (Peach, 1941: 33). That firm
directly targeted new investors by creating both a women's department and a department that specialized
in selling securities to foreign-born investors (Carosso, 1970: 236).
          Commercial banks, by contrast, were generally restricted by their charters from engaging in many
of the transactions involved in investment banking. As securities markets expanded, however, commercial
banks particularly in large cities allocated a growing share of their assets to loans with securities as
collateral--typically, call loans.8 But these loans did not build up their deposit base the way a commercial
loan typically would, and security loans primarily represented an outlet for funds that were not lent to
commercial customers (Meeker, 1930: 284). Some commercial banks, particularly those that had been
heavily involved in the liberty loan campaigns, also incorporated legally separate firms known as securities
affiliates that functioned as investment banks.9
         With the substantial expansion of the investment banking industry in the 1920s and growing
interest in securities markets, many households and institutions allocated a smaller proportion of their
savings to deposit accounts in order to invest in bonds or stocks. Commercial bankers had anticipated this

6
  Investment Bankers Association of America, Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Convention of the Investment Bankers
Association of America, 1917: 205-208.
7
  At the Annual Convention of the Investment Bankers Association of America in 1920, it was argued that "the spirit
of investment is growing among the people. Liberty bond investment has taught many of the people to invest who
have never before considered this matter....All of this individual investment should break the ground f or your work
and make it easier in the future to bring about the wide distribution of this class of securities which is very desirable"
(1920: 143).
8
  Edwards (1938: 224) notes that security loans rose from 22.5 percent of national bank loans and discounts in 1921
to 36.2 percent in 1928.
9
  For example, the Guarantee Trust Company of New York, a large state-chartered bank, stated that its involvement
in the liberty loan campaigns "paved the way" for the creation and operation of its highly successful securi ties
affiliate, Guaranty Company, which created a national branch network (Peach, 1941: 33).

                                                            8
consequence of the liberty loan drives, and expressed apprehension that "the drawing of so many millions
out of the banks would reduce their deposits and diminish their resources..."10 Even before the loan drives,
commercial bankers had been concerned that securities purchases reduced their deposits.11 This concern
was reflected in the terms of many states' so-called Blue Sky Laws; Mahoney (2003) finds that states with
larger numbers of small commercial banks were more likely to give a state authority absolute power over
approving the securities that could be issued in the state, thus potentially limiting their issue.12 The liberty
loan drives, therefore, likely intensified the competition for savings between commercial banks and
securities markets.


2.2 Effects on Securities Ownership
        Mindful of the fact that very few American households had ever owned a bond, the sales
campaigns conducted as part of the liberty loan drives included a fair amount of information regarding
what was termed "the facts" of the bonds, providing a basic education in fixed income investing. For
example, the famous Four Minute Men, the wartime volunteers who gave millions of short speeches in
public places, were given pre-written talks containing financial information on bonds and investing during
the loan drives.13 Hearing these messages may alone have made households more likely to become
investors in later years; modern research, such as Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie (2011), indicates that
people with greater knowledge of financial markets are much more likely to be investors.
        The campaigns also associated purchases of government bonds with notions of citizenship,
potentially dispelling the view that investing in financial assets was a form of speculation inappropriate for
prudent, honest people. "In the investor democracy figured in the War Loan drives," in Ott's (2011:62)
words, "investment conferred economic freedom in the form of self-restraint, economic stability, social
mobility, and individual security." This may have made middle-income households more open to investing
in other financial assets in later years, and the borrow and buy program may have made them willing to do
so via margin loans (O'Sullivan, 2016: 351).




10
   Proceedings of the Forty-Fourth Annual Convention of the American Bankers' Association , 1918, p. 335.
11
   For example, the Bank Commissioner of Kansas, J.N. Dolley, argued in a 1912 edition of the American Banker that
of the millions of dollars of securities purchased in Kansas before 1911, "98 [percent] of it was either borrowed from
the banker or taken from his deposits." After the passage of Kansas' Blue Sky Law, he boasted that deposits in
Kansas state banks had increased dramatically due to the exodus of blue sky speculators.
12
   It is important to note that by the end of the war, most of the power given to state authorities had been limited
through lawsuits and lobbying by the Investment Banking Association of America (Macey and Miller 1991).
13
   For example, the pamphlet "The Second Liberty Loan," distributed to the Four Minute Men during that campaign
includes detailed financial information, and four pre-written speeches, which contain statements such as "Four
percent on a fifty dollar bond means money doubled in fifteen years; one hundred dollars back to you, a net gain of
fifty dollars" (Committee on Public Information, Four Minute Men, Bulletin Number 17, October 8, 1917).

                                                          9
          The liberty loan campaigns may even have made some Americans vulnerable to the depredations
of unscrupulous or even fraudulent securities promoters. "As soon as industrial workers concluded
payments on their liberty bonds...the stock slicksters stepped into the picture," argued one critic.14 In
response, industry associations and chambers of commerce formed the Investors' Vigilance Committee, to
provide financial education and expose financial "frauds, fakes, swindles and bamboozlements" (Magazine
of Wall Street, 24 November 1923: 125). The importance these campaigns attached to the liberty bond
drives suggests that their architects viewed those campaigns as having had a powerful effect on American
households' willingness and ability to invest in financial assets.
          Yet other factors that were not directly related to the liberty bond drives may also have contributed
to the growth in shareholding in the 1920s. Figure 1 presents monthly data for an index of share prices
from Shiller (2000) in red, and also the volume of shares traded on the NYSE, in blue, for 1910-29. These
data clearly show the rising equity values over the 1920s, which accelerated dramatically around 1927.
The extraordinary returns offered in the stock market produced something of a mania for stocks, which
Galbraith famously described as a "speculative orgy" (1954:11). It is almost certainly the case that this
episode attracted many households into the stock market. Consistent with that, trading volumes on the
NYSE rose alongside stock prices. Although rising volumes do not necessarily reflect increases in the
number of individuals trading, they do suggest that interest in the market was growing.
          In what follows, we will attempt to distinguish the effects of the liberty bond drives from the
effects of rising share prices and other changes that would have been felt by all households by focusing on
the relationship between liberty bond subscription rates in particular places and the rate at which
households in those places owned stocks.


3. Data


          To study the effect of the liberty bond drives on the financial system, we assemble data on
subscription rates in the loan drives, on commercial banks, and on investment banks, all at the county
level. Our liberty bond subscription data were collected from pamphlets published by the Federal Reserve
Banks' liberty loan committees, as described in Hilt and Rahn (2020). Those sources reported total
numbers of subscribers by county, and following Hilt and Rahn, we calculate subscription rates by
dividing those totals by county populations as reported in the 1920 census. Our measure of loan
subscriptions is for the Fourth Liberty Loan, the largest issue, and the one for which there were data for the



14
  "Discovered: That Industrial Workers are Human!" Magazine of Wall Street, 18 August, 1923. The article argues
that American workers "need the same strenuous education that characterized the sale of liberty bonds."

                                                       10
greatest number of counties.15 Not every Federal Reserve district published county-level subscription data,
however, and our measure of loan subscriptions is only available for the Richmond, Cleveland, St Louis,
Minnesota, and San Francisco Federal Reserve districts plus Iowa, which published their own reports.16
         Figure 2 presents a map of our county subscription rate data. Our sources cover at least some
counties from every census division except New England. The map shades counties by subscription rate,
and reveals that rates tended to be higher in the North and West, and lower in the South. These regional
patterns present a challenge for our analysis, in that any changes in the financial system that varied by
region will be correlated with loan subscription rates. We address this heterogeneity in our empirical
framework by using Federal Reserve District-by-time fixed effects, but as shown in the appendix, the
results are not sensitive to dropping individual districts.
         Our commercial bank data consist of annual county-level balance sheet information from 1910 to
1929. The data were obtained from Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency and reports
published by each state's banking departments. The Comptroller published balance sheets for every
national bank annually, but many states did not publish balance sheets for their state-chartered banks and
trust companies (see Mitchener and Jaremski, 2015). Our data include the counties of every state for which
(1) data on state-chartered banks were published throughout the period and (2) liberty bond subscription
data were available. These restrictions create a sample of 869 counties in 17 states.17
         Our investment bank data come from Investment Banks and Brokers of America, a directory of
investment banks in the United States published beginning in 1914. This appears to be the most
comprehensive source available for these firms during the period under study, and claimed to list all the
"firms, individuals and banks that do an active investment business." Its entries include many partnerships,
corporations, and a small number of individuals, some of which operated as branches of firms from other
cities. The directory reveals that by the mid-1920s, many securities firms had developed large regional or
even national branch networks; there were more than 25 different firms with branches in at least 10 cities



15
   The fourth loan had the highest subscription rates of all the loans, and the subscription rate for that loan provides a
reliable indicator for the minimum extent to which the county participated in the liberty bond drives. The approach
also prevents double counting of individuals who subscribed in multiple campaigns. It is also worth noting that, for
the limited subset of counties where subscription data were available for the other liberty loans, the correlation rates
with subscriptions to the fourth loan were quite high: the correlation between subscription rates for the second and
forth loans was 0.77; for the third and fourth, 0.83; and for the victory loan and the fourth, 0.84.
16
   The Reserve Banks that did not publish county-level subscription data for their districts included those located in
the country's largest financial centers: New York, Chicago, Philadelphia and Boston.
17
   These states are: Iowa, Idaho, Illinois, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, Mississippi, Montana, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oregon, South Carolina, South Dakota, Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin, and West Virginia. We drop California
because the state did not report data for branches and the massive branching that occurred during the 1920s would
throw off the county-level statistics. For the few gaps in reporting, we fill the missing values using a linear
interpolation so as to obtain a balanced panel. We also drop the few observations for counties where no commercial
banks were present.

                                                           11
in 1925.18 We designate each listing in the directory as an investment bank. As these firms were not
required to publicly report information on their balance sheets or customer accounts, the information in the
directory enables us only to observe the number of investment banks in a county-year and their names, and
little else. We digitized the data from the 1914, 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1922, 1923, 1925, and 1929
editions.19
        We obtain data on the securities ownership of households in the 1930s from surveys conducted by
the Gallup organization.20 George Gallup conducted five polls in 1937 and 1938 that asked Americans
about their financial assets in the form of the question: "Do you happen to own any stocks or bonds at this
time?" In order to achieve sufficient samples for some of the smaller US states, we pooled the five
individual polls, resulting in a combined sample size of 14,805 respondents. These polls were not based on
random samples, but instead quota-controlled samples in which interviewers were instructed to target a
predetermined number of respondents from particular segments of American society in order to achieve a
final, "representative" sample of the US public. Fortunately, the political scientists Adam Berinksy and
Eric Schickler have produced weights for these polls that compensate for the deficiencies in their sampling
methods. These procedures used to generate these weights are described in Berinsky (2006), and Berinsky
and Schickler (2011). The weights are available along with the data files for the Gallup polls at the Roper
Center for Public Opinion Research at Cornell University via their polling archive, iPOLL. Our analysis is
weighted using ranked weights based on gender, race, phone ownership, and 4-category Census region.
        Finally, we utilize county-level census information from Haines (2004).21 These data enable us to
control for various county characteristics that may have influenced both liberty bond subscription and
changes in the structure of a county's financial services industry. These include measures of the size of the
market, such as total population and urbanization, as well as the composition of the market such as the
fraction of the population that was non-white and the number of farms in the county. When combined with

18
   These firms included securities affiliates of commercial banks (Guaranty Company, National City Company, Harris
Forbes), investment banks organized as corporations (Halsey, Stuart & Co., Inc.), and investment banks organized as
partnerships (Lee, Higginson & Co.; Paine, Webber & Co.).
19
   These are the only volumes that have we have been able to find through the Library of Congress and other archives
and libraries across the world.
20
   In 1935, George Gallup founded the American Institute of Public Opinion and began publishing a weekly column,
America Speaks!, distributed through leading newspapers, about the findings from his nationwide polls of the
American public (Moore, 1992). Pollsters first specified population segments (such as gender, race or region) thought
to be of particular relevance to political divisions within the public, creating mutually exclusive subpopulations, or
strata. The number of individuals sampled within these designated strata was then allocated in proportion to the final
desired sample size. Gallup's polls typically included quota-controlled numbers of respondents based on region
(south or non-south), gender, and economic status. In addition, while the number of respondents to target in the
various strata was fixed in advance, interviewers had considerable discretion in achieving their quotas once they were
in the field. Interviewers preferred to work in safer areas and to target people who seemed more approachable,
potentially yielding samples skewed towards the better-off (Berinsky, 2006).
21
   We aggregate counties to their 1910 boundaries so as to have consistent county definitions over time. Values in
between each Census observation are filled with a linear trend.

                                                         12
annual crop prices from Carter et al. (2006), these data also allow us to control for the run up in
agricultural prices during World War I and the collapse of those prices after the war. Following Jaremski
and Wheelock (2020), a crop price index is calculated as the value of a basket of the county's crops at
market prices in a given year normalized by the value of that same basket of crops at their pre-war prices,
where the fixed basket is defined by the county-specific crop output shares in 1910.
         Summary data for our sample counties are presented in Table 2. On average the liberty bond
subscription rate was equivalent to 16 percent of the county population, and the standard deviation of the
subscription rate was 10 percent. In columns (2) and (3) in the table, we compare county characteristics
between those with above-median subscription rates with those with below-median rates. Unsurprisingly,
those with higher subscription rates were more urban (i.e., locations having more than 2,500 people), less
agricultural, had larger commercial banking sectors, and were more likely to have an investment bank.22
This presents a challenge for our analysis, as any changes in counties related to these characteristics will be
correlated with liberty bond subscription rates. We address this issue directly by including many of these
county characteristics as time-varying controls in our regressions as well as by controlling for time-
invariant county fixed effects and Fed district-by-time fixed effects.


4. Empirical Analysis


4.1 Changes in the Structure of the Financial System, 1910-29: National Data
         We begin by analyzing the broad changes that occurred in the financial system during our sample
period. Figure 3 presents data on the commercial banking sector, at the top, and on the investment banking
sector, at the bottom, for the country as a whole, during the 1910-29 period.
         The number of commercial banks in the United States rose gradually from 1910-1921, and that
growth rate generally did not accelerate during the period of the liberty loan drives. Then after peaking
in1921, the total number of commercial banks gradually began to fall, as declines in commodities prices
led to significant exit and consolidation in the commercial banking sector in rural areas in the 1920s (see
Jaremski and Wheelock, 2020). The growth of the total assets of the commercial banking sector per county
(in red) clearly accelerated during the liberty loan drives, and then there was a significant contraction in
1921, likely in response to the Federal Reserve's policy changes intended to curtail rediscounts. But after
that decline, bank assets quickly rebounded and continued to expand over the rest of the decade, a period


22
  Using newly collected data from Kitchens and Rodgers (2020), we find no strong correlation between the liberty
bond subscriptions and the proportion of WWI enlistments among adult males at the county-level. Including the
interaction between the rate of adult male enlistment and time fixed effects in our model does not qualitatively or
quantitatively alter our results.

                                                         13
of economic growth. By encouraging thrift and saving in general, the liberty bond campaigns may have
contributed to the growth of commercial banks. Yet the loan campaigns may also have encouraged
individuals to divert more of their savings towards securities and investment accounts rather than
commercial bank deposits. The size of the commercial banking sector as a whole clearly grew throughout
our period of study, but the aggregate data could mask differential changes across banks and locations.
         Among investment banks, in the bottom figure, the patterns were different. In a reflection of the
relative lack of barriers to entry in that industry, the total number of those institutions (in blue) was much
more volatile. It grew from 1914--the first year for which we have data--to 1918, and then collapsed in
1919. The rapid drop in 1919 may indicate that the war years and commission-free liberty loan drives were
quite disruptive to that industry. The number of investment banks bounced back in 1920, and then
remained high throughout the rest of the 1920s, with a smaller decline occurring in 1923. The red line in
the panel, which presents the number of counties with at least one investment bank, shows relatively stable
growth up to 1919, and then a large, discrete increase from 1919 to 1920. The year 1920 saw not only a
large increase in the number of investment banks, but a 60 percent increase in the number of counties in
which investment banks were present, reflecting a significant expansion in the industry's geographical
reach which persisted throughout the rest of the 1920s.
         In order to identify the contribution of the liberty bond campaigns to these changes, we next turn
to our county-level data. Focusing on variation across counties allows us to control for the effects of
changes that were felt at the national level, such as the emergence of new public companies and
technologies, as well as the high returns offered by the stock market during the 1920s. In this way, our
analysis will not identify the overall effect of the liberty bond drives, but instead will compare U.S.
counties that were otherwise similar except for their subscription rates.


4.2 Changes in Commercial Banking, 1910-29
         We begin with an analysis of commercial banks. If the liberty bond campaigns led households to
reallocate or diversify more of their savings into investments in securities such as stocks and bonds, then
the commercial bank sector should have grown more slowly than it would have in the absence of those
campaigns. We primarily measure the size of the commercial banking sector in a county as the logarithm
of assets, which is the best measure of the total size of a bank, but we also show that the effects are similar
for total deposits, which more directly reflect individual behavior.23



23
  In the appendix, we show that the results are not sensitive to using other measures of liberty bond subscriptions
such as an indicator variable for counties above the median rate (Figure A1), to scaling the data up to the state-level
and using data for the entire country (Figure A2), to separately excluding each Fed district (Figure A3) or to
excluding any county that had a city of more than 25,000 at any time during the sample period (Figure A4).

                                                           14
        Our commercial bank data are organized as a balanced panel of counties from 1910 to 1929. In
order to investigate the impact of the liberty bonds on the commercial banking sector, we utilize a
difference-in-differences design, and focus on interactions between county liberty bond subscription rates
and a full set of year-fixed effects, in the context of a model with county-fixed effects and standard errors
clustered by county. The interactions provide a test of whether higher liberty bond areas were different
than low liberty bond areas in a given year compared with the difference in 1910 (the excluded year). In
this way, we can determine not only whether the liberty bond drives had an effect on commercial bank
behavior, but also precisely when the effect occurred. This will enable us to understand whether the effects
we observe represented the continuation of an ongoing trend in counties with high liberty bond
subscription rates, or whether they emerged as would be expected in the period during and after the liberty
loan drives.
        Rather than assume that counties with different high liberty bond subscription rates were the same,
we take steps to control for other factors that could have influenced both liberty bond subscription rates
and financial and economic development. Figure 2 revealed some regional patterns in liberty bond
subscription rates. In addition, at the time, the individual Federal Reserve Districts held significant
autonomy over the conduct of monetary policy, and could set their own discount rates (Wicker, 1966). We
thus include Fed district-by-year fixed effects in our model in order to eliminate the effects of these
regional differences from our analysis. We also include various county characteristics as controls, in order
to address concerns related to the differences in county characteristics that may have been systematically
related to liberty bond subscription rates seen in Figure 2. These include the logarithm of population, the
logarithm of the number of farms, the fraction of the population living in a location over 2,500 people, the
fraction of the population that was non-white, and the crop price index. Finally, we include an indicator for
whether or not there was a Federal Reserve Bank or Branch within a county and interact it with the time-
fixed effects, to account for the differential effect the presence that those institutions may have had on
liberty bond subscriptions, commercial banks, and investing behavior over time.
        The model we estimate is:


           , =  + 1    + 2 , +    +  + , ,                                                      (1)


where , is the logarithm of total commercial bank assets for county c in year t;  is the
subscription rate for the fourth liberty loan of county c, in percentage points; , is a vector of county
characteristics including the Census controls as well as interactions between an indicator variable for
whether county c contained either a Federal Reserve Bank or Branch and the year-fixed effects;



                                                      15
 is a set of indicator variables for the Fed districts;  is a vector of year-fixed effects;  is a
vector of county-fixed effects, and , is the error term, clustered by county.24
           The estimated coefficients of equation (1) along with two-standard-error bands are presented in the
top panel of Figure 4. The figure reveals that counties with high liberty bond subscription rates
experienced a significant relative decline in commercial bank assets during and after the liberty bond
drives compared to other counties. A 10 percentage point (about a 1 standard deviation) increase in liberty
bond subscription led to a 7.3 percent decrease in commercial bank assets by 1920 and a 9.7 percent
decrease by 1929, relative to other counties. We also find no strong mitigation of the effect over the 1920s
and if anything, there was an increase in the negative effect during the decade. These estimates imply that
there was a large and sustained relative decrease in commercial bank activity that corresponded to the
cross-section distribution of liberty bond subscription, even after controlling for the general effect of the
war and constant county characteristics and changing regional differences. Moreover, recalling Figure 3,
these effects actually work against the overall positive trend in bank assets during the period.
           Perhaps just as importantly, we find no difference in commercial bank assets across locations
related to the liberty bond subscription rates before the drives took place. Indeed, the coefficient on liberty
bonds does not become statistically significant until 1917 (the year of the first and second bond drives) and
does not become consistently significant until 1919. The insignificance of 1918 could be the result of
banks scaling up lending in that year to help place the liberty bonds with the public. The lack of any pre-
liberty bond effect confirms that areas with high liberty bond subscription were not evolving along
substantially different trends relative to areas with low liberty bond subscription prior to the campaigns.
           Yet the possibility remains that some unobserved county characteristic that was associated with
higher liberty bond subscription rates may also have shaped the evolution of the commercial banking
sector of counties in the 1920s. We argue that the county characteristics associated with higher liberty
bond subscriptions would also likely have been correlated with differential increases in commercial bank
assets. A higher subscription rate meant that a larger fraction of the population had the financial resources
to purchase a bond, and also likely meant that there was a higher level of social capital, as reflected in the
civil society institutions conducting the loan campaigns. Higher wealth and social capital, all else equal,
should have led to the creation of more commercial banks, and stronger growth of the assets of the banking
sector. The most likely sources of bias in our analysis go in the opposite direction of our estimates.
           The timing of the changes exhibited in the figure also help rule out the concern that the decline in
commercial bank activity we attribute to the liberty bonds was instead due to the post-war decline in
production and prices in agricultural areas. Although we explicitly control for each county's specific crop


24
     The results throughout the paper hold if we cluster our standard errors by state rather than county.

                                                             16
price index, the decline in income during the early 1920s, which we cannot observe directly, could have
been responsible for the decline in bank activity. Yet the significant decline in commercial bank assets in
counties with high liberty bond subscription rates between 1917 and 1919 moves against the substantial
increase in crop prices and incomes through 1919 that expanded bank balance sheets (Jaremski and
Wheelock, 2020). Moreover, as shown in Appendix Figure A5, counties with high liberty bond
subscription rates did not suddenly experience a decline in the number of banks in the late 1910s or early
1920s.25 Combined with the lack of an effect before 1917, the timing strongly indicates that the effect on
commercial banks was driven by the liberty loan campaigns, rather than activity before the war, the
economic slowdown after the war, or a sudden collapse of banks.
         Further evidence consistent with our interpretation of these effects is presented in the lower panel
of Figure 3. The mechanism leading to the contraction in bank assets we propose is that while household
savings were rising in general, depositors more exposed to the liberty bond drives chose to invest more of
their funds in securities and investment accounts rather than deposit them in commercial banks. A
necessary implication of this mechanism is that commercial bank deposits should have increased more
slowly in high liberty bond areas relative to other areas, and by similar magnitudes as the fall in bank
assets. The effects visible in the figure are not exactly the same, but they do not need to be: the liberty loan
drives may have impacted other sources of bank funding. But the effect on deposits was quite similar to
the effect on bank assets.


4.3 Changes in Investment Banking, 1910-29
         We next study the effects of the liberty loan drives on investment banks. Because data on
investment banks' assets or accounts were not reported to any state or federal regulators, we must limit our
analysis to the number of investment banks across counties. Of course, changes in the number of
investment banks will be an imperfect indicator for the level of demand for securities in a county.
Nevertheless, entry into investment banking was not restricted by many legal or other barriers, so we
would expect it to be responsive to changes in local demand.26 In addition, many investment banks had
sales staffs that actively solicited investments, so that changes in their numbers likely increased the number
of local securities owners.




25
   Indeed, we would not expect individuals purchasing more bonds and stocks to force commercial banks out of
business, as individuals still had use for deposit accounts.
26
   The Blue Sky Laws of states often imposed registration requirements and other regulations on individuals and
firms in the securities industry. However, these regulations were typically far less restrictive than those imposed on
commercial banks, which typically included significant minimum capital requirements as well as extensive
regulations on their operations and disclosure requirements.

                                                           17
        In what follows, we test whether liberty bond subscription rates influenced the number of
investment banks in a county. We start by examining the determinants of the number of investment banks
in 1914, 1916, 1918, 1919, 1920, 1922, 1923, 1925, and 1929--the years for which data are available. The
models are essentially the same as those used in the context of commercial banks, and take the form:


            , =  + 1    + 2 , +    +  + , , (2)


where , is the logarithm of the number of investment banks in county c in year t, and the rest
of the variables retain their previous definitions.27
        The results of equation (2) are presented in Figure 5, which plots the point estimates and two
standard error bars by year, relative to the excluded year of 1914. Reassuringly, there was no significant
effect of liberty bond subscription on the number of investment banks in the year 1916, indicating that
there was no ongoing differential growth of investment banks in the counties with high liberty bond
subscription rates prior to the war. There was also no effect in 1918, perhaps because the liberty loan
campaigns did not create any profit-making opportunities for investment banks, and in fact likely made
that industry less profitable in the short-run. But then in 1919, there was a positive effect on the number of
investment banks, even though the industry itself contracted significantly in that year (Figure 3). The effect
then grew in size in 1920 and 1922, as the industry expanded, and then persisted at a somewhat lower level
throughout the rest of the 1920s. Overall, these estimates are consistent with the notion that the liberty loan
campaigns changed American households' attitudes towards investing, and that investment banks sought
to capitalize on the opportunities this created for their industry by moving into counties where subscription
rates had been high.
        These estimates also help rule out the concern that the relative decline in commercial bank assets
in counties with high liberty bond subscription rates after 1917 was due to a general contraction in
financial markets or the post-war slump in agricultural areas. Instead, the negative effect we document
among commercial banks was isolated to that class of institutions. Investment banks expanded in the same
counties where commercial banks grew more slowly, and one would not expect that to have been the case
if economic conditions were deteriorating.




27
  We add 1 and take the logarithm of the number of investment banks because while most counties do not have a
single investment bank a couple of counties (e.g., those that encompass St. Louis and Baltimore) had more than 80
investment banks. The results are similar if we drop out these urban counties that had 25,000 people at any time
during the sample period (Appendix Figure A4), estimate a binary variable for whether or not there was at least one
investment bank in a county during the year (Appendix Figure A6), or separately exclude each Fed district (Appendix
Figure A3).

                                                        18
4.4 Changes in Competition Between Investment Banks and Commercial Banks, 1910-29
         If the liberty loan drives taught Americans that securities ownership could be an attractive choice
for their savings, and if they also taught investment bankers that the savings of ordinary households were
an attractive source of business, then they would have intensified competition between investment banks
and commercial banks for the savings of middle-income Americans and small businesses.28 Relative to the
period before the liberty loan drives, the presence of an investment bank in a county should have had a
stronger effect on commercial bank assets in the years after 1918, as competition between commercial
banks and investment banks for the savings of local households and businesses became more intense.
         To test for these effects, we take two approaches. The first examines whether the presence of an
investment bank influenced the amount of commercial bank assets in the same county in the same year.
This approach enables us to observe whether the effect of investment banks on local commercial banks
became stronger after the liberty bond drives. Yet a concern regarding this model is that any unobserved
county characteristic that was associated with both the presence of investment banks and a decline in the
assets of commercial banks in the 1920s would bias the estimated effects.29 To address this potential
concern, we utilize a second model, which focuses only on investment banks that entered during or
immediately following the liberty bond drive years (1916-1920). These investment banks were most likely
induced to enter by the liberty bond drives, which revealed which counties were promising locations for
investment banks through high participation rates, and which were unlikely to have signaled that the
commercial banks in the county would decline. We construct an indicator variable for counties gaining an
investment bank during that period and, similar to the previous approach, we investigate whether those
counties experienced differential growth of commercial bank assets after 1920, and whether they were
already seeing declines prior to World War I.30




28
   There were potential complementarities between investment banking and commercial banking; lending to brokers
to finance margin loans to customers became an important line of business for commercial banks in the 1920s
(Edwards, 1938). But those loans may not have originated locally, particularly if the investment bank was a branch of
a larger firm headquartered in a financial center such as New York or Chicago and obtained credit there.
29
   Of course, one might expect that county characteristics associated with financial development such as higher levels
of income, wealth, or industrialization would affect both commercial banks and investment banks in the same
direction. If investment banks were more likely to be present in counties where conditions were more favorable to the
growth of the commercial banking sector, then our estimates would understate the impact of investment banks on
commercial banks.
30
   In Appendix Figures A10 through A13, we show that both models are robust to excluding any county that had a
city of more than 25,000 people at any time during the sample period or to separately excluding each Fed district. The
results are also similar if we were to use a linear trend to fill in the years when investment bank data are unavailable.
While unreported, the results are robust to other variable choices including instead using an indicator for having an
investment bank in 1916, in 1918, 1919, or in 1920 or using an indicator for counties that gained a bank 1914-1920.

                                                           19
        The first model, in which the investment bank indicator can vary over time, takes the form:


       , =  + 1 ( > 0),   + 2 , +    +  + , , (3)


where the ( > 0), is an indicator variable that takes a value of 1 if county c had at least one
investment bank in year t and the rest of the variables retain their definitions.
        The estimates of equation (3) are presented in Figure 6, which plots the point estimates and two
standard error bars by year. The effect of investment banks is positive before 1918, it begins to decline in
1918 and becomes significantly negative by 1920 and remained so for the rest of the 1920s. A county that
had an investment bank would have had 7.4% more commercial bank assets in 1916, but 9.5% and 8.6%
less commercial banks assets in 1920 and 1925, respectively. The competitive relationship between
investment banks and commercial banks changed with the liberty bond drives.
        The model looking at counties that gained an investment bank 1916-1920 is:


   , =  + 1 (1916-20 > 0)   + 2 , +    +  + , , (4)


where (1916-20 > 0) is an indicator variable that takes a value of 1 if the county gained at
least one investment bank between 1916 and 1920 and the rest of the variables retain their definitions.
        Figure 7 presents the point estimates for counties that gained an investment bank between 1916
and 1920 along with two standard error bands by year, relative to the excluded year of 1910. These results
are similar but larger than those in Figure 6. Counties that gained an investment bank during the liberty
bond drives had only mild differences in commercial bank assets prior to 1917, and the difference becomes
consistently negative and declined steeply during the years of the liberty loan drives. A county that gained
an investment bank is expected to have had an insignificant 4.8% less commercial bank assets in 1916, but
a significant 17.5% and 18.8% less commercial banks assets in 1920 and 1925 respectively, relative to
1910. Even controlling for pre-trends and any potential omitted factor in the 1920s driving additional
investment bank entry, the effect of investment banks became considerably stronger immediately during
the liberty bond drives rather than before the war (i.e., 1910-1913) or during the early parts of the war (i.e.,
1914-1915).
        Taken together, these results suggest that there was a structural shift in the effect of investment
banks coinciding with the liberty bond drives in 1917-1919, and not necessarily just the start of WWI in
1914 or the entry of new technology and high stock returns of the 1920s. The liberty loan campaigns
reshaped local financial markets, and led investment banks to compete much more aggressively for the
savings of households and businesses. Yet it is important to note that the effect of investment bank entry

                                                       20
cannot account for the entire effect of liberty bonds on commercial bank assets. Although investment
banks entered many new cities and counties, they were present only in a relatively small portion of the
sample counties. If we include liberty bonds as a separate control in either equation (3) or (4), the liberty
bond interactions remain negative and statistically significant after 1918 as well. This suggests that the
effects of the liberty bonds on commercial bank assets were not solely due to the presence and entry of
investment banks, and that instead, the effect of investment banks on commercial banks was due in part to
the liberty bond drives themselves.


4.5 Determinants of Individuals' Ownership of Financial Assets, 1930s: State-level Data
        Our results have shown that high liberty bond subscription rates were associated with entry by
investment banks, which would almost certainly have led to higher securities ownership rates. But it is
important to directly quantify the effects on securities ownership rates, and also to investigate whether the
effects of the bond drives and the expansion of the investment banking industry they helped stimulate
persisted beyond the 1920s.
        The earliest available sources that record whether or not households owned financial assets are
surveys conducted by Gallup in the mid-1930s. We use these surveys to determine whether the ownership
rates of financial assets were higher in places where liberty bond subscription rates had been higher,
conditional on individual survey respondents' characteristics such as occupation, age, and various markers
of wealth and social status, such as whether or not they owned an automobile or a telephone. As we
observe financial asset ownership nearly 20 years after the liberty bond drives, this analysis will reveal
whether the many different mechanisms through which liberty bonds may have led to greater levels of
security ownership had persistent effects. Yet the limitations of the data will prevent us from being able to
distinguish among those different potential mechanisms.
        The main limitation of the data is that the geographical identifiers indicate only the state in which
the respondent resided. The surveys did record whether or not the respondent resided in a large city or a
small town, but not the identity of the city or town. We are therefore unable to utilize the variation across
counties within states in liberty bond subscription rates, and instead focus on state-level liberty bond
subscription rates, as reported by the U.S. Treasury (1920).
        As we have large numbers of households within states, we estimate the following model:


                         ,, =  + 1  + 2  +  + ,, , (5)


where  is an indicator variable equal to one if survey respondent  residing in state s reported
that they owned either stocks or bonds in survey wave j;  is the subscription rate for the fourth

                                                      21
liberty loan in the state in which respondent  resided;  are fixed effects for each of the five survey
waves; and  is a vector of characteristics of respondent  such as age, gender, race, proxies for income,
and locational characteristics. ,, is the error term, clustered by state. We estimate (5) using a logistic
regression.
        The estimates, presented in Table 3, imply that liberty loan subscription rates were strongly
correlated with financial asset ownership, even conditional on a broad range of individual characteristics.
In column (1), only the survey-wave fixed effects are included, and in column (2), controls for age, gender,
race, and whether or not the respondent resided in a small town or on a farm are added. This diminishes the
magnitude of the estimate of the liberty bonds parameter slightly, but it remains large and statistically
significant. The marginal effect implied by the logit coefficient reported in column (2) indicates that a
percentage point increase in the state subscription rate led to a 0.3 percentage point increase in the
likelihood that an individual owned financial assets. In columns (3) and (4), controls for occupation and
social class and wealth are included, and the effect remains unchanged. Finally, in column (5) we add
controls for other state characteristics. The additional controls do reduce the estimated magnitude of the
effect, but it remains statistically and economically significant.
        A potential source of concern regarding these results is that, since they only represent cross-
sectional differences from the years after the liberty loans, any estimated effect of liberty bonds on
securities ownership rates in 1930s may simply be a consequence of persistent differences across states
that were correlated with liberty bond subscription rates. Yet the low rate of securities ownership among
households in the years prior to the liberty loan drives suggests that it is implausible that these differences
could explain our results. In Appendix Figure A15, for instance, we show that these results are not due to
the effect of outlier states with particularly high or low levels of liberty bond subscription rates.


4.6 Changes in Real Outcomes, 1920-29


        Investment banks and commercial banks created alternative pathways for financial intermediation.
Commercial banks utilized deposits to fund loans, while investment banks solicited funds for brokerage or
asset management services that would ultimately channel savings into securities markets. But the lending
of commercial banks was local, whereas securities markets were regional or national. In the highly
segmented commercial banking markets of the early twentieth century, if households and businesses
reallocated their savings out of commercial bank deposits and into securities markets, this would have
caused a contraction in the availability of external finance locally, while increasing it regionally or




                                                       22
nationally.31 Here we investigate the impact of that local contraction on economic activity at the county
level.
         We adopt two approaches to this analysis. In the first, we instrument for the growth of commercial
bank assets with the liberty bond subscription rates in that county, and use the instrumented values to
predict changes in economic outcomes, obtained from the census. In this framework, the regressions
presented above showing the effect of liberty bonds on commercial bank assets (Figure 4) have the
interpretation of the first-stage relationship, and the IV estimates show the local average treatment effects
of the changes in commercial bank assets on economic activity induced by the liberty bond drives.
         This approach utilizes the changes in commercial bank assets induced by the liberty bonds to
estimate the effects of commercial banks on local economic activity. It requires that liberty bond
subscription rates satisfy the exclusion restriction that they only influenced economic outcomes through
their effect on the commercial banking system. For example, securities purchases made by the residents of
a county in the 1920s, or the entry of an investment bank in a county, must not have influenced local
economic activity except by drawing deposits away from commercial banks. We discuss this assumption
in detail below and show that when we delete counties where violations seem most likely, the results do
not change. Yet it is always possible that the liberty bonds could have influenced economic activity
through some channel other than commercial banks.
         We therefore adopt a second approach in which we estimate the relationship between local
economic outcomes and liberty bond subscription rates directly. The validity of this approach does not
depend on the effects of the liberty bonds operating through any specific channel. This second approach
has the interpretation of the reduced-form version of the first approach.
         We analyze the effect of the liberty bond subscriptions on the growth of county-level aggregates
between 1919 and 1929 from the federal census, in a framework that controls for each county's 1919
characteristics. We focus on five outcome variables, two for manufacturing and three for agriculture, all in
logarithms: the number of manufacturing establishments, manufacturing output, the number of farms, the
value of crop output, and total farm values. Each of these outcomes should have been positively related to
the availability bank credit.




31
  We verify that total loans declined in counties with higher liberty bond subscription rates in Figure A14. In the
localized and segmented commercial banking markets of the period, it is unlikely that loans from banks in other
counties would have offset these declines.

                                                          23
        We estimate our models in first differences. The first approach uses 2SLS, as follows:


        ,1919-29 =  + 1  ,1918-29 + 2 ,1919 + 3 ,1919 + 4  +  ,


         ,1918-29 =  + 1  + 2 ,1919 + 3 ,1919 + 4  + , (6)
        


where ,1919-29 is the change in the outcome variable between 1919 and 1929 for county c,
 ,1918-29 is the predicted change in the log of total bank assets in a county from 1918 to 1929,

,1919 is the level of the outcome variable in 1919 to control for any convergence effects, ,1919 is a
vector of county-level control variables in 1919,  is the error term clustered by state, and the rest of the
variables retain their definitions from above.
        The results of (6) are presented in Table 4, with OLS estimates presented next to the 2SLS results
for comparison. Columns (2) and (4) indicate that the growth in commercial bank assets in a county had
strong positive effects on the growth in the number of manufacturing establishments and farms. As the
liberty bond campaigns reduced the growth of commercial bank assets, the effect of the liberty bonds on
these outcomes was negative. The OLS estimates in (1) and (3) are both smaller than the corresponding IV
estimates, suggesting that the bias corrected by 2SLS was negative. This could be consistent with a
selection effect operating in the opposite direction--banks choosing to expand in areas with more
concentrated economic activity, and slower growth in the number of manufacturing enterprises and farms.
Columns (6) and (8) present estimates of the effect of the growth of commercial bank assets on the
manufacturing and crop output; here the patterns are similar, but the positive estimates of the effects of
commercial bank asset growth are not statistically significant. Finally, in columns (11) and (12), the effect
on farm values is estimated, and found to be positive.
        A source of concern regarding these results could be that the exclusion restriction would be
violated if the liberty loan campaigns induced households to make investments that directly affected
economic activity. Among the most plausible examples of this would be that households who learned
about investing from the loan campaigns made investments in local firms; this could have impacted our
economic outcomes independently of any effect on commercial banks. The counties in which investments
in local firms were most accessible, and arguably violations of the exclusion restriction were most likely,
were those containing large population centers where firms that accessed national securities markets were
located. In those counties, investments in some local firms could be made through securities dealers. Yet in
Appendix Table A1, we show that when we delete all counties with cities of 25,000 or more from the
sample, the results remain essentially unchanged.


                                                      24
         Of course it is possible that the liberty bonds could have influenced economic activity through
other channels. In our second approach to this analysis, we simply regress the change in the county
outcomes on the liberty bond subscription rate, as follows:


           ,1919-29 =  + 1  + 2 ,1919 + 3 ,1919 +  +  ,                                         (7)


The results are presented in Table 5. The estimates are generally negative: counties with higher liberty
bond subscription rates had slower growth in their numbers of manufacturing establishments and farms,
lower output, and lower farm values, although most of these effects are imprecisely estimated. It is worth
noting that the most plausible violations of the exclusion restriction in (6) would suggest a positive
relationship between liberty bonds and economic outcomes.
         Taken together, these estimates suggest that the liberty loan campaigns' impacts on household
finance and financial intermediation had significant consequences for the composition of economic activity
at the county level. By helping to divert a larger share of household savings into securities markets, the
liberty loan campaigns led to a relative contraction in the availability of bank loans in the 1920s, and fewer
small manufacturing establishments and farms.


5. Conclusion
         This paper analyzes the effects of the liberty loan campaigns of World War I, and provides a
quantitative assessment of their role in reshaping American finance. During the 1920s, American securities
markets expanded, as the investment banking industry grew, securities ownership proliferated, and the
commercial banking industry declined in relative terms. Financial historians have long argued that the
liberty bond drives contributed to these changes, but their effects have never been analyzed systematically.
         Using unique county level data, we find that that higher liberty bond subscription rates led to an
increase in the number of investment banks, a contraction in commercial bank assets and a stronger
competitive effect of investment banks on commercial banks. We also find that individuals residing in
states with higher liberty bond subscription rates were more likely to own financial assets such as stocks
and bonds in the mid-1930s. Finally, we show that these changes had significant effects on the
composition of economic activity at the county level, and resulted in fewer manufacturing enterprises and
farms.
         Many other factors contributed to the changes in American financial markets that occurred in the
1920s. The low rates of securities ownership among households in the United States at that time, and the
focus of the investment banking industry on wealthy individuals and institutions would almost certainly
have slowly changed in the absence of the liberty loan campaigns during the prosperous 1920s. Yet our

                                                      25
estimates imply that the contribution of the liberty loans was significant. In the absence of the liberty
loans, there would have been 22.3 percent fewer investment banks in 1929, and commercial bank assets
would have been 19.8 percent greater in 1929, relative to 1916. This contraction in the growth of
commercial bank assets reduced the number of manufacturing firms and farms in our sample counties
significantly. We cannot assess the overall welfare effects of these changes, but it is almost certainly the
case that in the absence of the liberty bonds, American stock and bond markets would have been smaller.
The costs at the local level were likely offset at least partly by the benefits at the national level.
        Although they were conducted to raise funds and generate political support for the war effort, the
liberty loan drives also led to a significant shift in financial intermediation. By introducing millions of
households to bond ownership, they contributed to the expansion of the investment banking industry and
securities investing in the 1920s that likely helped fuel the large-scale expansion in American industry of
the mid-twentieth century. The results of this paper thus confirm the importance of financial literacy and
trust for participation in financial markets. The liberty bond drives can be thought of as massive
interventions that sought to shape households' attitudes toward investing in securities and to provide
information that increased financial literacy.


References

Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale. 1997. "Financial Markets, Intermediaries and Intertemporal
        Smoothing," Journal of Political Economy 105(3): 523-546.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy. 2003. "Wealth accumulation and the propensity to plan."
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 118.3: 1007-1047.
Balloch, Adnan, Nicholae, Anamaria, and Dennis Philip. 2015. "Stock Market Literacy, Trust and
        Participaiton," Review of Finance 19: 1925-63.
Baskin, Jonathan Barron, and Paul J. Miranti, Jr. 1997. A History of Corporate Finance. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.
Beck, Thorsten, and Ross Levine. 2004. "Stock markets, banks, and growth: Panel evidence." Journal of
        Banking & Finance 28: 423-442.
Berle, Adolf A., Jr., and Gardiner C. Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property. New
        York: Macmillan.
Berinsky, Adam. J. 2006. "American Public Opinion in the 1930s and 1940s: The Analysis of Quota-
        Controlled Sample Survey Data." Public Opinion Quarterly 70(4):499-529.
Berinsky, Adam J. and Eric Schickler. 2011. The American Mass Public in the 1930s and 1940s
        [Computer file]. Individual surveys conducted by the Gallup Organization [producers], 1936-945:
        Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut [distributor], 2011.
Bernheim, A. L., and M. G. Schneider, eds. 1935. The Securities Markets. New York: Twentieth Century
        Fund.
Brown, J. David, and John S. Earle. 2017. "Finance and growth at the firm level: Evidence from SBA
        loans." Journal of Finance 72: 1039-1080.
Calomiris, Charles W. 1995. "The Costs of Rejecting Universal Banking: American Finance in the German
        Mirror, 1870-1914," in The Coordination of Economic Activity Within and Between Firms, N.
        Lamoreaux and D. Raff, eds., 257-312. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                                        26
Calomiris, Charles W. 2002. "Banking and Financial Intermediation," in Technological Innovation and
         Economic Performance, Benn Steil, David G. Victor, and Richard R. Nelson, eds., 285-313,
         Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Elliot Oh. 2018. "Who Owned Citibank? Familiarity Bias and Business
         Network Influences on Stock Purchases, 1925-1929." NBER Working paper No. w24431.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Daniel M.G. Raff. 1995. "The Evolution of Market Structure, Information, and
         Spreads in American Investment Banking," in Anglo-American Finance: Financial Markets and
         Institutions in 20th-Century North America and the U.K. R. Sylla and M. Bordo, eds., 103-160.
         Business One Irwin.
Carlson, Mark, Correia, Sergio and Stephan Luck. 2020. "The Effects of Banking Competition on Growth
         and Financial Stability: Evidence from the National Banking Era." Working Paper, Federal
         Reserve.
Carosso, Vincent P. 1970. Investment Banking in America: A History. Cambridge: Harvard University
         Press.
Carosso, Vincent P. 1979. More than a Century of Investment Banking: the Kidder, Peabody & Co. Story.
         New York: McGraw Hill.
Carter, Susan, Gartner, Scott, Haines, Michael, Olmstead, Alan, Sutch, Richard, and Gavin Wright. 2006.
         Historical Statistics of the United States, Millennial Edition. New York: Cambridge.
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Michele Gambera. 2001. "Banking market structure, financial dependence and
         growth: International evidence from industry data." Journal of Finance 56: 617-648.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. 2014. "The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-level
         Evidence from the 2008-9 Financial Crisis." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129: 1-59.
Dickson, P.G.M. 1967. The Financial Revolution in England: A Study in the Development of Public
         Credit, 1688-1756. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Edwards, George W. 1938. The Evolution of Finance Capitalism. New York: Longmans Green & Co.
Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867­1960.
         Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Friend, Irwin, G. Wright Hoffman, Willis J. Winn, Morris Hamburg, and Stanley Schor. 1958. The Over-
         the-Counter Securities Markets. New York: McGraw Hill.
Friend, Irwin, James R. Longstreet, Morris Mendelson, Ervin Miller, and Arleigh P. Hess, Jr. 1967.
         Investment Banking and the New Issues Market. New York: World Publishing.
Fulford, Scott. 2015. "How Important are Banks for Economic Development? National Banks in the
         United States, 1870-1900," Review of Economics and Statistics 97(5): 921-38.
Garbade, Kenneth D. 2012. Birth of a Market: The U.S. Treasury Securities Market from the Great War to
         the Great Depression. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Galbraith, John Kenneth. 1954. The Great Crash: 1929. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Georgarakos, Dimitris, and Giacomo Pasini. 2011. "Trust, Sociability and Stock Market Participation,"
         Review of Finance 15(4): 693-725.
Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist. 2018. "What Happened: Financial Factors in the Great Recession."
         Journal of Economic Perspectives: 3-30.
Gilje, Erik P., Elena Loutskina, and Philip E. Strahan. 2016. "Exporting liquidity: Branch banking and
         financial integration." Journal of Finance 71: 1159-1184.
Guiso, Luigi, Sapienza, Paola and Luigi Zingales. 2008. "Trusting the Stock Market," Journal of Finance
         63(6): 2557-2600.
Haines, Michael R. 2004. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-
         2000. ICPSR Study 2896. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
         Research.
Haliassos, Michael, and Carol C. Bertaut. 1995. "Why do so few hold stocks?." the Economic Journal
         105.432: 1110-1129.



                                                  27
Hall, George J., and Thomas J. Sargent. 2019. "Complications for the United States from International
         Credits: 1913-1940," in Dabla-Norris, ed., Debt and Entanglements Between the Wars.
         Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Haney, Lewis. 1914. "Farm Credit Conditions in a Cotton State." American Economic Review 4-1: 47­67.
Haven, T. Kenneth. 1940. Investment Banking under the Securities and Exchange Commission, Ann
         Arbor: University of Michigan.
Hilt, Eric, and Wendy M. Rahn. 2020. "Financial Asset Ownership and Political Partisanship: Liberty
         Bonds and Republican Electoral Success in the 1920s," Journal of Economic History, 80(3).
Jaremski, Matthew. 2014. "National Banking's Role in U.S. Industrialization, 1850-1900" Journal of
         Economic History 74:109-140.
Jaremski, Matthew, and David Wheelock. Forthcoming. "Banking on the Boom, Tripped by the Bust:
         Banks and the World War I Agricultural Price Shock" Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.
Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E. Strahan. 1996. "The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank branch
         deregulation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 111: 639-670.
Kang, Sung Won and Hugh Rockoff. 2015. "Capitalizing Patriotism: The Liberty Bonds of World War I."
         Financial History Review 22: 45­78.
King, Robert G., and Ross Levine. 1993. "Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right." Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 108: 717-737.
Kitchens, Carl, and Luke Rodgers. 2020. "Were Children Always Normal? Historic Evidence from the
         WWI Agricultural Boom and Bust." Working Paper.
Lin, Leming. 2020. "Bank Deposits and the Stock Market," Review of Financial Studies 33: 2622-2658.
Lusardi, Annamaria. 2004. "Saving and the effectiveness of financial education". In: O. Mitchell and S.
         Utkus (eds.), Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance, Oxford
         University Press, 157-184.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell. 2007. "Baby boomers retirement security: The role of planning,
         financial literacy and housing wealth." Journal of Monetary Economics 54: 205-224.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia Mitchell. 2008. "Planning and financial literacy: How do women fare?"
         American Economic Review 98: 413-417.
Macey, Jonathan, and Geoffrey Miller. 2001. "Origin of the blue sky laws." Texas Law Review 70: 347-
         397.
Mahoney, Paul. 2003. "The origins of the Blue-Sky Laws: A test of competing hypotheses." Journal of
         Law and Economics 46: 229-251.
McAdoo, William G. 1931. Crowded Years: The Reminiscences of William G. McAdoo. Boston: Houghton
         Mifflin Company.
Means, Gardiner C. 1930. "The Diffusion of Stock Ownership in the United States," Quarterly Journal of
         Economics 44: 561-600.
Meeker, J. Edward. 1930. The Work of the Stock Exchange. New York: Ronald Press.
Mitchell, Lawrence E. 2007. The Speculation Economy: How Finance Triumphed Over Industry. San
         Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Mitchener, Kris James, and Matthew Jaremski. 2015. "The Evolution of Bank Supervisory Institutions:
         Evidence from American States." Journal of Economic History 75: 819-859.
Moore, David M. 1992. The Super Pollsters. New York: Four Walls Eight Windows Publishing.
Nicholas, Tom. 2008. "Does Innovation Cause Stock Market Runups? Evidence from the Great Crash,"
         American Economic Review, 98(4): 1370-96.
Olney, Martha L. 1995. Saving and Dissaving of 12,817 American Households, 1917-1919. Amherst, MA:
          Martha L. Olney, University of Massachusetts [producer], 1993. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
          Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor]. http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR06276.v1
O'Sullivan, Mary. 2007. "The Expansion of the U.S. Stock Market, 1885­1930: Historical Facts and
         Theoretical Fashions," Enterprise and Society 8(3): 489-542.
O'Sullivan, Mary. 2016. Dividends of Development: Securities Markets in the History of US Capitalism,
         1866-1922. New York: Oxford University Press.

                                                   28
Ott, Julia C. 2011. When Wall Street Met Main Street: the Quest for an Investors' Democracy. Cambridge,
         Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Peach, W. Nelson. 1941. The Securities Affiliates of National Banks. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
Quinn, Sarah L. 2019. American Bonds: How Credit Markets Shaped a Nation. Princeton: Princeton
         University Press.
Rajan, Raghuram and Rodney Ramcharan. 2015. "The Anatomy of a Credit Crisis: The Boom and Bust in
         Farm Land Prices in the United States in the 1920s." American Economic Review 105: 1439-77.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Rodney Ramcharan. 2016. "Local Financial Capacity and Asset Values: Evidence
         from Bank Failures." Journal of Financial Economics 120: 229-251.
Rider, Kilian. 2019. "Should Monetary Policy Lean Against the Wind? Quasi-Experimental Evidence from
         Federal Reserve Policies in 1920-21," Working paper, Austrian National Bank.
Ripley, William Z. 1927. Main Street and Wall Street. Boston, Little, Brown, and Company.
Rutterford, Janette, and Dimitris P. Sotiropoulos. 2017. "The Rise of the Small Investor in the United
         States and United Kingdom, 1895 to 1970." Enterprise and Society 18(3): 485-535.
Saint-Paul, Gilles. 1996. "Demand-Driven Financial Development," in Hermes and Lensink, eds.,
         Financial Development and Economic Growth. London: Routledge.
Shiller, Robert. 2000. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton, New Jersey, Princeton University.
Sobel, Robert. 1965. The Big Board: A History of the New York Stock Market. New York: Free Press.
Song, Fenghua and Anjan V. Thakor. 2010. "Financial System Architecture and the Co-Evolution of
         Banks and Capital Markets," Economic Journal, 120 (547): 1021-1055.
Sutch, Richard. 2015. "Financing the Great War. A Class Tax for the Wealthy, Liberty Bonds for All."
         BEHL working paper no. 2015­09.
Sylla, Richard. 2002. "Financial Systems and Economic Modernization," Journal of Economic History
         62(2): 277-292.
Thomson, David K. 2016. "Like a Cord through the Whole Country: Union Bonds and Financial
         Mobilization for Victory" Journal of the Civil War Era 6(3): 347-75.
United States Treasury. 1920. Annual Report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the State of the Finances
         for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1919. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. 2011. "Financial literacy and stock market
         participation." Journal of Financial Economics 101: 449-472.
Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. 2012. "Financial literacy, retirement planning
         and household wealth." Economic Journal 122.560: 449-478.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette. 2004. "Perspectives on behavioral finance: Does "irrationality" disappear
         with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions." In: M. Gertler and K. Rogoff (eds.), NBER
         Macroeconomics Annual 2003, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Warshow, H.T. 1924. "The Distribution of Corporate Ownership in the United States," Quarterly Journal
         of Economics 39: 15-38.
Wicker, Elmus R. 1966. "A reconsideration of Federal Reserve policy during the 1920­1921 depression."
         The Journal of Economic History 26.2: 223-238.
White, Eugene N. 1990. "The Stock Market Boom and Crash of 1929 Revisited," Journal of Economic
         Perspectives, 4(2): 67-83.




                                                   29
FIGURES AND TABLES



                                                Table 1:
                          Liberty Loan Characteristics and Subscriptions, by Loan


                                              First         Second           Third          Fourth            Victory

    Subscription Period                      May-Jun          Oct          Apr-May         Sept-Oct          Apr-May
                                              1917           1917           1918             1918             1919

    Coupon rate                               3.50%         4.00%           4.25%           4.25%         3.75% or 4.75%

    Maturity (years)                            30            25              10              20                 4

    Total Subscriptions (Bill. $)             2.000          3.809           4.177           6.959             4.500

    Number of subscribers (Mill.)               4             9.4            18.4             22.8              11.8
    Notes: The first and second loans could be converted into subsequent loans bearing higher coupon rates. Their initial rates are
    reported here. The dual coupon rates for the victory loans reflected the fact that investors could choose whether or not their
    bonds were tax free; tax free bonds paid the lower rate. All liberty bonds were issued at par, so their yield to maturity at issue
    was equal to their coupon rate.
    Sources: Annual Reports, U.S. Treasury; Garbade (2012).




                                                              30
                                                       Table 2:
                                                 County Characteristics


                                                                                              Above-             Below
                                                                                             Median             Median
                                                                            All              Liberty            Liberty
                                                                        Counties              Bonds              Bonds
                                                                            (1)                 (2)                (3)
Liberty Bond Subscription Rate, in Percentage Points                      16.524              25.298              8.013
                                                                        [10.230]              [6.354]            [4.446]
Ln(County Population) in 1910                                              9.868               9.875              9.861
                                                                         [0.728]              [0.887]            [0.532]
Fraction Black in 1910                                                     0.138               0.038              0.236
                                                                         [0.211]              [0.098]            [0.244]
Fraction Urban in 1910                                                     0.161               0.242              0.082
                                                                         [0.214]              [0.251]            [0.128]
Ln(Number of Farms) in 1910                                                7.555               7.399              7.707
                                                                         [0.689]              [0.715]            [0.626]
Fed Reserve Bank or Branch In County                                       0.009               0.019                0
                                                                         [0.096]              [0.137]              [0]
Ln(Commercial Bank Assets) in 1910                                        14.135              14.767             13.522
                                                                         [1.348]              [1.237]            [1.154]
Number of Commercial Banks in 1910                                         7.704              10.443              5.046
                                                                         [6.485]              [7.387]            [3.953]
Number of Investment Banks in 1914                                         0.394               0.780              0.021
                                                                         [4.302]              [6.018]            [0.158]
Notes: this table presents means and standard deviations [in brackets] of county characteristics. Column (1) presents data
for all counties, column (2) for counties with above-median subscription rates, and column (3) for counties with below-
median rates. For definitions and sources, see text.




                                                               31
                                                Table 3:
               Effects of Liberty Loan Subscriptions on Financial Asset Ownership, 1930s


                                                              (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)
State Subscription Rate                                    0.035***          0.029***          0.031***         0.027***          0.015***
                                                            [0.006]           [0.006]           [0.005]          [0.006]           [0.006]

Survey Wave F.E.s?                                              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
Demographic Controls?                                           No               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
Occupation Controls?                                            No                No               Yes              Yes               Yes
Social Class Controls?                                          No                No                No              Yes               Yes
State Controls?                                                 No                No                No               No               Yes
Observations                                                  13,393            13,393            13,393           13,270           13,270
Notes: This table presents cross-sectional logistic regressions of the determinants of individual-level ownership of stocks and bonds as
ascertained in five Gallup polls from 1935-38. Each model includes indicator variables for the specific polls. Data are weighted (see text).
Demographic controls include the respondent's age, age squared, indicator variables for women and for African -Americans, and an
indicator variable for a respondent living on a farm or in a small town. Occupation controls include indicator variable for a professional
occupation, and an indicator variable for the respondent being unemployed. Social class controls include indicators for the ownership of a
telephone, and for the ownership of an automobile. State controls include the urbanization rate for 1920. Robust standard errors clustered
by state presented in parentheses below the coefficients. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% levels.




                                                               32
                                                 Table 4:
             Effects of Liberty Loan Subscriptions on County Growth, 1920-30: IV Estimates


                                     Ln(# of Mfg.                                                            Ln(Crop
                                          Estab.)           Ln(# of Farms)       Ln(Mfg Output)                Output)          Ln(Farm Value)
                                    OLS            IV       OLS          IV        OLS         IV         OLS         IV         OLS           IV
                                      (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)         (10)
Ln(Bank Assets) 1918-29           0.282**        0.631*    0.042* 0.244**        0.778*       0.808      0.065      0.206      0.138*** 0.329**
                                   [0.096]       [0.353] [0.022]       [0.077]   [0.362]     [1.990] [0.051]       [0.370]      [0.025]     [0.161]
County Controls in 1920?             Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Value of D.V. in 1920?               Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
District Fixed Effects?              Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Fed City Fixed Effects?              Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Kleibergen-Paap F                      --         12.45       --        13.15        --       13.57         --      13.29          --         7.32
Observations                         849           849       849         849       849         849        849        849          849         849
Notes: Table presents the results of OLS and 2SLS regressions of Equation (6). The dependent variables are described in the column headings.
The sample spans all states that had both (1) data on state banks published from 1910 to 1929 and (2) liberty bond subscription data. We drop
counties without any commercial banks in a given year. The sample contains observations in 1920 and 1930. "County Control Variables"
includes the logarithm of population, the logarithm of the number of farms, the fraction of the population living in a location over 2,500 people,
the fraction of the population that is non-white, and the crop price index. Robust standard errors clustered by county are presented in brackets
below the coefficients. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% levels.




                                                                       33
                                               Table 5:
           Effects of Liberty Loan Subscriptions on County Growth, 1920-30: Reduced Form


                                                Ln(# of         Ln(# of       Ln(Mfg.        Ln(Crop        Ln(Farm
                                               Mfg. Estab.)      Farms)       Output)        Output)        Value)
                                                    (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
 Liberty Bond Subscription Rate                   -0.009        -0.004**       -0.012         -0.002         0.002
                                                 [0.007]         [0.002]      [0.032]        [0.004]        [0.004]

  County Controls in 1920?                             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
  Value of Dependent Variable in 1920?                 Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
  District Fixed Effects?                              Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
  Fed City Fixed Effects?                              Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
  Observations                                         849            849           849             849            849
Notes: Table presents the results of Equation (7). The dependent variable is described in the column headings. The sample
spans all states that had both (1) data on state banks published from 1910 to 1929 and (2) liberty bond subscription data. We
drop counties without any commercial banks in a given year. The sample contains observations in 1920 and 1930. "County
Control Variables" includes the logarithm of population, the logarithm of the number of farms, the fraction of the population
living in a location over 2,500 people, the fraction of the population that is non-white, and the crop price index. Robust
standard errors clustered by county are presented in brackets below the coefficients. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5%
level and *** at 1% levels.




                                                                34
150                                                                                                  350




                                                                                                     300




                                                                                                     250
100


                                                                                                     200




                                                                                                     150


50
           Stock Price Index, Right Axis
                                                                                                     100




      NYSE Volume, Left Axis (Millions)                                                              50




 0                                                                                                   0
 1910          1912           1914         1916   1918   1920   1922   1924   1926   1928     1930



                                                  Figure 1:
                            Stock Prices and NYSE Trading Volumes, 1910-29
        This figure presents monthly data on the volume of shares traded on the NYSE, in blue, and scaled
        by the left axis, and Robert Shiller's (2000) share price index, in red and normalized to January
        1910 = 100, scaled by the right axis.




                                                           35
               Figure 2:
Subscription Rates, Fourth Liberty Loan
      Source: Hilt and Rahn (2020)




                  36
                                            Commercial Banks
                                                                                        20
  30


  25
          Total Banks,                                                                  15
          Left Axis (000s)
  20


  15                                                                                    10


  10
          Assets per County,
          Right Axis (Millions)                                                         5
   5
                                         Loan
                                         Drives

   1910       1912      1914      1916   1918     1920    1922   1924   1926   1928   1930




                                            Investment Banks
   7                                                                                    500


   6
                                                                                        400
             Total Investment Banks,
   5
             Left Axis (000s)
                                                                                        300
   4


   3
                                                                                        200

   2
               Counties with an IB,
               Right Axis                                                               100
   1                                     Loan
                                         Drives

   1910       1912      1914      1916   1918     1920    1922   1924   1926   1928   1930




                                           Figure 3:
    Changes in Commercial Banks (Top) and Investment Banks (Bottom), 1910-29
The top panel of this figure shows the total number of commercial banks in the United States,
in blue, and the value of commercial bank assets per county, in red. The shaded grey area
represents the period of the liberty loan drives. The bottom panel shows the total number of
investment banks, in blue, and the number of counties with an investment bank, in red.




                                                  37
                               Effect of Liberty Bond Subscriptions on Commercial Bank Assets
     0.005



         0



     -0.005



      -0.01



     -0.015


                                             Loan Drives
      -0.02
          1910   1912   1914       1916         1918         1920        1922         1924        1926   1928   1930




                               Effect of Liberty Bond Subscriptions on Commercial Bank Deposits

     0.005




         0




     -0.005




      -0.01




     -0.015
                                             Loan Drives

         1910    1912   1914       1916         1918         1920        1922         1924        1926   1928   1930




                                             Figure 4:
 Effect of Liberty Bonds on Commercial Bank Assets (Top) and Deposits (Bottom), 1910-29
Notes: The top panel of this figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of liberty bond
subscription rates on county commercial bank assets, as estimated from equation (1). The lower
panel shows the effects on commercial bank deposits. The shaded grey area represents the period
of the liberty loan drives.




                                                            38
                                Effect of Liberty Bond Subscriptions on Number of Investment Banks
       0.02




      0.015




       0.01




      0.005




         0




                                              Loan Drives
     -0.005
          1910   1912    1914      1916          1918         1920          1922         1924        1926   1928   1930




                                               Figure 5:
                     Effect of Liberty Bonds on Investment Banks, 1914-29
Notes: This figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1914, of liberty bond subscription rates on
the number of investment banks in a county, as estimated from equation (2). The shaded grey area
represents the period of the liberty loan drives. The odd pattern of dates reflects the available years
of data.




                                                             39
                            Effect of the Presence of an Investment Bank on Commercial Bank Assets
    0.2




   0.15




    0.1




   0.05




      0




   -0.05




    -0.1




   -0.15



                                          Loan Drives
    -0.2
      1910   1912    1914     1916           1918           1920           1922           1924       1926   1928   1930




                                              Figure 6:
Effect of the Presence of an Investment Banks In Year on Commercial Bank Assets, 1914-29
Notes: This figure shows the annual effect of having an investment bank during the year on
commercial bank assets, as estimated from equation (3). The shaded grey area represents the
period of the liberty loan drives. The odd pattern of dates reflects the available years of data.




                                                                 40
                                Effect Investment Bank Entry (1916-20) on Commercial Bank Assets
       0.05



          0



       -0.05



        -0.1



       -0.15



        -0.2



       -0.25



        -0.3                                 Loan Drives

          1910   1912    1914       1916         1918        1920         1922         1924        1926   1928   1930




                                             Figure 7:
     Effect of Gaining an Investment Bank 1916-20 on Commercial Bank Assets, 1914-29
Notes: This figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of having gained at least one an
investment bank during 1916-1920 on commercial bank assets, as estimated from equation (4).
The shaded grey area represents the period of the liberty loan drives. The odd pattern of dates
reflects the available years of data.




                                                           41
APPENDIX FIGURES




                                         Effect of Liberty Bonds on Commercial Bank Assets
         0.1




        0.05




           0




        -0.05




         -0.1




        -0.15




         -0.2




        -0.25




         -0.3


                                              Loan Drives
        -0.35
            1910   1912   1914    1916           1918          1920          1922            1924   1926   1928   1930




                                              Figure A1:
   Effect of Above Median Liberty Bonds Subscriptions on Commercial Bank Assets, 1910-29
  Notes: The figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of an indicator for counties with an
  above median liberty bond subscription rates on commercial bank assets, as estimated from
  equation (1). The shaded grey area represents the period of the liberty loan drives.




                                                              42
                               Effect of Liberty Bonds on Commercial Bank Assets: State-Level Data
      0.005




          0




      -0.005




       -0.01




      -0.015




       -0.02                                Loan Drives

          1910   1912   1914     1916          1918           1920          1922          1924       1926   1928   1930




                                            Figure A2:
         Effect of Liberty Bonds on Commercial Bank Assets at State-Level, 1910-29
Notes: The top panel of this figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of liberty bond
subscription rates on state-level commercial bank assets, as estimated from equation (1). The
shaded grey area represents the period of the liberty loan drives.




                                                             43
                                     Effect of Liberty Bonds on Commercial Bank Assets
       0.004




          0




      -0.004




      -0.008




      -0.012




                                           Loan Drives
      -0.016
           1910   1912   1914     1916        1918         1920         1922         1924   1926   1928   1930




                                              Figure A3:
     Effect of Liberty Bonds on Commercial Bank Assets-Dropping Fed Districts, 1910-29
Notes: The figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of liberty bond subscription rates on
county commercial bank assets, as estimated from equation (1). The blue line represents the effect
for the entire sample, while the other lines represent when each Fed district is dropped separately.
The shaded grey area represents the period of the liberty loan drives.




                                                         44
                                       Effect of Liberty Bonds on Commercial Bank Assets
       0.01




      0.005




          0




      -0.005




       -0.01




      -0.015




       -0.02




                                          Loan Drives
      -0.025
           1910   1912   1914   1916          1918           1920           1922           1924   1926   1928   1930




                                            Figure A4:
     Effect of Liberty Bonds on Commercial Bank Assets-Dropping Urban Areas, 1910-29
Notes: The figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of liberty bond subscription rates on
county commercial bank assets, as estimated from equation (1). The sample only contains counties
that did not have a city of more than 25,000 people in any period. The shaded grey area represents
the period of the liberty loan drives.




                                                           45
                                    Effect of Liberty Bonds on the Number of Commercial Banks
          0.15




           0.1




          0.05




             0




          -0.05




                                              Loan Drives
           -0.1
             1910   1912    1914    1916         1918         1920         1922        1924     1926   1928   1930




                                            Figure A5:
               Effect of Liberty Bonds on Number of Commercial Banks, 1910-29
Notes: The figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of liberty bond subscription rates on
the number of commercial banks, as estimated from equation (1). The shaded grey area represents
the period of the liberty loan drives.




                                                        46
                                 Effect of Liberty Bond Subscriptions on the Presence of an Investment Bank
       0.014




       0.012




        0.01




       0.008




       0.006




       0.004




       0.002




           0




                                                 Loan Drives
       -0.002
            1910   1912   1914       1916           1918           1920           1922            1924        1926   1928   1930




                                               Figure A6:
              Effect of Liberty Bonds on Presence of an Investment Bank, 1914-29
Notes: This figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1914, of liberty bond subscription rates on
an indicator for the presence of at least one investment banks in a county, as estimated from
equation (2). The shaded grey area represents the period of the liberty loan drives. The odd pattern
of dates reflects the available years of data.




                                                                47
                               Effect of Liberty Bond Subscriptions on the Number of Investment Banks
       0.3




      0.25




       0.2




      0.15




       0.1




      0.05




         0




      -0.05



                                                Loan Drives
       -0.1
         1910   1912    1914         1916         1918          1920        1922         1924           1926   1928   1930




                                               Figure A7:
      Effect of Above Median Liberty Bonds Subscriptions on Investment Banks, 1914-29
Notes: This figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1914, for counties with an above median
liberty bond subscription rates on the number of investment banks in a county, as estimated from
equation (2). The shaded grey area represents the period of the liberty loan drives. The odd pattern
of dates reflects the available years of data.




                                                               48
                                 Effect of Liberty Bonds on the Nubmer of Investment Banks
      0.014




      0.012




       0.01




      0.008




      0.006




      0.004




      0.002




         0


                                           Loan Drives
     -0.002
          1910   1912    1914    1916         1918         1920         1922         1924    1926   1928   1930




                                              Figure A8:
        Effect of Liberty Bonds on Investment Banks-Dropping Fed Districts, 1910-29
Notes: The figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of liberty bond subscription rates on
the number of investment banks in a county, as estimated from equation (2). The blue line
represents the effect for the entire sample, while the other lines represent when each Fed district is
dropped separately. The shaded grey area represents the period of the liberty loan drives. The odd
pattern of dates reflects the available years of data.




                                                          49
                               Effect of Liberty Bond Subscriptions on Number of Investment Banks
       0.01




      0.008




      0.006




      0.004




      0.002




         0




     -0.002




                                             Loan Drives
     -0.004
          1910   1912   1914      1916          1918         1920          1922          1924       1926   1928   1930




                                              Figure A9:
        Effect of Liberty Bonds on Investment Banks-Dropping Urban Areas, 1910-29
Notes: The figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of liberty bond subscription rates on
the number of investment banks in a county, as estimated from equation (2). The sample only
contains counties that did not have a city of more than 25,000 people in any period. The shaded
grey area represents the period of the liberty loan drives. The odd pattern of dates reflects the
available years of data.




                                                            50
                                            Effect of Liberty Bonds on Commercial Bank Assets
              0.2




             0.15




              0.1




             0.05




               0




            -0.05




             -0.1




            -0.15



                                                 Loan Drives
             -0.2
               1910   1912    1914   1916           1918          1920         1922             1924   1926   1928   1930




                                              Figure A10:
Effect of the Presence of an Investment Banks In Year on Commercial Bank Assets-Dropping Fed
                                            Districts, 1914-29
  Notes: This figure shows the annual effect of having an investment bank during the year on
  commercial bank assets, as estimated from equation (3). The blue line represents the effect for the
  entire sample, while the other lines represent when each Fed district is dropped separately. The
  shaded grey area represents the period of the liberty loan drives.




                                                           51
                                   Effect of the Presence of an Investment Bank on Commercial Bank Assets
           0.25




            0.2




           0.15




            0.1




           0.05




             0




          -0.05




           -0.1




          -0.15




           -0.2


                                                   Loan Drives
          -0.25
              1910   1912   1914        1916          1918         1920          1922          1924         1926   1928   1930




                                                Figure A11:
Effect of the Presence of an Investment Banks In Year on Commercial Bank Assets-Dropping Urban
                                               Areas, 1914-29
    Notes: This figure shows the annual effect of having an investment bank during the year on
    commercial bank assets, as estimated from equation (3). The sample only contains counties that
    did not have a city of more than 25,000 people in any period. The shaded grey area represents the
    period of the liberty loan drives. The odd pattern of dates reflects the available years of data.




                                                                 52
                                      Effect Investment Bank Entry (1916-20) on Commercial Bank Assets
              0.05




                0




             -0.05




              -0.1




             -0.15




              -0.2




             -0.25




              -0.3                                 Loan Drives

                1910   1912    1914    1916          1918          1920          1922          1924      1926   1928   1930




                                                Figure A12:
Effect of Gaining an Investment Bank 1916-20 on Commercial Bank Assets-Dropping Fed Districts,
                                                   1914-29
   Notes: This figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of having gained at least one an
   investment bank during 1916-1920 on commercial bank assets, as estimated from equation (4).
   The blue line represents the effect for the entire sample, while the other lines represent when each
   Fed district is dropped separately. The shaded grey area represents the period of the liberty loan
   drives.




                                                            53
                                 Effect Investment Bank Entry (1916-20) on Commercial Bank Assets

         0.05




            0




         -0.05




          -0.1




         -0.15




          -0.2




         -0.25




          -0.3                               Loan Drives

            1910   1912   1914   1916           1918          1920           1922          1924     1926   1928   1930




                                              Figure A13:
Effect of Gaining an Investment Bank 1916-20 on Commercial Bank Assets-Dropping Urban Areas,
                                                 1914-29
   Notes: This figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of having gained at least one an
   investment bank during 1916-1920 on commercial bank assets, as estimated from equation (4).
   The sample only contains counties that did not have a city of more than 25,000 people in any
   period. The shaded grey area represents the period of the liberty loan drives.




                                                             54
                                 Effect of Liberty Bond Subscriptions on Commercial Bank Loans
      0.005




         0




     -0.005




      -0.01




     -0.015




      -0.02




     -0.025




                                            Loan Drives
      -0.03
          1910   1912    1914    1916          1918          1920          1922          1924    1926   1928   1930




                                           Figure A14:
                 Effect of Liberty Bonds on Commercial Bank Loans, 1910-29
Notes: The figure shows the annual effect, relative to 1910, of liberty bond subscription rates on
county commercial bank loans, as estimated from equation (1) with loans as the dependent
variable. The shaded grey area represents the period of the liberty loan drives.




                                                            55
                                     0.35


                                      0.3
  Stock Ownership Rate, Late 1930s




                                     0.25                                                                                           NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                      CA
                                                                                          VT                                                                             IL
                                                                                                                       MA
                                                                                                                       NH                                           CT
                                                                                                                                          DE
                                      0.2                                                      MD          WI
                                                                                                                                            MN           NY
                                                                 VA                  ME                                      OH
                                                                                                                              IA                    UT
                                                                            WV
                                                                                                                  MO
                                                                                                                                         ND
                                                                                                                                          PA             WA
                                                                                                                             MI
                                                                                                                               AZ
                                     0.15                                                      KS         CORI
                                                                                                           NE                                                                 WY
                                                            MS
                                                                                                                        IN           ID        OR
                                              NC                           TX                                                                                 SD
                                                   LA GA
                                                                      FL
                                      0.1                 TN
                                                                                                                       MT                                                                  NV
                                                      AL NM
                                                     AR

                                     0.05             SC                        OK
                                                                 KY


                                       0
                                       0.05                0.1                   0.15                  0.2                   0.25                             0.3                  0.35         0.4
                                                                                                    Liberty Bond Subscription Rate


                                             Figure A15:
             State-Level Relationship Between Stock Ownership in the Late 1930s
                               and Liberty Bond Subscription Rates
Notes: This figure shows the average stock ownership rate by state, as calculated from the Gallup
poll data from the late 1930s, plotted against the state-level liberty bond subscription rate, as
reported by the U.S. Treasury (1920). This relationship is clearly not driven by the effect of
outliers. The figure includes a regression line; the estimated coefficient on liberty bond
subscriptions is 0.841 (S.E. 0.188). The individual-level results shown in the main text are robust
to dropping important states such as New York and California.




                                                                                                                 56
                                                Table A1:
             Effects of Liberty Loan Subscriptions on County Growth, 1920-30: IV Estimates,
                                 Excluding Counties With Cities of 25,000


                                    Ln(# of Mfg.                                                              Ln(Crop
                                         Estab.)            Ln(# of Farms)        Ln(Mfg Output)                Output)          Ln(Farm Value)
                                    OLS           IV         OLS         IV         OLS         IV         OLS         IV         OLS            IV
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)          (10)
Ln(Bank Assets) 1918-29           0.277**       0.683*      0.041* 0.233**         0.792*      0.523      0.084       0.209     0.138*** 0.411**
                                  [0.099]       [0.347] [0.023]       [0.085]      [0.397]    [2.018] [0.050]        [0.380]     [0.026]      [0.168]
County Controls in 1920?            Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Value of D.V. in 1920?              Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
District Fixed Effects?             Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Fed City Fixed Effects?             Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Kleibergen-Paap F                     --         11.22         --      10.68          --       10.65         --       10.49         --          6.84
Observations                        776           776        776        776          776        776        776         776         776          776
Notes: Table presents the results of OLS and 2SLS regressions of Equation (6), with counties containing cities of 25,000 excluded. The dependent
variables are described in the column headings. The sample spans all states that had both (1) data on state banks published from 1910 to 1929 and
(2) liberty bond subscription data. We drop counties without any commercial banks in a given year. The sample contains observations in 1920
and 1930. "County Control Variables" includes the logarithm of population, the logarithm of the number of farms, the fraction of the population
living in a location over 2,500 people, the fraction of the population that is non-white, and the crop price index. Robust standard errors clustered
by county are presented in brackets below the coefficients. * denotes significance at 10%; ** at 5% level and *** at 1% levels.




                                                                        57
