                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE BAKER HYPOTHESIS

                                        Anusha Chari
                                       Peter Blair Henry
                                         Hector Reyes

                                      Working Paper 27708
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27708


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




We are grateful to Nandini Gupta and Paul Romer for helpful comments, and to Sandile
Hlatshwayo and Bill Megginson for help with the privatization data. Henry and Reyes thank the
Sloan Foundation for financial support of the Ph.D. Excellence Initiative, of which Reyes is
Fellow and Henry is Principal Investigator. Henry is a member of the Board of Directors of
Citigroup and Nike; neither corporation has funded this research. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Anusha Chari, Peter Blair Henry, and Hector Reyes. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Baker Hypothesis
Anusha Chari, Peter Blair Henry, and Hector Reyes
NBER Working Paper No. 27708
August 2020
JEL No. E13,E44,F21,F43,F6,F63,O1,O38,O47

                                           ABSTRACT

In 1985, James A. Baker III's "Program for Sustained Growth" proposed a set of economic policy
reforms including, inflation stabilization, trade liberalization, greater openness to foreign
investment, and privatization, that he believed would lead to faster growth in countries then
known as the Third World, but now categorized as emerging and developing economies
(EMDEs). A country-specific, time-series assessment of the reform process reveals three clear
facts. First, in the 10-year-period after stabilizing high inflation, the average growth rate of real
GDP in EMDEs is 2.2 percentage points higher than in the prior ten-year period. Second, the
corresponding growth increase for trade liberalization episodes is 2.66 percentage points. Third,
in the decade after opening their capital markets to foreign equity investment, the spread between
EMDEs average cost of equity capital and that of the US declines by 240 basis points. The impact
of privatization is less straightforward to assess, but taken together, the three central facts of
reform provide empirical support for the Baker Hypothesis and suggest a simple neoclassical
interpretation of the unprecedented increase in growth that has taken place in EMDEs since 1995.


Anusha Chari                                      Hector Reyes
301 Gardner Hall                                  Leonard N. Stern School of Business
CB#3305, Department of Economics                  Kaufman Management Center
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill       44 West Fourth Street
Chapel Hill, NC 27599                             New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                          USA
achari@unc.edu                                    hr133@stern.nyu.edu

Peter Blair Henry
New York University
Leonard K. Stern School of Business
Kaufman Management Center
44 West 4th Street, 11-160
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
pblairhenry@gmail.com
1. Introduction

       On October 8, 1985, then Secretary of the United States Treasury, James A. Baker III,

unveiled a "Program for Sustained Growth" at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), World

Bank meetings in Seoul, South Korea. In his remarks, Baker enumerated a list of economic

policy reforms--inflation stabilization, trade liberalization, greater openness to foreign

investment, and privatization--that he urged "Third World" leaders to adopt to enable their

countries to grow their way out of the debt crisis that had been precipitated by Mexico's default

on its external obligations three years earlier. Later codified and branded "The Washington

Consensus" by Williamson (1989), while labeled "neoliberalism" by others (e.g., Chomsky

1998, Stiglitz 2002), Baker's speech unleashed a contentious debate about the economic impact

of his recommended reforms that remains unresolved. Liberal opponents argue that the

Washington Consensus failed (Rodrik 2006). Conservative proponents contend, instead, that

reforms have been found difficult and left untried (Krueger 2004, Gil Diaz 2003).

       From the perspective of the Solow growth model, the tenets of Baker's speech constitute

a testable claim that can be confronted with data: "If developing countries implement reform(s)

then their standards of living will rise at a faster rate than they did before the implementation."

After decades of debate, the Baker Hypothesis has yet to be confronted directly, appropriately,

and comprehensively with data. Sachs and Warner (1995), Rodriguez and Rodrik (2000), and

others attempt to evaluate the impact of reforms on economic performance by running cross-

sectional growth regressions and therefore test a hypothesis that is patently incongruent with a

fundamental prediction of the Solow model.

       Cross-sectional regressions of growth on policy variables ask: is it the case that countries

with low inflation, free trade, and liberalized capital accounts have higher long-run growth rates
                                                                                                      2
(30-year-averages, say) than countries with high inflation, restricted trade, and closed capital

accounts? This question does not confront theory with data, however, because the model does

not predict that countries that have reformed will grow faster than countries that have not. What

the model does predict--and the Baker Hypothesis implicitly claims--is that if a given country

implements and maintains a certain economic reform, then it will grow faster in the aftermath of

the reform than it did prior to implementation. The period of faster growth will persist until the

country has completed its transition to the new, higher level of total factor productivity induced

by the reform, and once the transition is complete, the country will revert to its pre-reform,

steady state rate of growth. Because cross-sectional growth regressions run afoul of the model,

they are likely to yield insignificant results when the data would say otherwise if given the

chance to speak (Easterly 1996; Henry 2007; Wacziarg and Welch 2008).

       This article gives voice to the data by taking seriously the country-specific, time series

predictions of the Solow model. Figure 1 documents the precipitous and persistent decline after

1994 in the average annual rate of inflation across the set of formerly Third World nations that

are now classified by the IMF's World Economic Outlook (WEO) as emerging and developing

economies (EMDEs). The fall in inflation is a proxy for the salient change of direction in the

economic policies and priorities of leaders in much of the developing world that was set in

motion by Baker's speech and took root in 1989 after the announcement of the Brady Plan and

the fall of the Berlin Wall (Williamson 2004). Beyond the task of vanquishing high inflation, this

change of direction manifested itself through the adoption of policies that: (1) created freer trade;

(2) increased openness to flows of foreign investment; and (3) expanded the role of the market in

producing and allocating goods and services. The widespread, if uneven, adoption of these

policies--commonly referred to as the "Washington Consensus mantra of stabilize, liberalize,
                                                                                                     3
and privatize" (Gertz and Kharas 2019)--by EMDEs circa 1994 provides a unique set of policy

experiments that enable an objective observer to examine whether the time paths of GDP and

other real variables in the aftermath of reforms refute or support Baker's implicit "if-then" claim.

       Accordingly, Figure 2 provides a visual test of the Baker Hypothesis that reveals three

facts. First, the growth rate of real GDP in the emerging world has been higher since 1994 than it

was in the previous period for which the WEO provides historical data. From 1980 to 1994, real

GDP in the EMDEs grew at an average rate of 3.3 percent per year versus 5.3 percent per year

from 1995 to 2018. This 2.0 percentage-point increase in growth is economically significant. For

a country whose population grows at 1 percent per year, annual GDP growth of 3.3 percent

means that its per capita income doubles once every 30 years; with 5.3 percent growth, the same

country's standard of living doubles in just 16. Furthermore, the EMDEs increase in growth is

not due to China. China's growth averaged 10.1 percent from 1980 to 1994 and then slowed to

9.2 percent from 1995 to 2018. Figure 2, therefore, understates the EMDEs growth acceleration

without China.

       Second, there is no evidence to support arguments that faster growth in poor countries

comes at the expense of average living standards in rich ones. Excluding the years 2007­2012, a

period of slower growth due to the Global Financial Crisis that originated in the developed

world, there has been no change in the growth rate of rich-countries. Their real GDP expanded

by 2.9 percent per year from 1980 to 1994 and 2.9 percent from 1995 to 2007.

       The third fact is that the unchanged growth performance in rich countries suggests that

the accelerated rise of living standards in poor ones was not driven by an aggregate shock to the

global economy, but rather by factors specific to EMDEs. Vast supplies of low-cost labor in the

rural and informal economies of poor countries surely played a role in sustaining the growth
                                                                                                    4
process per the first assumption of Lewis (1954). But from 1995 to 2018 there was no change in

the demographics of the developing world to suggest that an increase in the growth rate of its

labor force was responsible for the growth acceleration. Indeed, from 1995 to 2018, the growth

rate of the labor force in Asia and Latin America was actually decreasing (and was roughly

constant in Africa), even as EMDE growth rates of real GDP were rising.

        Instead, the proximate cause of the growth acceleration in EMDEs was the set of country-

specific economic reforms, suggested by Figure 1, that moved conditions in the developing

world more closely in line with the spirit of the second assumption of Lewis (1954). In countries

that implemented and maintained reforms, the level of productivity rose. With wages remaining

flat for an extended period of time due to a perfectly-elastic supply of labor, owners of capital

had a persistent incentive to invest, triggering, in turn, a cycle of sustained profitability and

expanding demand for previously underemployed workers.

        Starting from the creation of macroeconomic stability, a condition without which there is

no sustained growth (Commission on Growth and Development 2008), the rest of this article

provides a country-specific, time-series assessment of the economic reform process. The

empirical validity of the Baker Hypothesis, which conjectured what reforms would make

economies grow, stands in sharp contrast to the failure of the Baker Plan, which failed to

articulate a realistic strategy for how leaders could actually bring about the subset of reforms best

suited to their countries.



2. Stabilization of Inflation

        Fiscal deficits were the structural cause of both the inflation and debt difficulties in much

of the developing world during the late 1970s and early 1980s. Public officials from Kingston to
                                                                                                    5
Kuala Lumpur ran large deficits, causing their countries' stock of public debt to increase faster

than GDP. When debt-to-GDP ratios breached critical thresholds, access to foreign financing

ceased. Governments increasingly turned to monetization as an alternative source of funding, and

inflation rose. By 1985, the average rate of inflation in the developing world was over 40 percent

per year, leading Baker to declare "If the debt problem is going to be solved, there must

be...First and foremost, the adoption by principal debtor countries of comprehensive

macroeconomic and structural policies, supported by the international institutions, to promote

growth and balance of payments adjustment, and to reduce inflation." (Baker, 1985, p.207).

          The intellectual justification for Baker's call to reduce inflation flows from the reality

that stabilizing high inflation raises productivity, because, among other reasons, stabilization

reduces the variance of the aggregate price level, as well as the variance of relative prices.

Variability of the aggregate price level matters, because greater variability of inflation increases

the likelihood of bouts of unexpected inflation (Ha, Kose, and Ohnsorge 2019; IMF 2001).

Because unexpected inflation helps borrowers and hurts lenders, fear of unexpected inflation in

non-inflation-indexed environments may discourage lenders from entering into long-term

contracts with negative attendant consequences for production and investment. Also, rising

inflation that goes unchecked eventually becomes high inflation. High inflation is not neutral and

therefore creates relative price distortions that reduce the quality of the signal that individual

prices provide to producers about the profitability of goods and services (Andres and Hernando

1999). Again, increased uncertainty about profitability reduces the incentive to produce and

invest.

          Given the negative consequences of high inflation, there is a broadly held view that the

benefits of reducing it outweigh any potential costs. Baker did not specify the level at which he
                                                                                                       6
and his Treasury colleagues considered inflation to be "high", but in keeping with previous work

we use the following definitions. High inflation is annual consumer price index (CPI) inflation

that is 40 percent or more; moderate inflation is less than 40 percent but greater than or equal to

10 percent; low inflation is less than 10 percent (Dornbusch and Fischer 1993; Fischer 1993;

Easterly 1996; Bruno and Easterly 1998). We use these definitions to determine a given EMDE's

stabilization year in the following manner.

       First, we download the country's annual rates of CPI inflation, construct a time series of

its three-year moving average of CPI inflation, and classify the country as having high,

moderate, or low inflation at the start of the three-year moving average. Second, we graph the

moving average and, starting from the initial year of the series, identify the first instance in

which the country experiences a level of inflation that shifts its classification into the next lowest

group (e.g., from "moderate" to "low", or from "high" to "moderate") for five or more

consecutive years. We define the country's "stabilization year" as the peak-inflation year

identified by our procedure.

        Finally, we classify each country's stabilization episode as "high" if the stabilization

began from an inflation peak that was "high", and "moderate" if its stabilization episode began

from a peak that was "moderate". Our procedure yields 15 "high" and 23 "moderate" EMDE-

inflation-stabilization episodes. There are two reasons why the total number of stabilization

episodes, 38, is less than the total number of EMDEs, 155. First, some countries never stabilized.

Second, because we seek to examine the growth rate of real GDP in the decade before and after

stabilization, we dropped countries for a lack of data.

       For the 38 inflation stabilization episodes identified, Table 1 provides two panels, A and

B, that describe the data. Panel A summarizes the high inflation episodes, Panel B the moderate
                                                                                                      7
inflation ones. Within each panel, the episodes are grouped according to the geographic region in

which they occurred: Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, and Eastern Europe.

Within each grouping, the first column lists the names of the countries; the second column

provides the year in which the country's stabilization began; the third column gives the level of

inflation in the country in the year stabilization began. For each region, the bottom rows of each

panel provide the average (median) stabilization year and the number of countries in each region.

When it comes to stabilizing high inflation, the average (median) year of stabilization across all

regions is 1991 (1992), and Latin America has the greatest frequency, with 11 of the 15 episodes.

For stabilizing moderate inflation: Africa is the epicenter with 11 of the 23 episodes, the average

(median) stabilization year is 1992 (1995); and it is notable that Asian countries--particularly

Korea in 1980 and Thailand in 1976--stabilized much earlier than the rest of the world.

       Moving from tables to time series, Figure 3 plots, in event time, the average growth rate

of real GDP in the 38 inflation-stabilization episodes. Acknowledging that there were concurrent

events that temper interpretation of the graph, the average annual growth rate of real GDP ten

years after the onset of stabilization is 3.23 percent versus 1.91 percent in the ten years prior, and

twenty-four of the 38 countries in the sample have a post-stabilization growth rate of GDP that is

higher than their pre-stabilization growth rate.

       Consistent with previous work on the costs and benefits of stabilization, the change in the

post-stabilization trajectory of real GDP growth is larger in the aftermath of stabilizing high

inflation than it is in the case of stabilizing moderate inflation (Easterly 1996; Henry 2002). For

the "high" episodes, the average annual growth rate of GDP rises from 1.69 percent prior to

stabilization to 3.89 percent after--an increase of 2.2 percentage points per year--and 12 of 15

countries have a post-stabilization growth rate that is higher than their pre-stabilization growth
                                                                                                      8
rate. The average annual growth rate of GDP also rises for the "moderate" episodes--from 2.06

percent to 2.80 percent--but the increase of 0.74 percentage points is one-third the size of that in

the "high" episodes, and the pattern of increase is less consistent, with 12 of 23 countries having

post-stabilization growth that exceeds pre-stabilization growth.

       Because stable and predictable inflation increases the informativeness of prices and

improves the efficiency of resource allocation, there is broad agreement that stabilizing

inflation--and therefore the macroeconomic environment more generally--is a necessary

condition for a country to maximize the benefits of opening up its economy to trade and capital

flows from the rest of the world (Fischer 1986, 1987; Matthieson and McKinnon 1981;

McKinnon 1984; Michalopolous 1987; Sachs 1988). There was considerably less agreement at

the time of Baker's speech, however, about whether the benefits of a country opening up would

outweigh the costs (Sachs 1987). Baker and his Treasury colleagues had no such qualms and the

Secretary went on to argue that "For those countries which have implemented measures to

address the imbalances in their economies, a more comprehensive set of policies can now be put

in place...We believe that such institutional and structural policies should include...-market-

opening measures to encourage foreign direct investment and capital inflows, as well as to

liberalize trade" (Baker 1985, page 209).



3. Liberalization of Trade

       Building on the work of Sachs and Warner (1995), Wacziarg and Welch (2008) carefully

construct a comprehensive collection of country-specific trade liberalization dates. From

Wacziarg and Welch's list of 98 advanced and developing countries that have liberalized trade,

we culled the dates of the 72 countries in their sample that classified as developing countries at
                                                                                                     9
the time of Baker's speech. Of these 72 countries, 64 had a sufficiently long time series on real

GDP growth to be included in our analysis. Table 2 summarizes these 64 countries and their

trade liberalization episodes. Again, we group the episodes according to the geographic region in

which they occurred. Within each grouping, the first column lists the names of each country; the

second column gives the year in which the country liberalized trade. For each region, the bottom

rows of each panel provide the average (median) liberalization year and the number of countries

in each region.

       From a geographic standpoint, Africa had the largest number of countries that liberalized

trade, 26. From a temporal perspective, most countries liberalized trade in the early 1990s, and

the average (median) trade liberalization year for the entire sample is 1990 (1991). Korea in

1968, however, stands out as an early liberalizer of trade, just as it did in Table 1 as an early

stabilizer of inflation. Korea's early mover status on a subset of economic reforms is somewhat

at odds with the narrative of the contrarian Korean growth experience. It is true that "Every

major shift in industrial diversification in the 1960s and 1970s was instigated by the state"

(Amsden 1989, p.80). But the key input into Korea's economic transformation was less an

ideological tilt toward dirigisme as it was a commitment by the state to a pragmatic growth

strategy that empowered Korean enterprises to take advantage of the world market. The Korean

approach to trade liberalization, along with that of Singapore and Taiwan, contained two critical

elements that constitute, as it were, a test of the Baker Hypothesis before Baker.

       First, all three countries stabilized inflation before pursuing trade liberalization, and

remained vigilant about maintaining macroeconomic stability. Korea, although we do not have

the CPI data to detect it in our stabilization algorithm, experienced hyperinflation in the 1950s,

during and after the Korean War, that it reduced to moderate inflation by 1960. Like Korea,
                                                                                                     10
Taiwan also experienced hyperinflation--during the Chinese Civil War--but stabilized inflation

by 1951 (Sachs, 1987). As for Singapore, with the exception of a temporary spike in 1973 and

1974 due to the oil-price shock, the country has had low inflation since its independence in 1965.

       Second, by the end of the 1960s, Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan had all rejected import

substitution, and embraced, instead, a sustained commitment to growth strategies that relied on

both imports and exports (Commission 2008). While Korea did not fling its economy wide

open--the country retained high import tariffs on a wide range of items from agricultural

products to computer equipment--the authorities acknowledged the necessity of foreign goods

and acted accordingly.

       As an important complement to the import liberalization agenda, in 1964 Korean leaders

reduced the fiscal deficit and devalued the won by almost 100 percent in order to maintain export

profitability (Dornbusch and Park 1987). But Korea's approach was not mercantilist. Although

Korean exports increased from 4.8 percent of GDP in 1963 to 34 percent in 1980, imports as a

percent of GDP rose from 15.9 to 41.4 percent over the same time period (Krueger 1995).

Furthermore, Korea's trade balance was negative in both 1963 and 1980. In fact, from 1965 to

1990, Korea's GDP grew by 7.1 percent per year, with the country running trade deficits for

almost the entire period. In the case of Taiwan, import tariffs were similarly reduced in a gradual

fashion, and a large number of items--intermediate capital inputs, in particular-- were removed

from the import control list. Like the Korean officials, Taiwan's Nationalist Government also

corrected the overvaluation of its currency by: (1) devaluing the New Taiwan Dollar between 50

and 80 percent from 1958-1961, depending on the type of transaction; and (2) unifying the

exchange rate in 1963. Finally, Taiwanese officials established export processing zones and

passed a law in 1960 to permit direct investment by foreign and overseas Chinese capital (Jao
                                                                                                  11
1976). Like Taiwan, Singapore also chose to encourage foreign direct investment as it switched

to export-led growth (Menon 2015).

        Turning from East Asia back to the broader developing world, Figure 4 plots, in trade

liberalization time, the average growth rate of GDP for the 64 EMDEs. The figure also includes,

for comparison, a plot in liberalization time of the average growth rate of GDP for a control

group of countries that did not implement trade liberalization during the relevant window. For

the 10-year period before trade liberalization the average growth rate of real GDP in EMDEs was

1.72 percent. The average growth rate of real GDP in EMDEs for the 10-year period after

liberalization was 4.38 percent. The 2.66 percentage-point increase in the average growth rate of

GDP in the EMDEs is not driven by outliers, but rather a consistent pattern of higher growth

after opening. Of the 64 countries in the sample, 52 have a post-trade liberalization growth rate

that exceeds their country-specific, pre-liberalization average. The growth trajectory of the

control group is flat.



4. Liberalization of Capital Flows

        Baker's case for developing countries opening to foreign investment hung on standard

neoclassical theory in which liberalizing the capital account facilitates a more efficient

international allocation of resources and produces a number of beneficial effects. Specifically,

savings flow from capital abundant developed countries, where the return on capital is low, to

capital-scarce developing countries where the return on capital is high. The flow of savings into

the developing countries reduces their cost of capital, triggering a temporary increase in

investment and growth that permanently raises their standard of living (Fischer 2003; Krueger

1988; Obstfeld 1998).
                                                                                                    12
        Because the national stock market's earnings-to-price ratio--the aggregate earnings

yield--is the average cost of equity capital for all publicly traded firms in a country--it provides

the broadest visible proxy for the rate of return that owners of capital require to reinvest their

profits in the local economy instead of allocating them elsewhere or increasing consumption. In

turn, the aggregate earnings yield equals the risk-free interest rate plus the equity-risk premium.

In theory, prior to liberalization of the capital account, the risk-free rate for a given country is

determined domestically by the local supply of savings and demand for investment; the country's

pre-liberalization equity-risk premium is the domestic price of risk (required return per unit of

variance) multiplied by the quantity of risk (the variance of aggregate market returns). After

liberalization, the country's capital market is integrated with the world capital market; therefore,

post liberalization: the risk-free rate is the world interest rate, and the equity premium is the

world price of covariance risk multiplied by the covariance of local market returns with global

market returns. Since the world risk-free rate is typically lower than the EMDE risk-free rate,

and the variance of emerging stock returns is greater than their covariance with world stock

returns (Chari and Henry 2004), we expect liberalization to reduce the aggregate earnings yield.

        As the variable of interest is the stock market earnings yield, we confront theory with

evidence by defining "capital account liberalization" as the first point in time that a government

permits foreigners to purchase shares of publicly listed corporations, a seemingly limited form of

opening that actually played a significant role in facilitating privatization and foreign direct

investment (FDI) as well as enabling flows of portfolio equity. Using dates from Chari, Henry,

and Sasson (2012), Figure 5 plots, in liberalization time, the average value of the earnings yield

of the 18 EMDEs for which there is information on both liberalization dates and yields. The

numbers are annual, and the plot starts at year -5 because of data limitations. Both the average
                                                                                                       13
and median liberalization date is 1989, and there are only 3 countries with data on earnings

yields in year -10, none of which are in Latin America, a focal point of Baker's speech. As a

point of comparison, and a quasi-control group, Figure 5 also plots the US earnings yield, to

which we assign a year "0" of 1989 to match the average liberalization date of the EMDEs.

       First, and consistent with theory, Figure 5 indicates that during the process of

liberalization and its aftermath the average earnings yield of EMDEs falls sharply and then

gradually converges to that of the US. On impact, that is between year -1 and year 0, the average

EMDE earnings yield falls from 13.3 percent to 8.0 percent, a drop of 530 basis points in a single

year. This average is not the result of a few outliers, but instead a consistent drop in the cost of

capital. There are only 4 countries that do not, on impact, experience a fall in their earnings

yield. The US earnings yield also falls during the liberalization window, but by a smaller

amount, 210 basis points from 8.6 percent to 6.5 percent. The observation that capital account

liberalization shrinks the differential in EMDE-US earnings yields by 320 basis points, and that

the gap continues to narrow in the aftermath of liberalization--converging to zero in year 5--

provides empirical support for the capital market liberalization component of the Baker

Hypothesis.

       Second, except for the rise in year 8 associated with the 1997-98 Asian Financial Crisis,

the fall in EMDE earnings yields appears to be permanent. The average yield for the 18 countries

in the five years prior to liberalization, 12.7 percent, drops to an average of 7.1 percent in the ten

years after liberalization--a decrease of 560 basis points. In the case of the US, the average

earnings yield is also lower in the post-liberalization period than it was in the pre-liberalization

period--4.7 percent versus 7.9 percent--but the decline in the average EMDE yield is 240 basis

points larger than that of the US. As in the case of the on-impact change in yields, the pattern of
                                                                                                       14
a longer-run post liberalization cost of capital that is lower than the pre-liberalization cost of

equity capital is also extremely consistent. Of the 18 countries, there are only 2 in which the

post-liberalization cost of equity capital is not lower than the pre-liberalization cost of equity

capital, and in both of those countries the cost of capital is unchanged.

       Space limitations do not permit panel regressions to address questions about reverse

causality and statistical significance, but Figure 5 stands up to empirical scrutiny (Henry 2000;

Stulz 2005). As far as economic significance is concerned, the fall in the required rate of return

on equity capital after the onset of reforms in the 1990s provides a plausible, if admittedly

oversimplified, explanation of the growth acceleration that took hold in the developing world

after 1994. By reducing inflation to provide stability and reduce uncertainty, as well as opening

the economy to increase the supply of savings and allow greater diversification of risk, the

combination of stabilization and capital account liberalization reduced the cost of equity capital

in EMDEs. By tilting domestic output in the direction of comparative advantage and raising

productivity, trade liberalization raised the rate of return on investing in capital. Falling costs of

capital in conjunction with higher prospective returns to property, plant, and equipment provided

a strong incentive to increase investment, and many countries in the developing world did, in

fact, experience higher rates of investment, wages, and GDP growth following major reforms

(Chari, Henry, and Sasson 2012; Chari and Henry 2008; Henry 2007)

       In addition to giving EMDEs access to a larger pool of savings, opening their equity

markets to foreigners enabled developing countries to reduce their reliance on debt, which

requires payments that are invariant to the borrower's circumstances, and resort to FDI and

portfolio equity as alternative sources of capital. Baker's speech mentioned the benefits of

foreign equity financing as a complement to debt (Baker 1985, p. 210), but his remarks did not
                                                                                                     15
address a critical source of debt bias in the international financial system: implicit subsidies to

suppliers of debt capital. G-7 lenders to emerging market countries can resort to G-7 courts in the

event of debt disputes, but there is no such recourse for G-7 holders of emerging market equity

(see Rogoff 1999). Failure to address the debt bias left EMDEs vulnerable, in the future, to the

excessive reliance on leverage that lay at heart of the crisis Baker sought to resolve. In particular,

short-term, dollar-denominated debt was the proximate cause of both the 1994 Mexican Crisis

and the 1997-98 Asian Crisis (Feldstein 2002).

       The reality that neither the Mexican, Asian, or any other emerging market crisis was

caused by the liberalization of portfolio equity flows underscores an instructive irony. The

aversion of developing country leaders in the 1970s to allow foreigners to purchase shares in

their countries' corporations created an excessive reliance on leverage that led to a debt crisis

that left them little choice but to open equity markets to facilitate FDI and a wave of

privatizations that began in Latin America and spread to Eastern Europe.



5. Privatization of State-Owned Enterprises

       With the sale of British Telecom by the Thatcher government in 1984, the term

"privatization" entered the everyday lexicon of modern economics, but in the aftermath of

Baker's speech, the trend of selling state-owned-enterprises (SOEs) spread to the developing

world. Proponents of privatization posit at least three ways in which it can raise welfare. First, by

formally establishing property rights and making owners and managers accountable for profits

and losses, the reallocation of assets from the public to the private sector can increase the

operating efficiency and financial performance of firms previously owned by the state. Second, if

privatization also induces entry and increases competition, it can increase consumer surplus and
                                                                                                      16
the overall quality of goods. Third, for a given level of tax revenue, selling loss-making

enterprises reduces the size of the government's deficit, frees up resources for investment in

public goods, and generates revenues that can be used to pay down debt.

       In the case of Latin America, fiscal constraints were a driving factor behind privatization.

For years prior to Mexico's historic default in August of 1982, loss-making SOEs in countries

across Latin America contributed to chronic budget deficits that were the root cause of the

region's debt and inflation crises, and the easing of restrictions on foreign ownership of domestic

equity in the late 1980s and early 1990s facilitated the stock market sale of SOEs that were a

drain on public finances. For example, shares of YPF, the Argentine national oil company, were

divested on the New York Stock Exchange in 1993; Brazil conducted equity sales in electricity,

steel, and telecoms in 1997.

       Because privatization is generally implemented at the level of the firm rather than the

macroeconomy, evaluating its impact on economic growth is more nuanced than in the case of

stabilization and liberalization. One exception, however, was the economies of Eastern Europe

and the former Soviet Union, where the massive scale of the privatization efforts effectively

amounted to an aggregate shock. Given the scale and scope of the shift from state to market

production in these countries following the fall of the Berlin Wall, they provide an ideal setting

in which to evaluate whether privatization generates aggregate efficiency gains.

       Figure 6 indicates that in the 12 transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe

(CEEE) and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) that replaced the Soviet Union, the

average private sector share of GDP rose from 13 percent in 1990 to 65 percent in 1998. While

privatization significantly increased the role of the private sector in Eastern Europe, the initial

years of privatization were accompanied by deep recessions in Poland, Hungary, Romania, the
                                                                                                      17
Czech Republic, Slovakia, and the Former Soviet Union due to the massive disruptions that

ensued during the transition from state to market (Blanchard and Kremer 1998; Estrin,

Hanousek, Kocenda, and Svejnar 2009; Fischer 1992). For example, in 1991 the economies of

Poland, Romania, and the Czech Republic contracted by an average of 10.5 percent. Between

1998 and 2007, however, these countries were also among the fastest growing economies in

Europe. The average annual growth rates during this period were: 3.7 percent in the Czech

Republic and Hungary, 4.3 percent in Poland, 4.4 percent in Romania, 5.9 percent in the Russian

Federation, and 5 percent in Slovakia.

       By and large, the macroeconomic evidence suggests that post-communist privatization

efforts accompanied by complementary reforms may have had a positive effect on the long-run

level of aggregate output, but the effects vary in accordance with: (1) the speed of

implementation (shock therapy versus gradualism); (2) whether ownership was subsequently

dispersed or concentrated; and (3) whether the new owners of the enterprise were foreigners or

domestic residents. Sale to foreign owners primarily led to positive effects on the level of total

factor productivity, firm revenues, labor productivity, employment, and wages. Sale to domestic

residents, on the other hand, resulted in weaker or categorically negative effects (Estrin,

Hanousek, Kocenda, and Svejnar 2009).

       There are many reasons for the varied record of privatization across space and time. The

extent to which privatization is expected to raise efficiency is complicated, nuanced, and context

specific. The design of privatization programs appears paramount in putting into place the

foundation for subsequent economic progress, and the mode of privatization therefore matters.

Rapid privatization in Russia--especially of SOEs in oil, natural gas, and minerals--generally

led to inefficiencies and corruption. Gradual divestment in the Czech Republic, Poland, Slovakia,
                                                                                                     18
and Slovenia, was more positive. Corporate governance and institutional frameworks are also

important determinants of whether the transfer of ownership to private hands and later

restructurings deliver the desired productivity gains.

       Turning from macro to micro data, and moving beyond Eastern Europe and the former

Soviet Union, reveals more definitive results. There are a range of studies of the financial and

operating performance of firms before and after privatization that employ comprehensive data on

manufacturing firms in Africa, Asia, and Latin America in addition to the transition economies.

Following privatization, real sales, operating efficiency, profitability, capital spending, and

dividend payments all show significant increases alongside declining leverage (Megginson and

Netter 2001; Boubakri and Cossett 1998). In many cases, improvements in profitability

following privatization were not accompanied by layoffs or a decline in worker compensation.

Fears of employment losses also appear exaggerated, as a significant fraction of privatized firms

actually employ more workers (Megginson and Netter, 2001; Gupta, 2005; Estrin et. al., 2009).

The caveat in all of this, of course, is that if governments systematically privatize better firms,

selection bias may lead to erroneous attribution of improved performance to the merits of private

ownership (Gupta, Ham and Svejnar, 2008).

       Another privatization concern stems from evidence, in a sample of privatized firms in 41

emerging and developed countries, that ownership becomes more concentrated in the two

decades following divestment (Boubakri et al. 2005). Increased concentration highlights the

reality that improved operating performance does not necessarily imply positive-sum outcomes.

Indeed, given the rents generated in some cases for the lucky few who were able to acquire state

assets, significant controversy surrounds the question of increased market power rather than

broad-based welfare gains following privatization.
                                                                                                      19
           Concerns about levels of rents and ownership concentration were flagged early on during

privatization efforts in Eastern Europe. Famous examples include small groups of oligarchs who

managed to concentrate power quickly and accumulate wealth, tainting the reputations of

privatization programs through indictments of corruption and cronyism (Roland, 2008).

Measures to minimize concentration included calls to incentivize divesture commissions to

perform break-ups in industries where there were concerns about anti-competitive behavior, and

recommendations to perform market structure interventions to prevent collusion before

divestiture (Tirole, 1991). But privatization critics argue that neither public nor private provision

can fully resolve the difficult incentive problems and the choice simply depends on the

transaction costs associated with future public or private interventions (Sappington and Stiglitz

1987). While the benefits of privatizing competitive industries are less controversial, on balance,

state-owned natural monopolies may be preferable if they mitigate regressive redistributive

effects.

           Finally, an under-appreciated nuance of ownership concentration is that whether under

state or private control, ownership concentration and regulatory capture can delay or stall other

reforms such as the liberalization of FDI. Evidence suggests that the propensity to open up

industries to foreign investment is inversely related to industry concentration (Chari and Gupta,

2008). Efficiency gains are compromised when reform movements are highjacked by special

interests suggesting that the political economy of privatization has significant implications for

efficiency.




                                                                                                    20
6. Resistance and Resentment

       While the data on economic outcomes speak clearly in retrospect, the path to meaningful

reforms that brought them about was slow, rocky, and non-linear, because Baker failed to say

that his speech provided a compass not a map. Postulating that developing countries would grow

faster if they stabilized and traded with the rest of the world was one thing. Charting a course

from the universe of potential policy changes he described to higher standards of living was quite

another. The second point required, for each nation, a sustained commitment to a pragmatic

growth strategy, consisting of an optimal mix of country-specific, efficiency-enhancing policy

changes.

       Efficiency-enhancing policy changes involve difficult adjustments. In democratic

settings, enough of those who lose from the changes must be persuaded to back them if the

reform process is to be sustained. Therefore, in addition to strategic knowledge about the benefits

that such policy changes could bring, successful reform requires tactical knowledge--and

bargaining chips. Said differently, "...the economic policies that lead to debt difficulties (and

those that lead to rapid growth) are intensely political...the international community has thus far

failed to find techniques to reward adherence to altered policy packages over a sustained

period...If one were to identify one desirable type of financing facility, it would...

simultaneously increase the credibility of the program, serve as an additional inducement to

undertake appropriate reform measures, and overcome debt overhang." Krueger (1988).

       Baker's official three-step plan for bringing about reform stumbled, in large part, because

it rejected Krueger's point about debt overhang. Under the first step of the Baker Plan, leaders

had to implement reforms to maintain access to official lending from the IMF and World Bank.

Second, their countries would start growing as a result of the first step. Third, private creditors
                                                                                                      21
(the commercial banks) would voluntarily resume lending because of the second step. Baker did

not ask the banks to write down debt to eliminate overhang and to hold them accountable for

extending ill-advised loans in the past. Indeed, he explicitly and publicly opposed any form of

debt relief.1

           Meaningful changes took place in the immediate aftermath of Baker's speech

(Williamson 2004). For example, in 1986 the Philippines stabilized and Colombia and Costa

Rica liberalized trade. And a number of countries did enough to retain access to IMF and World

Bank money. But without debt relief, not enough leaders had the political capital they needed to

drive sustained economic transformation. A brief overview of reform dates illustrates the point.

The average stabilization year was 1992--seven years after Baker's speech--and the average

trade liberalization year was 1990.

           In order to accelerate the reform process, In May of 1989 Nicholas F. Brady, Baker's

successor at the US Treasury, announced a new financing facility. In return for countries

agreeing to implement and sustain certain economic policy changes first emphasized by Baker,

countries were offered debt relief that would eliminate debt overhang and clear the way for new,

profitable private lending. Once countries managed to negotiate an agreement, their

implementation of reforms under the Brady Plan was swift. For the 16 countries that eventually

received debt relief, the average year of reaching a Brady agreement was 1992--the same as

their average stabilization year, and two years after their average trade liberalization date.

           Accomplishments of the Brady Plan notwithstanding, Baker's uneven treatment of the

debt overhang problem had lasting ramifications. Specifically, Baker's insistence that economic


1
    See Arslanalp and Henry (2006) for documentation of Baker's opposition to debt relief.

                                                                                                  22
restructuring take place without the banks accepting any responsibility left the leaders of many

developing countries in a politically untenable position and ignited a firestorm of criticisms from

multiple sources that were united by a theme with enduring resonance. Washington, Wall Street,

and the leaders of the international financial system resolved a banking crisis by driving through

policy changes that hurt the poor and helped the bankers.



7. Conclusion

       From 30,000 feet, the economic performance of formerly Third World countries in the

immediate aftermath of reforms speaks for itself, even as there were important regional

differences in outcomes (Coulibaly and Okonjo-Iweala 2020; Goldfajn, Martinez, and Valdes

2020), and some of the reforms have since stalled or been reversed. Economic efficiency is not a

sufficient condition for a flourishing society, but it is absolutely necessary for sustainable and

inclusive growth that allows an increasing fraction of a country's population to have choices and

opportunity, even as its leaders need to recognize the urgency for actions to mitigate the impact

of growth on climate change and the environment.

       In the absence of exogenous shocks, economic activity does not implode in countries

with low inflation and modest debt that export goods they produce efficiently while importing

those that they do not. As the fortunes of nations ebb and flow, it is important to remember these

realities and to distinguish between cycles and trends. Increasing and legitimate discontent over

rising inequality in the present moment may overshadow one of the most important stories about

the world economy since the end of the Second World War, even as it continues to unfold.

       Certain economic policy reforms implemented by EMDEs have significantly improved

their economic performance, lifting hundreds of millions of people out of poverty with positive
                                                                                                     23
attendant consequences for health and life expectancy. The hard-won economic successes of the

past three decades underscore the benefits of policymakers finding the will to meaningfully and

constructively address the redistributive consequences of globalization in order to salvage the

prospect of continued catch-up growth by EMDEs and positive sum outcomes for both

developed and developing economies alike.




                                                                                                  24
References

Amsden, A. H. 1989. Asia's Next Giant: South Korea and Late Industrialization. New York:
     Oxford University Press.

Andrés, Javier and Ignacio Hernando. 1999. "Does Inflation Harm Economic Growth? Evidence
    from the OECD" in The Costs and Benefits of Price Stability, edited by Martin Feldstein.
    Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Arslanalp, Serkan and Peter Blair Henry (2005). "Is Debt Relief Efficient?" Journal of Finance,
     60(2): 1021-1055.

Baker, James A. III. 1985. "Statement of the Honorable James A. Baker III, Secretary of the
       Treasury of the United States Before the Joint Annual Meeting of the International
       Monetary Fund and the World Bank, October 8, 1985, Seoul, Korea" in International
       Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Finance Corporation,
       International Development Association. Annual Meetings of the Board of Governors
       Summary Proceedings.
       http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/773301468155960731/pdf/534210BR0boar
       d101Official0Use0Only1.pdf

Borisova, Ginka and William Megginson. 2011. "Does Government Ownership Affect the Cost
       of Debt? Evidence from Privatization." The Review of Financial Studies, 24 (8), 2693­
       2737.

Blanchard, Olivier and Michael Kremer. 1997. "Disorganization." The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 112 (4), 1091­1126

Boubakri, Narjess and Jean-Claude Cosset. 1998. "The Financial and Operating Performance of
    Newly Privatized Firms: Evidence from Developing Countries." The Journal of Finance,
    53, 1081-1110.

Bruno, Michael and William Easterly, William. 1998. "Inflation Crises and Long-Run
     Growth." Journal of Monetary Economics, 41 (1), 3-26.

Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry. 2004. "Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence from a
     Natural Experiment." Journal of Finance, 59 (3), 1295-1324.

Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry. 2008. "Firm Specific Information and the Efficiency of
     Investment." Journal of Financial Economics, 87 (3), 636-655.
                                                                                              25
Chari, Anusha and Gupta, Nandini. 2008. "Incumbents and Protectionism: The Political
     Economy of Foreign Entry Liberalization." Journal of Financial Economics, 88 (3), 633-
     656.

Chari, Anusha, Peter Blair Henry, and Diego Sasson. 2012. "Capital Market Integration and
     Wages." American Economic Journal-Macroeconomics, 42 (2), 101­132.

Chomsky, Noam. 1999. Profit Over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order. New York: Seven
    Stories Press.

Coulibaly, Brahima and Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala. 2020. "Washington Consensus Reforms and
     Economic Performance in Sub-Saharan Africa." Brookings Insititution, Work in Progress.

Commission on Growth and Development. 2008. "The Growth Report: Strategies for Sustained
   Growth and Inclusive Development." Washington, DC: World Bank.

Estrin, Saul, Jan Hanousek, Evzen Kocenda, and Jan Svejnar. 2009. "The Effects of Privatization
      and Ownership in Transition Economies." Journal of Economic Literature, 47 (3), 699-
      728.

Dornbusch, Rüdiger and Park, Yung Chul. 1987. "Korean Growth Policy." Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity, 18 (2), 389-454.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1992. "The Case for Trade Liberalization in Developing Countries."
    Journal of Economic Perspectives, 6 (1), 69-85.

Dornbusch, Rüdiger and Stanley Fischer. 1991. "Moderate Inflation." NBER Working Paper No
    3896, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Easterly, William. 1996. "When is stabilization expansionary?" Economic Policy 22, 67­107.

Feldstein, Martin, ed. 1999. The Costs and Effects of Price Stability. Chicago: The University of
     Chicago Press, pp. 315-341.

Fischer, Stanley. 1986. " Issues in Medium Term Macroeconomic Adjustment," World Bank
     Observer, July 1986.

Fischer, Stanley. 1986. "Economic Growth and Economic Policy," in V. Corbo (et al.) Growth-
     Oriented Adjustment Programs, Washington, DC: IMF-World Bank, 1987.

Fischer, Stanley. 1992. "Stabilization and Economic Reform in Russia." Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, The Brookings Institution, 23(1), 77-126.

Fischer, Stanley. 1993. "The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth." Journal of Monetary
                                                                                               26
       Economics 32 (3): 485-512.

Gertz Geoffrey and Homi Kharas 2019. "Beyond Neoliberalism: Insights from Emerging
     Markets." Brookings Institution Report. The Brookings Institution.

Gil Diaz, Francisco. 2003. "Don't Blame our failures on Reforms That have Not Taken Place."
     Fraser Forum (June): 7-10.

Goldfajn, Ilan, Lorenza Martinez, and Rodrigo Valdes. 2020. "Washington Consensus in Latin
     America: From Raw Model to Straw Man." Working Paper

Gupta, Nandini. 2005. "Partial Privatization and Firm Performance." Journal of Finance, 60 (2),
     987-1015

Gupta, Nandini, John Ham and Jan Svejnar, 2008. "Priorities and Sequencing in Privatization:
     Evidence from Czech Firm Panel Data," European Economic Review, 52 (2), 183-208.

Ha, Jongrim, M. Ayhan Kose, and Franziska Ohnsorge. 2019. Inflation in Emerging and
     Developing Economies: Evolution, Drivers, and Policies. Washington DC, The World
     Bank.

Henry, Peter Blair (2002). "Is Disinflation Good for the Stock Market?" Journal of Finance,
57(4): 1617-1648.

Henry, Peter Blair. 2007. "Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation."
     Journal of Economic Literature 45 (4): 887­935.

International Monetary Fund. 2001. "The Decline of Inflation in Emerging Markets:
        Can It Be Maintained?" in World Economic Outlook. Washington, DC: International
        Monetary Fund.

Jao, Y. C. 1976. "Trade and Economic Development in Taiwan." Intereconomics, 11 (6), 172-
        176.

Kim, Linsu. 1999. Learning and Innovation in Economic Development, p.360.

Kim, Linsu. 2003. "The dynamics of technology development: lessons from the Korean
      experience" in Competitiveness, FDI and Technological Activity in East Asia, edited by
      Sanjaya Lall and Shujiro Urata.

Krueger, Anne, 1995. "East Asian Growth Experience and Endogenous Growth Theory" in
      Growth Theories in Light of the East Asian Experience. National Bureau of Economic
      Research 1995.

Krueger, Anne, 1988. "Resolving the Debt Crisis and Restoring Developing Countries
                                                                                               27
     Creditworthiness," paper presented at the Carnegie-Rochester Public Policy Conference,
     University of Rochester.

Krueger, Anne. 2004. "Meant Well, Tried Little, Failed Much: Policy Reforms in Emerging
     Market Economies." Roundtable lecture presented at the Economics Honor Society, New
     York University (March 23).

Krueger, Anne. 2009. Trade Liberalization and Growth in Developing Countries.
      http://www.saisjhu.edu/faculty/krueger/recentpapers/TradeLiberalizationandGrowt
      hinDevelopingCountries.pdf

Lewis, W. Arthur 1954. "Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor" The
       Manchester School, 22: 139-91.

Matthieson Donald J. and R. McKinnon. 1981. "How to Manage a Repressed Economy,"
       Princeton Essays in International Finance, no. 145, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
       December 1981.

McKinnon, Ronald I. 1984. "The International Capital Market and Economic Liberalization in
     LDCs," The Developing Economies, December 1984, 22.

Megginson and Netter. 2001. "From State to Market: A Survey of Empirical Studies on
      Privatization." Journal of Economic Literature, 39 (2), 321-389.

Menon, Ravi. 2015. "An Economic History of Singapore: 1965-2065. Keynote address by Mr
      Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the
      Singapore Economic Review Conference 2015, Singapore, 5 August 2015.
      https://www.bis.org/review/r150807b.htm

Michalopolous, Constantine. 1987. "World Bank Programs for Adjustment and Growth,"
      prepared for IMF-IBRO Symposium on Growth Oriented Adjustment Programs,
      Washington, D.C., February 1987.

Rodriguez, Francisco and Dani Rodrik. 2000. "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic's
      Guide to the Cross-National Evidence," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 15(1), 261-
      325.

Rodrik, Dani. 2006. "Goodbye Washington Consensus, Hello Washington Confusion? A Review
       of the World Bank's Economic Growth in the 1990s: Learning from a Decade of Reform"
       Learning from a Decade of Reform" Journal of Economic Literature 44(4): 973-987

Rogoff, Kenneth. 1999. "International Institutions for Reducing Global Financial Instability."
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13 (4), 21-42.


                                                                                                 28
Roland, Gerard ed. 2008. Privatization: Successes and Failures. New York: Columbia
      University Press.

Sachs, Jeffrey and Andrew Warner.1995. "Economic Reform and the Process of Global
        Integration" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1-118

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1987. "Trade and Exchange Rate Policies in Growth-Oriented Adjustment
       Programs," in V. Corbo, et al. (eds.) Growth-Oriented Adjustment Programs IMF-World
       Bank, 1987.

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1988. "Conditionality, Debt Relief and the Developing Countries' Debt Crisis."
       NBER Working Paper No. 2644.

Sappington, David and Joseph Stiglitz. 1987. "Privatization, information and incentives."
      Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 6, 567-585.

Stiglitz, Joseph 2002. Globalization and Its Discontents. New York and London: Norton.

Stulz, Rene. 2005. "The Limits of Financial Globalization." Journal of Finance, 60(4): 1595-
        1638.

Tirole, Jean. 1991. "Privatization in Eastern Europe: Incentives and the Economics of Transition,"
        NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 6, 221-268.

United States Senate, Committee on Finance. 1990. Hearing before the Subcommittee on
       International Debt. https://www.finance.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/hrg101-801.pdf

Wacziarg, Romain and Karen Welch. 2008. "Trade Liberalization and Growth: New
      Evidence" World Bank Economic Review 22: 187-231

Williamson, John. 1989. "What Washington Means by Policy Reform." In Latin American
       Readjustment: How Much Has Happened? edited by John Williamson. Washington, DC:
       Institute for International Economics.

Williamson, John. 2004. "A Short History of the Washington Consensus" Paper commissioned by
       Fundación CIDOB for a conference "From the Washington Consensus towards a new
       Global Governance," Barcelona, September 24­25, 2004.




                                                                                                 29
                           Percent




            0
                20
                     40
                          60
                                     80
                                          100
                                                120
     1980                                             140
     1981
     1982
     1983
     1984
     1985
     1986
     1987
     1988
     1989
     1990
     1991
     1992
     1993
     1994
     1995
     1996
     1997
     1998
     1999
     2000
     2001
     2002
     2003
     2004
     2005
     2006
                                                            Figure 1. Inflation In EMDEs Fell Permanently In 1994.




     2007
     2008
     2009
     2010
     2011
     2012
     2013
     2014
     2015
     2016
     2017
     2018
30
                                      Percent




             -4
                  -2
                              0
                                  2
                                                4
                                                    6
                                                        8
                                                            10
                       1980


                       1982


                       1984


                       1986


                       1988


                       1990


                       1992


                       1994


                       1996




     EMDEs
                       1998


                       2000




     RIch
                       2002


                       2004


                       2006


                       2008
                                                                 Figure 2. EMDEs Grew Faster After 1994. Rich Countries Did Not.




                       2010


                       2012


                       2014


                       2016


                       2018
31
                                    Figure 3. EMDEs Grew Faster After They Stabilized Inflation.
          5




          4




          3
Percent




          2




          1




          0
               -10   -9   -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3    -2   -1    0    1    2     3    4     5   6   7   8   9   10




          -1


                                                                                                                        32
                                        Figure 4. EMDEs Grew Faster After They Liberalized Trade.
          6




          5




          4
Percent




          3




          2




          1




          0
              -10   -9   -8   -7   -6      -5   -4    -3   -2   -1    0        1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10

                                                           EMDEs          Control Group



                                                                                                                           33
                      Figure 5. EMDEs' Cost of Equity Capital Fell After They Opened Their Stock Markets to Foreigners.
          0.16




          0.14




          0.12




           0.1
Perecnt




          0.08




          0.06




          0.04




          0.02




            0
                 -5     -4     -3      -2     -1      0       1      2       3         4    5      6       7      8       9        10

                                                              E/P: EMDEs     E/P: US                                          34
                               Figure 6. In Transition Economies, The Private Sector's Output As a Share of GDP Rose After
                                                                      Privatization.
                 80



                 70



                 60



                 50
Percent of GDP




                 40



                 30



                 20



                 10



                 0
                      1990



                             1991



                                    1992



                                           1993



                                                  1994



                                                         1995



                                                                1996



                                                                       1997



                                                                              1998



                                                                                     1999



                                                                                            2000



                                                                                                   2001



                                                                                                          2002



                                                                                                                 2003



                                                                                                                        2004



                                                                                                                               2005



                                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                                        35
Table 1. The Frequency of Stabilization Episodes Varies by Geography and Was Concentrated in the 1990s. Panel A: High Inflation.


                         Africa                                   Asia                              Latin America                       Eastern Europe



Country                   Year       Inflation     Country        Year   Inflation     Country           Year       Inflation      Country    Year   Inflation

Congo, Dem. Rep.          1995       9963.07         Syria       1989     43.37       Argentina          1991          84          Poland     1992       296.40

                                                                                      Bolivia            1987        4435.78       Turkey     1997       91.58
                                                                                       Brazil            1995        1651.74
                                                                                       Chile             1976         410.76
                                                                                     Costa Rica          1984         53.27
                                                                                     Dominican           1992         46.07
                                                                                      Republic
                                                                                       Ecuador           2002           62
                                                                                       Jamaica           1994         50.15
                                                                                        Peru             1991        3849.12
                                                                                      Suriname           2002         65.59
                                                                                      Uruguay            1992         98.32
Mean                      1995       9963.07                     1989     43.37                          1991         982.44                  1995        194
Median                    1995       9963.07                     1989     43.37                          1992           84                    1995        194
Number of Countries
                           1                                       1                                      11                                   2




                                                                                                                                                          36
Table 1. The Frequency of Stabilization Episodes Varies by Geography and Was Concentrated in the 1990s. Panel B: Moderate Inflation.



                         Africa                                   Asia                              Latin America                      Eastern Europe

Country                   Year       Inflation     Country       Year    Inflation     Country           Year       Inflation    Country     Year   Inflation
Algeria                   1995         27.09        Korea        1981     22.79      El Salvador         1988         26.38      Hungary     1993     28.95
Burundi                   1998         25.60      Philippines    1986     27.83       Guatemala          1992         28.59
Gabon                     1997         15.48       Thailand      1976     15.05          Haiti           1996         32.22
Gambia                    1988         32.80                                             Haiti           2006         21.23
Kenya                     1995         34.04                                          Honduras           1997         25.02
Madagascar                1997         35.93                                          Paraguay           1992         29.30
Mauritius                 1982         23.64                                           Mexico            1998           30
Niger                     1997         17.30                                         Trinidad and        1982         15.51
                                                                                        Tobago
Senegal                   1997        14.30
South Africa               988        17.04
Togo                      1997        20.09
Mean                      1994        23.94                      1981     18.31                          1994         26.03                  1993       28.95
Median                    1997        23.64                      1980     15.05                          1994         27.48                  1993       28.95
Number of Countries
                           11                                      3                                      8                                   1




                                                                                                                                                        37
Table 2. The Frequency of Trade Liberalization Episodes Varies by Geography and Was Concentrated in the 1990s.

            Africa                           Asia                        Latin America                 Eastern Europe

       Country            Year           Country          Year           Country          Year        Country           Year
         Benin            1990         Bangladesh         1996          Argentina         1991        Albania           1992
      Botswana            1979            Jordan          1965            Bolivia         1985        Bulgaria          1991
    Burkina Faso          1998            Korea           1968            Brazil          1990        Georgia           1996
       Burundi            1999             Nepal          1991             Chile          1976        Hungary           1990
     Cabo Verde           1991           Pakistan         2001          Colombia          1986       Montenegro         2001
      Cameroon            1993         Philippines        1988         Costa Rica         1986         Poland           1990
     Cote d'Ivore         1994          Sri Lanka         1991    Dominican Republic      1992        Romania           1992
         Egypt            1995          Tajikistan        1996           Ecuador          1991         Serbia           2001
       Ethiopia           1996                                         El Salvador        1989        Turkey            1989
        Gambia            1985                                          Guatemala         1988
        Ghana             1985                                           Guyana           1988
        Guinea            1986                                          Honduras          1991
    Guinea-Bissau         1987                                           Jamaica          1989
        Kenya             1993                                           Mexico           1986
     Madagascar           1996                                          Nicaragua         1991
          Mali            1988                                           Panama           1996
      Mauritania          1995                                          Paraguay          1989
      Mauritius           1968                                             Peru           1991
       Morocco            1984                                    Trinidad and Tobago     1992
     Mozambique           1995                                          Uruguay           1990
         Niger            1994                                          Venezuela         1996
     Sierra Leone         2001
     South Africa         1991
       Tanzania           1995
        Tunisia           1989
       Uganda             1988
         Mean             1991                            1987                            1989                          1994   38
        Median            1992                            1991                            1990                          1992
  Number of Countries      26                              8                               21                             9
