                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 HISTORY AS EVOLUTION

                                         Nathan Nunn

                                      Working Paper 27706
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27706


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




I am particularly grateful to Joseph Henrich for numerous insightful discussions. I also thank
Alberto Bisin, Robert Boyd, Ben Enke, Michele Gelfand, Michael Muthukrishna, James
Robinson, and Felipe Valencia Caicedo for helpful comments and/or discussions. I also thank
Vafa Behnam, Aditi Chitkara, Rumi Khan, and Laura Kincaide for excellent RA work. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nathan Nunn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
History as Evolution
Nathan Nunn
NBER Working Paper No. 27706
August 2020
JEL No. C73,N01,N10,Z1

                                          ABSTRACT

In this chapter, I consider the benefits of viewing history through an evolutionary lens. In recent
decades, a field of research has emerged, which builds on foundations from biological evolution
to study culture within an evolutionary framework. I begin the chapter by discussing the theory
behind cultural evolution and the empirical evidence supporting its ability to explain the history
of human societies. I then turn to a discussion of how an evolutionary perspective provides
important insights into a range of phenomena within economics, including a deeper
understanding of human capital, innovation, gender roles, the consequences of warfare, the
effects of market competition, why we observe historical persistence and path dependence, and,
most importantly, why sustained economic growth is often so elusive. I end by turning to a
summary of a growing body of research within economics that has made progress in improving
our understanding of cultural evolution and, thus, contributing to evolutionary disciplines outside
of economics.


Nathan Nunn
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu
                                              Contents

1   Introduction                                                                                            3


2   The Benefits of Cultural Evolution                                                                      5

    A   Cultural evolution saves on information costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           5

        a       Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6

        b       Evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10

    B   Cultural evolution is cumulative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       11

        a       Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11

        b       Evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14


3   Insights from a Recognition of History as Evolution                                                    16

    A   Environmental Mismatch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         17

        a       Endogenous Mismatch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        22

    B   Education and Cultural Evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         25

        a       Innovation and the Collective Brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        30

    C   How and Why History Matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          34

        a       Kludges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    40

    D   Group-Level Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      44

    E   Biology, Sex, and Gender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       49


4   Contributions of Economics to Cultural Evolution                                                       51


5   Conclusions                                                                                            58


References                                                                                                 58




                                                     1
                                       List of Figures

1   The equilibrium proportion of traditionalists (T) and non-traditionalists (NT). . . .                  9

2   The adoption of a new (optimal) action following a shock depends on the propor-

    tion traditionalists in the society x . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17

3   An example of environmental mismatch: The dodo bird (raphus cucullatus). Sketch

    by Roelandt Savery, 1626. Source: Figure 10 of Hume (2006). . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               19

4   The equilibrium proportion of traditionalists (T) and non-traditionalists (NT), as-

    suming the instability of the environment is endogenous to learning by NT (and

     = 1/2). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25

5   Illustration of the model of cumulative culture / human capital developed by

    Henrich (2004b). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      29

6   Example of a mountain landscape dictating the evolution of the eye. Source: Figure

    5.30 of Dawkins (1996). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       36

7   Temporary historical events and permanent effects. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              38

8   An example of a kludge: the bony flatfish. Source: Figure 1 of Norman (1934). . . .                   41



                                        List of Tables

1   Summary of the literature on the long-term determinants of cultural traits. . . . . .                 53

2   Overview of the economics literature on the shorter-term determinants of cultural

    traits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   54

3   Overview of the economics literature on the consequences of differences in cultural

    traits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   55




                                                  2
                                             1. Introduction

To the typical economic historian, the relevance of evolutionary perspectives, such as those from

evolutionary biology, evolutionary psychology, or evolutionary anthropology, to the study of eco-

nomic history of long-term economic growth likely seem limited. The importance of evolution or

biology may seem restricted to well-defined subfields within economics that study the importance

of genetics for economic outcomes.1 However, in this chapter, I will argue that an evolutionary

perspective can provide further and more widely-relevant insights for the study of economic

history and long-run economic growth. In particular, my aim is to reduce the perceived gap

between research done within the field of economic history and that done within the fields of

evolutionary biology, evolutionary psychology, and evolutionary anthropology.

   The field of evolutionary research that is the most relevant for economic history is cultural

evolution. The field was an outgrowth of evolutionary biology and emerged as a line of research

interested in better understanding human psychology, human societies, human behavior, and

their evolution over time. The first contributions were theoretical studies, such as Cavalli-Sforza

and Feldman (1981) and Boyd and Richerson (1985), that adapted and extended models from

evolutionary biology and applied them to cultural evolution.2

   I begin the chapter by first providing a conceptual and theoretical description of culture and

cultural evolution. An important part of this is to describe the theory and evidence behind the

benefits of culture and why it is such a central part of human decision making and, therefore,

the fabric of human society. As I will discuss, there are two aspects of culture and its evolution

that are particularly important. The first is that culture is efficient. By relying on traditions that

are passed down over generations, individuals are able to effortlessly make decisions in complex

environments where figuring out the optimal action with certainty is costly or even impossible.

When a population's setting is stable over time, then reliance on evolved cultural traditions is an

effective strategy.
   1 Examples of this line of research includes geneoeconomics (Benjamin, Cesarini, Chabris, Glaeser, Laibson, Guona-

son, Harris, Launer, Purcell, Smith, Johannesson, Magnusson, Beauchamp, Christakis, Atwood, Hebert, Freese, Hauser,
Hauser, Grankvista, Hultman and Lichtenstein, 2012), macro-level analyses of the effects of genetic distance and
genetic diversity (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009, Ashraf and Galor, 2012), micro-level studies on the importance of
genetics relative to the environment for economic outcomes (Sacerdote, 2007, Cesarini, Dawes, Fowler, Johannesson,
Lichtenstein and Wallace, 2008, 2009), or empirical and theoretical research that takes a Darwinian perspective to
understand economic growth (Galor and Moav, 2002, Clark, 2007).
   2 For an overview and introduction into the field of cultural evolution, see Chudek, Muthukrishna and Henrich

(2015). For a description of the history of the field, see Mesoudi (2016).




                                                         3
   The second aspect of cultural evolution is that it is cumulative. Culture allows societies to

accumulate an evolved body of knowledge that is greater than any single individual could learn

within their lifetime or fit within their mind. By taking as given the cultural wisdom of previous

generations, societies do not need to `reinvent the wheel' and instead can focus their efforts on

adding to the body of culturally accumulated knowledge of the society ­ i.e., what has been called

the `collective brain' (Muthukrishna and Henrich, 2016).

   Having described the conceptual foundations of cultural evolution and its benefits, I then turn

to a series of examples aimed at showing how an evolutionary perspective of human behavior

can provide insight into the study of economics in general and economic history in particular.

I do this in three ways. The first is to show that the differences between evolutionary thinking

and traditional economic thinking are often much smaller than one might think. Specifically,

there are many cases where the same logic, the same evidence, and a similar narrative are

developed but using different terminology, empirical methods, and data. Thus, I hope to make

these commonalities more apparent to the reader.

   The second strategy is to highlight instances in which the insights from the evolutionary

literature can be leveraged by economic historians to gain a better understanding of historical

processes. Here, I will touch on a few cases that have become apparent to me over the years. I

will discuss how the evolutionary insights, such as environmental mismatch, the collective brain,

cumulative improvements, kludges, group-level selection, sexual dimorphism, and reproduction

strategies, helps us develop a deeper understanding of a diverse set of aspects of human history,

including human capital, innovation, warfare, state formation, cooperation, social structure,

gender roles, kinship, social structure, path dependence, and comparative economic development.

To me, these are the most obvious examples of the insights that emerge from an evolutionary

perspective. However, my sense is that they are just the tip of the iceberg.

   The third strategy is to highlight cases in which historical research within economics has con-

tributed to the cultural evolution literature. As I will discuss, a sizeable and quickly growing area

of research within economics has taken an evolutionary perspective, thus providing important

contributions, both theoretical and empirical, to evolutionary fields outside of economics.




                                                 4
                       2. The Benefits of Cultural Evolution

Given my argument about the importance of cultural evolution for studying the history of

human societies, it is necessary to first define what is meant by the term `culture'. The standard

definition from evolutionary anthropology defines culture as the knowledge, technology, values,

beliefs, and norms that can be transmitted across generations and between individuals (e.g.,

Boyd and Richerson, 1985). There are numerous examples of cultural that vary by context, but

examples include religious/supernatural beliefs, views about morality, norms about giving and

cooperation, gender norms, food preferences, taboos, and traditions and skills regarding farming,

house-building, hunting, etc.

  Implicit in this definition is that our culture influences the decisions we make and therefore

affects human behavior. For scholars in evolutionary fields, this is natural and an obvious fact.

However, for economists this is not something that we take for granted. Instead, when one views

human behavior from the traditional economic perspective of `rationality', particularly of one

takes a narrow definition of rationality, then a natural question arises: why does culture exist?

Why would someone be influenced by what they are told by their teachers, their parents, friends,

church leaders, celebrities, etc? Why wouldn't individuals just figure out what is best on their

own, engaging in a form of rational calculus? For example, if cheating, stealing, or lying yields a

higher payoff, then why would someone be influenced by the fact that religious leaders, parents,

teachers, or friends might tell them that this behavior is wrong and should be avoided? These

are important questions and to understand the logic behind culture and its benefits, we now

turn to a theoretical examination of culture. Specifically, I now discuss a theoretical literature

where culture is not taken as given, but is derived endogenously. In other words, an important

characteristic of the models is that they show when individuals would use culture to guide their

decision and why doing this can be beneficial.


A. Cultural evolution saves on information costs

To understand the primary benefits of culture, one must first recognize an important fact: As hu-

man beings, we have cognitive limits. Acquiring and processing information has an opportunity

cost. In the face of these limits, we have developed culture and cultural learning, and with them

cultural values and beliefs. These serve as tools that are "fast and frugal" and allow us to make



                                                 5
decisions more efficiently than if we were an economist's traditional version of `rationality' (e.g.,

Gigerenzer and Goldstein, 1996, Todd and Group, 1999).


a. Theory

The formal theory behind culture and its evolution has been well developed in the cultural

evolution literature and began with seminal models by Boyd and Richerson (1985) and Rogers

(1988) among others.3 The authors model situations where an action must be made in a setting

without perfect (costless) certainty. The payoff of each action depends on the environment, which

is variable. Individuals can either collect information and figure out the optimal action on their

own or they can rely on the traditions that have evolved up until the previous generation. They do

this by choosing the action of a person from the previous generation. This effectively models the

process of transmission of cultural or psychological traits across generations. Under very general

conditions, there will always be some proportion of the population that relies on the cultural

traditions of the previous generation.

   The models show that, under fairly general conditions, we should observe the presence of cul-

ture and decision-making that are based on cultural values. There are two primary benefits that

culture provides over rationality. First, culture-based decision-making provides a quick and easy

way to make decisions. To the extent that rational decision-making (narrowly defined) requires

costs due to information acquisition or cognitive processing, then acting on one's transmitted

cultural traditions and values saves on these costs. The second benefit is that relying on culture

allows for cumulative learning. By following the culture of the previous generations, individuals

do not have to reinvent the wheel and re-learn everything that has already been figured out

during the history of the society in question. For example, if the society has already learned how

to effectively hunt, which plants are not poisonous, and what rituals and beliefs helps the society

to exist in harmony, then taking these as given and trying to improve upon them may be a better

strategy than having individuals try to figure these things out again.

   I now present a simple model which focuses on the first of the two benefits and shows how

culture can emerge in equilibrium. Following this, I discuss the second benefit of culture, the fact

that it is cumulative, in Section 2B.
  3 Fora related paper within economics, see Bisin and Verdier (2001a). The models are very similar, except that
what we think of as a reliance on culture/tradition in the description below they interpret (and model) as imperfect
empathy on the part of the parents.



                                                         6
   The model is taken from Giuliano and Nunn (forthcoming) and reproduces the basic logic of

Rogers (1988), which is one of the first and simplest models of this aspect of cultural evolution.

The players of the game consist of a continuum of members of a society. Each period, a new

generation is born and the previous generation dies. When a player is born, they make a once-

and-for-all choice of two possible actions, which we denote a and b. Which of the two actions

yields a higher payoff depends on the state of the world (i.e., the environment), which can be

either A or B . If the state is A, then action a yields the payoff  > 0 and action b yields a payoff

of - . If the state is B , then action a yields a payoff of - and action b yields the payoff  > 0.

Thus, in each state, one of the two actions is better than the other.

   In each period, with probability   [0,1], there is a shock which results in a new draw of the

state of the environment. It is equally likely that the draw results in the new environment being

in state A or state B . The state of the world is unknown to the players. However, as I explain

below, it is possible to engage in learning (at a cost) to determine the state of the world.

   There are two potential types of players. Each uses a different method to choose their action.

The first type, "Traditionalists (T)," value tradition and place strong importance on the actions

of the previous generation. They choose their action by following the action of a randomly

chosen person from the previous generation. Thus, the model allows for both vertical and oblique

transmission.4 The second type, "Non-Traditionalists (NT)," do not value tradition and ignore the

actions of the previous generation. They obtain the optimal action with certainty for the current

period, but there is a cost of learning,   (0,  ). Thus, although the cost is positive it is assumed

to be fairly modest. Let x denote the proportion of the population that is traditionalists.

   I now turn to an examination of the payoffs of both types of players, starting with the non-

traditionalists. In each generation, they incur the cost  to learn the optimal action. This action is

chosen and they obtain  . Therefore, the payoff to a non-traditionalist is given by:

                                                    NT =  - .

   To calculate the expected payoff of a traditionalist, consider the following sequence of possi-

bilities, each of which results in a traditionalist choosing the right action for her environment,

thus, receiving  . First, a traditionalist copies a non-traditionalist from the previous generation;

and the environment did not experience a shock between the last and current generation. Since
   4 Vertical
            transmission is transmission from parents to children. Oblique transmission is all other forms of transmis-
sion of those from an older generation to the younger generation.


                                                          7
the non-traditionalist from the previous generation chose the action that was optimal in her

environment and since a shock did not occur, then this action will also be optimal in the

current environment and the traditionalist receives  . This scenario occurs with probability

(1 - x)(1 - ). Second, a traditionalist copies a traditionalist from the previous generation,
who had copied a non-traditionalist from the previous generation. No shocks occurred during

this time. The traditionalist receives  and this occurs with probability x(1 - x)(1 - )2 . Third, a

traditionalist copies a traditionalist, who copied a traditionalist, who copied a non-traditionalist.

No shocks occurred during this time. This occurs with probability x2 (1 - x)(1 - )3 .

   One can continue this sequence of possibilities infinitely. The sum of the probabilities is given
          t-1 (1 - x)(1 - )t . With probability equal to one minus this sum, a traditionalist does
by t =1 x

not necessarily obtain the correct action. In these cases, there has been at least one shock to the

environment since the most recent non-traditionalist was copied. Because the consequence of a

shock is an equal probability of being in either state, a traditionalist still has a 50% chance of

receiving  , a 50% chance of receiving - , and her expected payoff is 0. Putting this together,

and using the formula for an infinite geometric sequence gives:

                                               (1 - x)(1 - )
                                      T =                    .
                                               1 - x(1 - )

   The payoffs to traditionalists and non-traditionalists as a function of the proportion of tradi-

tionalists in the society, x, are shown in Figure 1. The expected payoff of a traditionalist,  T ,

is decreasing in x. Intuitively, as the fraction of traditionalists increases, it is less likely that a

traditionalist will copy a non-traditionalist who is more likely to have chosen the correct action.

At the extreme, where everyone in the population is a traditionalist (x = 1), each traditionalist

copies another traditionalist and the expected payoff is 0.

   At the other extreme, where everyone is a non-traditionalist (x = 0), a (mutant) traditionalist

will copy the correct action from someone in the previous generation and as long as there was not

a shock to the environment between the two generations, she will obtain the right action. Thus,

with probability 1 - , a traditionalist's payoff is  . If, on the other hand, the environment did

change, which occurs with probability , then there is an equal probability that the environment

is in either state and the expected payoff is 0. Therefore, the expected payoff to a traditionalist

when x = 0 is  (1 - ).

   In an equilibrium with both types present, the expect payoffs to both types must be equal. In


                                                  8
    Figure 1: The equilibrium proportion of traditionalists (T) and non-traditionalists (NT).


an equilibrium with only one type, its average payoff must be no less than that of the other type.

Thus, the equilibrium proportion of traditionalists x is given by:
                                      
                                       -                        
                                      
                                        (1-)
                                                   if   [0,      ]
                                 
                                x =                                                             (1)
                                                            
                                      
                                      0
                                                   if   [     , 1]

  From Figure 1, it is clear that under fairly general conditions ( >  ), traditionalists are

present in society. Their emergence is due to the benefit of cultural transmission, which provides

a fairly accurate way of making decisions at low cost.

  It is straightforward to show that the equilibrium is stable under the standard assumption that

the relative payoffs of types affects their fitness and/or survival. Formally, this can be modeled

using the standard replicator dynamic (e.g., Gintis, 1997). In the polymorphic equilibrium, where

both types are present, a small perturbation of x > x , causes the payoff of traditionalists to be

lower than of non-traditionalists and x will decrease until x is reached. If x < x , the payoff

of traditionalists is higher than of non-traditionalists, and x will increase until x is reached.

In the monomorphic equilibrium with x = 0, a perturbation of x > x , causes the payoff of


                                                9
traditionalists to be lower than of non-traditionalists and x will decrease until there is convergence

to x .


b. Evidence

In the model, the presence of culture in equilibrium is due to the benefit of cultural transmission,

which provides a fairly accurate way of making decisions at a low cost. Anthropologists have

documented numerous real-world examples of functional cultural traits being followed despite

the population not knowing their benefits.5                One of the best-known examples is the alkali

processing of maize, which is the traditional method of preparing maize in many parts of Latin

America. During the process, dried maize is boiled in a mixture of water and limestone or ash,

before being mashed into a dough called `masa'. Although it was unknown at the time, putting

limestone or ash in the water before boiling prevents pellagra, a disease resulting from niacin

deficiency, which occurs in diets that consist primarily of maize. The alkaline solution that is

created when limestone or ash is added increases the body's absorption of niacin (Katz, Hediger

and Valleroy, 1974).

   Another example of the benefits of culture and tradition is documented in Billing and Sherman

(1998). The authors examine data for 43 spices from 4,578 meat-based recipes in 93 cookbooks

from 36 countries. They document several empirical regularities that are consistent with the

effective use of spices as antimicrobials even though this benefit was unknown. They show that

the spices that are more commonly used are the ones that are more antimicrobial. Societies in

hotter climates use more antimicrobial spices. Spices are used in ways, and in combinations, that

appear to maximize their antimicrobial properties. For example, onions are not effective unless

they are cooked and cilantro is not effective if it is cooked. In most recipes, onions are cooked

and cilantro is not. Another example is chili powder (e.g., red pepper, onion, garlic, cumin, etc)

which contains a combination of the spices that generate complementarities and maximizes their

effectiveness.

   Another well-known example of a tradition with functional benefits that were unknown is from

the Naskapi, who are an indigenous First Nations society who traditionally lived on land that

today is in Quebec, New Foundland and Labrador (Speck, 1935). The primary form of subsistence

of the Naskapi was caribou hunting. Deciding where to hunt is an important decision. The
  5 For   an excellent overview and many examples, see chapter 7 of Henrich (2016).


                                                          10
hunters would like to hunt in the locations where the caribou are. By contrast, the caribou would

like to avoid the locations where the hunters are. Effectively, this is a two-dimension version of

the game "matching pennies."6 We know that in such a game, the only Nash equilibrium is a

mixed strategy equilibrium where one randomly chooses each direction with equal probability.

The difficulty is that human beings are notoriously bad at randomizing and instead would tend

to follow certain patterns, which could be detected by the Caribou. The Naskapi developed a

ritual that they undertook prior to hunting expeditions. They would put the shoulder blade of a

caribou in the fire. It would then burn and crack and the patterns of these told the hunters where

they should hunt. Although this was unknown, the ritual was effective because it provided a

method to randomly select the location of the next hunting expedition.

   The logic of the models has been tested and confirmed in numerous studies. One clear

prediction of the models is that in equilibrium, there should be a strong reliance on culture and

tradition (i.e., more social learning) in environments that are unstable and for which determining

the optimal action is difficult. Within the evolutionary literature, this prediction has been tested

using experimental tools (Galef and Whiskin, 2004, McElreath, Lubell, Richerson, Waring, Baum,

Edstein, Efferson and Paciotti, 2005, Toelch, van Delft, Bruce, Donders, Meeus and Reader, 2009).

   Most recently, the prediction that tradition and cultural persistence should be weaker in more

unstable environments was tested by Giuliano and Nunn (forthcoming). The study uses paleocli-

matic data, combined with information on the historical locations of ethnic groups, to construct

estimates of the variability of the ancestral environment across generations for ethnic groups

and countries. They find that ancestral climatic stability is associated with greater self-reported

importance placed on tradition, and more persistence in cultural traits over time, including among

the descendants of immigrants to the United State and Indigenous populations from the United

States and Canada.


B. Cultural evolution is cumulative

a. Theory

An important characteristic of the model discussed above, which has long been recognized in

the literature, is that, in the end, the existence of culture and tradition does not make the society
   6 Matching pennies is a two-player zero-sum game in which each player chooses either heads or tails. One player

obtains a higher payoff when the players' choices are the same. The other player obtains a higher payoffs the the
players' choices are different.


                                                       11
better off. In the long-run, regardless of the extent to which culture is present, the society-wide

payoff is  - . This is contrary to the conventional wisdom that humans are more successful

than other animals because we have culture, which leads to greater group-level success (Henrich,

2016). Subsequent theoretical work has shown that this characteristic of Rogers' model is not due

to its simplicity. Instead, it is general and found in a large class of models where the only benefit

of culture is to save on individual-level information acquisition (Boyd and Richerson, 1995, 2005).

   This has led to an emphasis on `cumulative cultural evolution' as a key benefit of culture. It is

related to the benefit of information acquisition, highlighted in the model above but conceptually

distinct. To put it simply (and to use multiple clichés), an important benefit of culture it that it

means that we do not have to `reinvent the wheel' and that we can `stand on the shoulders of

giants.' We can take as given the knowledge or traditions of the previous generation, without

necessarily understanding them fully, and build on them, continuing the process of incremental

cultural innovation.

   To see the logic of this, consider the following variant of the model above, which is detailed in

Boyd and Richerson (1985, 1995). The set up is the same except there is a continuum of states. As

before, in each period, there is a probability that the environment switches to a new state. There

is also a continuum of behaviors, with one behavior yielding the highest payoff for each possible

state. In addition, the payoff of a behavior in a particular state is decreasing in the distance from

the state's optimal behavior. We will see examples below, but concretely one can think of the

behavior as being the technology used to build tools or houses, or strategies used to forage for

food or hunt for game. The further one deviates from the optimal strategy or technology, the

lower is one's expected payoff.

   Unlike the model above, it is now assumed that all individuals can modify their behavior

by learning. Individuals start with an initial guess and then through costly trial and error

modify their behavior. Following the same logic as above, there are two types: traditionalists and

non-traditionalists. Traditionalists adopt the behavior of a randomly chosen individual from the

previous generation and use this as the starting point from which they experiment. By contrast,

non-traditionalists ignore the behavior from the previous generation and use a fixed behavior as

their starting point and they always acquire the optimal behavior given the current state. Relative

to non-traditionalists, traditionalists invest much less in changing their behavior and thus they

improve upon their initial behavior much less than a non-traditionalist.


                                                 12
   The logic of the equilibrium of this model is similar to the prior model. As long as the

environment doesn't change too frequently, traditionalists will slowly converge to the optimal

behavior over time. The movement is not as rapid as for non-traditionalists, who accomplish this

in one generation, but learning costs are reduced. In this model, each new generation of non-

traditionalists `reinvents the wheel' and obtains the optimal action. By contrasts, traditionalists

build on the knowledge accumulated by the previous generation. Their behavior does not track

the environment as optimally as non-traditionalists, but they save on information acquisition

costs. In this model, the average payoff in society is increasing in the share of traditionalists

in the population. Thus, the model is consistent with cultural evolution increasing the effective

knowledge and wellbeing of the society.

   The benefits of cumulative cultural evolution become even more clear when one recognizes

that the world is much more complicated than the stylized models that we use in economics.

We typically model settings where the number of determinants is modest, payoffs functions

are smooth and continuous, and therefore, equilibria are typically unique and nicely behaved.7

However, reality is much more complicated. There are often many equilibria. Our wellbeing is

affecting by a very large number of determinants of determinants, including our own actions,

the actions of others, exogenous shocks. In addition, there are complicated interactions between

each of these factors. Unlike our simplified models that feature smooth and well behaved payoff

functions that generate an optimal action that is easily calculated, in reality, payoff functions are

not smooth and are highly irregular. (We will see examples of this below.) In such a setting,

calculating the optimal action is literally impossible. Cumulative cultural evolution reduces these

much larger optimization problems into smaller, more manageable chunks, where cumulative

learning can take place. This allows each generation to `tinker' and develop small piecemeal

improvements to the current values, beliefs, or technologies (i.e., culture) of a society. In addition,

these simpler chunks feature simpler problems and smoother surfaces. As Boyd, Richerson and

Henrich (2013, p. 136) put it:

          In a small neighborhood in design space, the performance surface is approximately

          flat, so that even if small changes are made at random, half of them will increase the

          payoff (unless the design is already at the optimum). Large changes will improve
   7 If
      our models do have multiple equilibria, then we usually simplify the setting by using a selection criterion such
as choosing the Pareto superior equilibrium.



                                                         13
     things only if they are in the small cone that includes the distant optimum. Thus, we

     expect it to be much harder to design a useful bow from scratch than to tinker with

     the dimensions of a reasonably good bow.

Thus, an important characteristic of culture is to make optimization problems that are impossible

for any individual in their lifetime possible for the larger society when the problem is tackled in

an incremental manner over many generations.


b. Evidence

From an evolutionary point of view, the best evidence of the importance of cumulative cultural

evolution is the technological sophistication developed by humans compared to other animals

including non-human primates. As early as 10,000 years ago, humans moved into and were

able to subsist in diverse, and often remote, parts of the earth. Living in these environments

necessitated the development of technologies like "spears, atlatls, and later bow and arrow are

used to acquire game; flaked stone tools are necessary to process kills and to shape wood,

bone, and process hides; clothing and shelter are crucial for thermoregulation; fire making

paraphernalia is necessary for cooking, heat, and light. Slings, baskets, and pottery facilitate

transport and storage; boats expand foragers; ranges to include lakes and oceans; fishhooks and

cordage make coastal habitats rich sources of protein." (Boyd et al., 2013, p. 142).

   Another important source of evidence on the value of cumulative cultural evolution is from

numerous natural experiments where explorers (usually European) arrived in a new location

with more advanced technology but no cumulative knowledge of the local environment. These

"lost explorer experiments" have a remarkably similar storyline (Boyd et al., 2013, Henrich,

2016). European explorers arrive to a new location inhabited by smaller-scale societies. These

are societies that the explorers perceived as being less sophisticated with technology that was

much less advanced. The expedition experiences unexpected circumstances which require the

explorers to remain in the new lands longer than their provisions allow for requiring them to

live, as the indigenous inhabited do, off of the land. Despite having more scientific knowledge

and more resources, including manufactured survival equipment, the explorers never fair well

and often die. Without the benefits of cumulative cultural evolution, they are not able to survive

let alone thrive in the new setting.



                                                 14
   One of the more notable examples among these natural experiments is the Franklin Expedition

of 1846 in which the explorers starved to death on King William Island, where indigenous Inuit

had lived successfully for over 700 years (Boyd et al., 2013). Other examples include the 1860

Burke and Wills expedition in Australia or the Narvaez expedition in what today is Florida.

The last two examples are particularly interesting because they show that an exception to the

standard story appears to only occur when the lost European explorers engage in cumulative

cultural evolution, learning the culture of local populations. In the case of the Burke and Wills

expedition, at one point the explorers were saved by indigenous hunter-gatherers, who showed

them how to make bread from a seed called `nardoo,' which could be pounded, made into flour,

and baked as a bread. However, the explorers didn't follow the indigenous cultural practices of

preparing the nardoo precisely. They did not leach the flour with water extensively, they did not

expose the flour to ash during heating, and they did not eat the nardoo from mussel shells. It

turns out that each of these was an important detoxification practice that combats the high levels

of thiaminase in nardoo. In the end, despite the presence of abundant food around them, the

Burke and Wills both died. There was one additional person, named King, on the expedition

who survived long enough to be saved. How did he do it? By living among the local population.

In other words, by completely relying on their cumulative cultural knowledge (Henrich, 2016,

pp. 27­30). In the Narvaez expedition, of the 300 original conquistadors that were part of the

expedition, four individuals were able to survive, but again, this was only because they lived

among the local indigenous population (Henrich, 2016, pp. 30­31).

   Another source of evidence for the benefits of cumulative cultural evolution is from experi-

ments intended to test for the benefits of this mechanism. Muthukrishna, Shulman, Vasilescu and

Henrich (2014) designed an experiment where participants are asked to undertake a difficult task

that they have no prior experience with. The experiment was designed to mimic the process of

cumulative cultural evolution and to vary its presence. All experiments had 10 generations and

information sharing across generations. The experiment was incentivized so that participants'

payoffs were increasing in their performance and the performance of subsequent generations.

In one treatment, which was intended to model greater access to cumulative cultural evolution,

participants in generations 2 to 10 had access to guidance from all five participants in the previous

generation. In the other, which was intended to model less cumulative cultural evolution, the

participants only had access to information from one of the five participants of the previous


                                                 15
generation.

   There were two versions of the experiment, each with a different task. In one, participants

had to create an image using software on a computer. The information that was transmitted

between generations was the created image and two pages of written notes/tips from one or five

participants (depending on treatment) from the previous generation. In the other, participants

had to tie a system of knots using rock-climbing equipment. In this experiment, participants had

access to an instructional video created by one or five participants from the previous generation.

   The authors find strong evidence that performance on the tasks was greater in the versions of

the experiment with more cumulative cultural evolution. These participants had more informa-

tion when starting and therefore didn't need to `reinvent the wheel.' In this setting, learning from

an accumulated body of knowledge helped them avoid common pitfalls and to gain important

insights more easily than if they were learning on their own.

   As I will discuss below, a number of findings within the economics literature regarding puz-

zling aspects of technology and innovation provide evidence in support of models of cumulative

cultural evolution. Or put differently, models of cumulative cultural evolution provide a useful

framework that can help economists make sense of the process of innovation. I return to this in

Section 3B.



              3. Insights from a Recognition of History as Evolution

I now turn to a discussion of how an evolutionary framework provides a range of insights that

are relevant to economics. At this point, a few caveats are in order. Although I have organized

these insights into subsections, the ideas do not necessarily flow from one subsection to the next.

These should be thought of as disparate insights that have come to me from reading the cultural

evolution and economic history literatures in tandem. In addition, in no way do I think that the

insights and connections described below are complete or even representative. We are so early in

our thinking of history as evolution that at this times these are a few random points. My sense is

that they are still just the tip of the iceberg in terms of fruitful ideas and research that will emerge

from a more evolutionary perspective within economics.




                                                  16
                                             1



       Share of population with new action   .8


                                             .6


                                             .4


                                             .2


                                             0
                                                  -3   -2   -1   0     1   2    3     4     5    6    7    8    9   10
                                                                               Generation

                                                             x*()=.2       x*()=.4          x*()=.6       x*()=.8


Figure 2: The adoption of a new (optimal) action following a shock depends on the proportion
traditionalists in the society x .



A. Environmental Mismatch

An important consequence of cultural evolution is that it can result in environmental mismatch.

To see this, we return to the model of Rogers (1988). In the model, the benefit of culture is that it

saves on information acquisition costs. However, the cost is that when the environment changes,

traditionalists (i.e. those who rely on culture for decision making) do not choose actions that

respond as accurately to the environment as non-traditionalists do. To see this consider Figure 2,

which shows how the actions chosen in a society respond to a change in the state of the world,

which is assumed to occur between periods 0 and 1. Different paths are reported, each for a

society with a different equilibrium proportion of traditionalists (which is due to differences in

the underlying ). As shown, societies with a lower proportion of the population of traditionalists

(low x ) more quickly and fully respond to the change in the environment by changing the action.

   In the model, many individuals continue to choose the old action after the state changes (after

period 0). This is an example of environmental mismatch. These individuals are choosing an

action that is optimal for a past environment but not for the current environment. Because of the

slow-moving nature of culture, when actions are chosen based on culture, episodes of mismatch

                                                                               17
can occur.

   The most well-known examples of mismatch are actually from evolutionary biology. One is sea

turtles. The mothers leave the ocean, come to shore, and bury their eggs on sandy beaches. Once

the sea turtles hatch, they need to be able to make their way back to the ocean. They have evolved

a method that allows them to do this simply: After they are born, at night, they head directly

towards any bright light. In their natural environment, the only bright light is the reflection of

the moon off of the water. By moving towards the moon's reflection, sea turtles navigate towards

the water (Ehrenfeld and Carr, 1967). This evolved mechanism worked extremely well until

the environment changed. In the modern world, where cities and freeways with bright lights are

often located next to beaches, this biological heuristic works less well. Instead of heading towards

the ocean, they move towards city lights which are in the opposite direction of the ocean (Salmon,

Tolbert, Painter, Goff and Reiners, 1995). This is an example of mismatch. A trait that worked

well in the environment in which it evolved works poorly in the new environment.

   Another commonly cited example is the dodo bird (raphus cucullatus), which is a bird that

lived on the Island of Mauritius. A sketch of the bird from 1626 is shown in Figure 3. Because

of a scarcity of berries and other food during certain times of the year, dodo birds developed

accumulations of fat on its body. They lost the ability to fly but developed a keen sense of

smell which allowed them to track down the limited amounts of berries that existed during

seasonal scarcity. Because there were no predators on the islands, they didn't develop and special

strategies to hide or protect their eggs. Overall, they were well-adapted to their environment

(Claessens, Meijer and Hume, 2015, Gold, Bourdon and Norell, 2016). However, after human

contact, predators like pigs, rats, and dogs were brought to the islands. The unprotected eggs

and the flightless birds did not far well and the species soon became extinct.

   The notion of mismatch provides a framework that helps better understand the world and

make better sense of recent empirical findings within historical economics. For example, the find-

ing that Africa's slave trades reduced contemporary levels of trust from Nunn and Wantchekon

(2011), combined with the evidence that increased trust is associated with higher incomes at both

the country and individual levels (Algan and Cahuc, 2010, Butler, Giuliano and Guiso, 2016),

suggests that the current levels of trust within Africa may be suboptimal. The current levels

of trust may be well-suited to the 400-year period of intensive slave raiding that the continent

experienced, but they may be lower than optimal in the current environment.


                                                18
                                                                                                                      The

                                                                                                             is of ext
                                                                                                             morpholo
                                                                                                             accurate o


                                                                                                             Roelandt S
                                                                                                                    Pre-1626.
                                                                                                                    most prol
                                                                                                                    the first ar
                                                                                                                    individua
                                                                                                                    Hoefnage
                                                                                                                    (Anker 1
                                                                                                                    1999). Th
Figure 3: An example of environmental mismatch: The dodo bird (raphus cucullatus). Sketch by
RoelandtFigure
           Savery, 10.
                     1626. Dodo
                           Source: sketch
                                     Figure 10 by ofRoelandt
                                                    Hume (2006     Savery
                                                                     ).        c. 1626.                             emperor's
                                                                                                                    "exotics"
   One of the best developed historical examples of mismatch is from Avner Greif's (1989, 1993,the emper

1994) studies of the Maghribi and Genoese merchants of the Medieval Mediterranean. One group,Rudolph
        Carolius Clusius 1605
the Maghribi traders, were Jewish traders who had migrated from Baghdad to Tunis and hadin Prague

adopted The        French
          the values   of Muslim  naturalist          Carolius
                                     society. They began      trading in    the early 11thwho
                                                                           Clusius,           Century.was
                                                                                                        AccordingHolland,
        eventually
to Greif, their merchantto  agent become
                                    relationships  professor            of botany
                                                     relied on information       sharing.in    Leiden,
                                                                                            If an agent cheated a(Mullenm
        produced
merchant,    then no other his
                            merchantsmonumental
                                          would hire the agent. work          Exoticorum
                                                                       This created                 Libri
                                                                                    a form of collective   punish-at least 6
        decem in 1605 and did much to bring a knowledge of
ment, which required information sharing and the formation of dense information networks. Thecorner of
        faunas and floras from distant lands to Europe
other group of traders in the region at the time were the traders from Genoa who did not engagestance. A
        (Anker 1974). He had access to the exotic species
in the same form of collective punishment of cheating agents. Instead, the merchants were highlyincludes a
        brought back to the Netherlands as well as access to
individualistic and did not engage in information sharing.                                                          Cheke 20
        the journals. He copied his Dodo illustration                                                               II's invent
   The wage that had to be paid to keep an agent from cheating was lower in the collectivist
        (Figure 8) directly from the journal of van Neck                                                            It was pr
regime of the Maghribi than under the individualistic regime of the Genoese.8 However, from
        and included a gizzard stone, so often mentioned by                                                         perhaps c
the early 11th to 12th Centuries, trade between Spain and Constantinople expanded signifi-
        early mariners particularly because of their usefulness                                                     gave rise
cantly. In response, the Genoese expanded by creating new merchant-agent relationships with
        in sharpening knives (Strickland and Melville 1848).                                                        illustrativ
  8 In addition, the Maghribi system also featured other benefits. Merchants could use each other as agents. If a
        Unfortunately,
merchant-agent                        the
                was dishonest, then other       original
                                          merchants  could punish journal          of byvan
                                                                   the merchant-agent              Neck
                                                                                           not punishing agents whoDodo inh
had cheated that merchant. This additional threat meant that the efficient wage need to pay a merchant-agent to keep
        is missing and Clusius's illustration, albeit simplistic,
them from cheating was even lower (Greif, 1994).                                                                    to Maurit
                                                     19
non-Genoese. A consequence of this is that formal organizations and legal practices developed

to facilitate these forms of cross-group exchange. The institutions that emerged were helpful

for longer-term economic development (Greif, 1994). By contrast, the Maghribi, because of the

equilibrium they were in, could only expand by creating new merchant agent relationships within

their own group. Thus, more formal institutional structures did not develop and commerce con-

tinued to rely on informal enforcement mechanisms such as social norms of group punishment.

   Another example of mismatch is highlighted by the recent findings from Alesina, Teso and

Stantcheva (2013a), which measures perceptions of intergenerational mobility in Sweden, Italy,

France, the U.K. and the United States. They show that the sample from the United States has,

by far, the most optimistic perceptions of the amount of economic mobility in their country. This

is particularly striking since the United States has the lowest mobility of the countries studied.

In addition, for the other countries, the measures of perceived mobility and actual mobility are

pretty similar. For the United States, perceived mobility is far from actual mobility. Thus, the

United States appears to be a clear outlier in terms of its perceptions about mobility.

   While this has yet to be studied thoroughly, the origins of this misperception are most likely

due to the fact that in the 19th Century, the United States was a settler economy with very high

levels of mobility, and much higher than other countries, like the U.K. at the time (Long and

Ferrie, 2013). It was likely this environment that generated some of the values and beliefs that are

particularly American, such as a belief in the American Dream (anyone can make it if they work

hard enough), a desire to have limited government, and a limited set of policies that economically

support the population and/or redistribute income, such as universal health care or high-quality

public schooling. While other factors are clearly important, such as the history of race relations,

a key determinant of these beliefs is likely the high mobility experienced in the U.S. historically.

While these beliefs may have been accurate and well-suited for the historical setting, it is less clear

that they are well-suited to the current environment.

   Viewing the world through the lens of mismatch also generates insights that are important for

policy. One example of this is the recent paper by Heller, Shah, Guryan, Ludwig, Mullainathan

and Pollack (2017), which examines the effectiveness of a series of interventions from 2009 to 2015

aimed at improving the outcomes of disadvantaged youth from Chicago. One was a one-year

program called `Becoming a Man' (BAM), which was developed by the Chicago nonprofit Youth

Guidance. The other was the same program, but stretched out over two years. The programs


                                                  20
comprised 2,740 and 2,064 randomly-chosen youth, respectively. Both versions of the program

had significant effects. They reduced total arrests by 28­35%, arrests for violent crime by 45­50%,

and arrests for other crimes by 37­43%. The authors also found persistent effects on schooling

outcomes: graduation rates increased by 6­9 percentage points. The third program had many

of the same elements of BAM but was implemented among high-risk juvenile arrestees and was

implemented by the Cook County, Illinois Juvenile Treatment Detention Center. This program

was also very successful, reducing readmission rates to the detention center by 21%.

   The authors also study potential mechanisms that could explain the results. They find that the

evidence points to one aspect of the interventions being particularly important. To understand

the mechanism, we must first recognize that much of our behavior is driven by automatic

impulses ­ what Daniel Kahneman (2011) calls `system 1'. (For cultural economists and those

studying cultural evolution, system 1 would be associated with transmitted cultural values and

beliefs.) This is also true for the youth in the programs, who are from distressed neighborhoods

where being aggressive and fighting is often necessary to save one's reputation. However, these

automatic responses, although generally adaptive to the youth's environment, may not be the

best response in many situations, like in school. The programs helped students develop the

mental tools necessary to switch from an automatic reaction based on system 1 responses to one

that is more thoughtful, taking into account the specifics of the situation and relies on system 2.

According to the authors, the experiments leverage what is known about individual culture and

psychology to develop what they call "a greater sense of occasion" (Heller et al., 2017, p. 6).

   This example illustrates that one solution to cultural mismatch is to attempt to reduce the

reliance of decision-making on the cultural trait. In this case, there was a reduction in the reliance

on system 1 and an increase in the use of system 2. The study also provides an excellent example

of how knowing the cultural and psychological roots of behavior can help design policy that can

effectively improve the actions and outcomes of those involved.

   Another example of mismatch and its implications for policy is explored in the recent study

by Bursztyn, Gonzalez and Yanagizawa-Drott (forthcoming). The authors study Saudi Arabia,

a setting that is much less supportive of female employment outside of the home than the rest

of the world. The authors study a sample of 500 married men, aged 18­35, from Riyadh, Saudi

Arabia. To qualify for the study, participants had to have a cell phone and at least some college

education.


                                                 21
   Participants were divided into groups of 30 individuals from the same neighborhood. They

were then asked whether or not they agree that "women should be allowed to work outside

the home," as well as their guess about the number of members of their group who hold this

view. The authors found that individuals systematically underestimated the support for women

working outside the home. This mismatch between beliefs of the norms held by others and actual

norms in the population can be understood as a form of mismatch. Within Saudi Arabia, in

recent decades beliefs about women's work have been changing.9 Thus, beliefs about norms,

which evolved in a previous environment, are not accurate in the current environment.

   The authors then test whether the perceived and actual norms of others can be more-closely

aligned by providing participants with information about the reported survey-based beliefs of

others within their group. For a randomly-selected half of the sample, this was done. They find

that the information provision increased the likelihood that participants signed up their wives for

a job-matching service, and that their wives had applied for a job and had interviewed for a job

3­5 months after the experiment. Not surprisingly, the effects are greater the greater was the gap

between the perceived and actual norms. Overall, the study documents the presence of mismatch

and shows how information provision can quickly reduce the mismatch.


a. Endogenous Mismatch

As the examples of mismatch above highlight, a shortcoming of the traditionalist strategy that

relies on culture is that the actions chosen by individuals do not trace the environment as precisely

as they could. In other words, they generate the potential for environmental mismatch.

   Recent research on the origins of the Industrial Revolution can be viewed through the lens

of mismatch where the change in the environment is endogenous to the strength of tradition in

society. To see this, we again return to the model from Rogers (1988). In the model, the stability of

the environment  was exogenously given. However, in reality, there are many examples of the

external environment ­ such as economic conditions, politics, technology, etc ­ being determined

by human actions. Further, the rate of technological innovation, economic growth and political

change, itself, can be endogenous to the tradition in society.
   9 For example, according to the Global Gender Gap Index, the `economic participation and opportunity' score for

Saudi Arabia increased from 0.24 in 2006 to 0.38 in 2020. In addition, if one looks at the data for Saudi Arabia from
the Arab Barometer, one finds strong evidence that individuals born in more recent years have views that are more
supportive of women's employment.




                                                         22
   Joel Mokyr (2018), in his book Culture of Growth, argues that a crucial determinant of the

18th Century Industrial Revolution in Western Europe was the novel belief that it was acceptable

for younger generations to question the wisdom of the previous generations. This change in

thinking resulted in a cultural belief that it is possible and desirable to understand how the

natural world works, led to innovation and knowledge creation, which ultimately created the

economic productivity gains of the Industrial Revolution. Mokyr (2018) argues that the presence

of this new cultural trait ­ a weakening of the importance placed on traditional ways of thinking

­ was present in Western Europe but not China, which explains why, despite similar levels of

economic development, the Industrial Revolution did not occur in China. He argues that "the

heavy hand of the respect for the `ancients' was felt through much of Chinese history" (p. 298).

According to this argument, a weakening of tradition, and the resulting cultural change, are key

determinants of the Industrial Revolution and the World's current economic prosperity.

   Within this model, this means that in addition to  affecting x , x can also affect . We can

extend the Rogers model to incorporate this mechanism by assuming that the rate of change  is

decreasing in the proportion of traditionalists in the economy x: (x) and  (x) < 0.

   We can also add technological progress to the model by altering the payoffs such that the payoff

to a matching state and action is  +  (rather than  ) and to a mismatching state and action is

 -  (rather than - ), where  can be thought of as the level of technology in the society.

Following the logic of Mokyr (2018), assume that increases in  occur as a by-product of the

information acquisition of non-traditionalists. Therefore, the growth of  is a decreasing function
                                                                     
of the proportion of traditionalists in the economy:     (x)   and      (x) < 0. Further, assume that
instability is driven solely by technological innovation and, therefore, instability is increasing in
                                                      
the rate of technological change:      (x)   and       (x)   > 0. From this it follows that instability

 is a decreasing function of the prevalence of tradition x in society: (x) and  (x) < 0.

   This setting gives rise to multiple stable equilibria. To see this, first consider an equilibrium

where the proportion of traditionalists is high. As a consequence, there is little technological

change and the environment is stable. Because of the stability of the environment, the relative

benefit of tradition is high, which sustains the high proportion of traditionalists. Thus, such an

equilibrium is stable. Second, consider an equilibrium where the proportion of traditionalists is

low (even zero). In such an equilibrium, there is a lot of trial-and-error learning, which generates

rapid technological change and a highly unstable environment. This in turn results in a relatively


                                                 23
low benefit of tradition, which sustains the low proportion of traditionalists. Thus, such an

equilibrium is also stable.

   To see this more formally, recall the payoffs of the two types:

                                                          (1 - x)(1 - )
                                        T      = +
                                                          1 - x(1 - )
                                      NT       =  +  - .

Assume that the probability that there is no shock in a generation, 1 - , is given by the following

function: 1 - (x) = x for   [0, 1]. With this, the expected payoff of a traditionalist then

becomes:
                                                          (1 - x)x
                                            T =  +
                                                         1 - x + 1
   The payoffs of the two types are shown in Figure 4 for the case where  = 1/2.10 The

payoffs to non-traditionalists remain unchanged since they do not depend on . The payoffs

to traditionalists are now increasing in the proportion of traditionalists x. This is because the

higher the proportion of traditionalists in the economy, the less innovation, the more stable the

environment, and the more beneficial is tradition. From the figure it is also clear that the level of

technology,  , does not affect the equilibrium. This is because  affects the payoffs of both types

symmetrically and additively.

   The figure also shows that with endogenous  one can have multiple equilibria. In one

equilibrium, x = 1. Since the proportion of traditionalists is high, economic growth is low, and

the state is stable. This can be thought of as a traditional low-growth equilibrium. In the other

equilibrium, x = 0. Since the proportion of traditionalists is low, there is rapid economic growth,

and the state is less stable. In the figure xB denotes the boundary of the basins of attraction of the

two equilibria. Any initial population distribution of traditionalists greater than xB eventually

converges to the x = 1 equilibrium. Initial population distributions less than xB converge to the

x = 0 equilibrium.

   A necessary condition for multiple equilibria to arise is that the cost of information acquisition,
                                                   
, must be sufficiently high; namely,  >           1+ .   If this is not satisfied, then the equilibrium with

x = 0 is unique. Intuitively, if acquiring information is sufficiently easy, then traditionalists are

not present in equilibrium.
  10 The
       payoffs shown are for the scenario where information acquisition costs are sufficiently high; namely,  >  /3
(or  >  /(1 +  ) in the more general case). This condition is discussed further below.



                                                         24
                        + 23
                                                                                               
                                                                           T =  + 1(1--xx
                                                                                        +1
                                                                                          )x
    Long Run Payoffs




                                                                           NT =  +  -
                       +-




                            x* = 0   xB                                                  x* = 1
                                          Proportion of Traditionalists

Figure 4: The equilibrium proportion of traditionalists (T) and non-traditionalists (NT), assuming
the instability of the environment is endogenous to learning by NT (and  = 1/2).


   Mokyr's description of the industrial revolution is one where society transitioned out of the

the x = 1 equilibrium, with no (or little) information acquisition and a very strong importance

placed on following the beliefs and actions of previous generations. Because of the strong reliance

on tradition, the external environment is stable, which means a reliance on tradition is efficient.

   In this setting, a society transitioning from the former to the latter equilibrium requires a

reduction in the number of traditionalists below xB . Once this occurs, economic growth increases

and the environment becomes less stable, which further reduces the benefits to tradition.


B. Education and Cultural Evolution

I now turn to a description of how cultural evolution can be used to provide a deeper and

more realistic understanding of education, human capital, and innovation. To see this, I turn

to the definition of culture. Within the cultural evolution literature, the standard definition is

something along the following lines: "[culture is] the transmission from one generation to the

next, via teaching and imitation, of knowledge, values and other factors that influence behavior.

Cultural transmission may have a variety of structures. . . For example, parents may enculturate


                                                    25
their offspring or peers may enculturate each other." (Boyd and Richerson, 1985, p. 2). This

definition is one that is very similar to the typical definition that has been adopted within the

field of cultural economics. For example, Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2006) have the following

definition "customary beliefs and values that ethnic, religious, and social groups transmit fairly

unchanged from generation to generation." (p. 23).

    At first glance, the two definitions of culture appear essentially identical, which is not sur-

prising since the cultural economics literature builds upon the cultural evolution literature. Both

definitions describe the transmission of values and beliefs from one generation to the next.11

A small but important difference is that "knowledge" and its transmission is mentioned in the

definition of Boyd and Richerson (1985) but not Guiso et al. (2006). This is a huge difference in

how culture is defined and conceptualized in economics compared to evolutionary anthropology.

Within economics, the accumulation and transmission of knowledge within or across generations

is not culture. That is human capital. When I first came across the anthropological definition, my

immediate reaction was likely the same as the reaction you are likely having now. Knowledge and

technology are conceptually very different from culture. They are examples of human capital and

not of culture. But, I have come to realize that generally the difference is not clear and making a

conceptual distinction between the two is problematic and not particularly helpful.

    Take for example knowledge of how to create arrows that are used for hunting. Henrich (2016)

describes this process for the indigenous hunter-gatherers of Tierra del Fuego. This production

process is relatively simple, requiring only fourteen steps and six material inputs. Henrich (2016,

p. 107) describes some of the steps and I quote him directly:


    · The process begins by selecting the wood for the shaft, which preferably comes from chaura, a bushy,

          evergreen shrub. Through strong and light, this wood is a nonintuitive choice since the gnarled

          branches require extensive straightening. (Why not start with straighter branches?)

    · The wood is heated, straightened with the craftsman's teeth, and eventually finished with a scraper.

          Then, using a preheated and grooved stone, the craftsman presses the shaft into the grooves and rubs

          it back and forth, pressing it down with a piece of fox skin. The fox skin become impregnated with

          the dust, which prepares it for the polishing stage. (Does it have to be fox skin?)
  11 It
      is true that the definition of Guiso et al. (2006) does not mention transmission between those of the same
generation (horizontal transmission). However, it is clear that the cultural economics literature does not exclude this
form of transmission.



                                                          26
   · Bits of pitch, gathered from the beach, are chewed and mixed with ash. (What if you don't include

     ash?)

   · The mixture is then applied to both ends of a heated shaft, which must then be coated with white

     clay. (What about red clay? Do you have it heat it?) This prepares the ends for the fletching and

     arrowhead.

   · Two feathers are sued for the fletching, preferably from the left wing of the bird, and vise versa for the

     lefties. (Does this really matter?)

   · The feathers are lashed to the shaft with sinews from the back of the guanaco, after they are smoothed

     and thinned with water and saliva. (Why not sinews from the fox that I had to kill for the

     aforementioned skin?)

  Learning how to successfully create arrowheads requires years of apprenticing. The knowl-

edge, much of which is tacit, is taught over an extended period of time and much of it is codified

in terms of tradition. The underlying mechanics and reason that a certain feather is used or a

certain wood is not understood. Instead, the learning is of culture and traditions. In this case

culture is synonymous with knowledge and human capital. As we will discuss further below,

one actually "learns" more by adopting the traditions of one's culture.

  There are numerous examples where the accumulation of human capital is really cultural

transmission ­ i.e., information and knowledge that is transferred through cultural learning.

Such examples are also present within the economics literature, although this is often referred

to as `tacit knowledge' acquisition rather than cultural transmission. One example is the famous

case of Desh Garments, where as part of a 1980 joint venture agreement between South Korea's

Daewoo and Bangladesh's Desh garments, 130 workers from Desh garments were brought to a

Daewoo garment plant located in Busan, South Korea (Easterly, 2001). This episode of cultural

transmission had a dramatic effect on garment production in Bangladesh. Annual production

increased from 43,000 shirts in 1980 to 2.3 million in 1987. Of the 130 Desh workers who had

traveled to South Korea, 115 of them left Desh garments to start their own garment companies at

some point in the 1980s.

  Another example, but in a more controlled setting is from an experiment that intentionally var-

ied the amount of cultural transmission to textile firms in India (Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie

and Roberts, 2013, Bloom, Mahajan, McKenzie and Roberts, 2020). The authors study 17 firms

                                                     27
that comprise 28 medium-sized (100-1,000 employees) family-owned textile plants, located in

Maharashtra, India. Fourteen of the 28 plants received five months of extensive management

consulting, which was valued at $250,000. The consulting was intended to improve management

and operations within the plants. They found that in the months following the study, the

treatment resulted in fewer defects, inventory savings, and higher total factor productivity. Nine

years after treatment, they found that although about half of the previously adopted management

improvements had been abandoned, the treated plants still were much more productive than the

non-treatment plants. In addition, they found additional forms of cultural transmission. The

practices had fully spread to non-treatment plants (even those not involved in the experiment at

all) that belonged to the same company (i.e., firm) as a treatment plant. Thus, cultural knowledge

was transmitted fully within the company.

   A theoretical model of such processes of cultural transmission was developed by Henrich

(2004b). To anthropologists, the model is one of cultural transmission. To economists, it is one

of human capital accumulation. In the model, each period there is a role model. Depending

on the setting, this person could be a master craftsman, the village sage, or even a professor

of economics. There are N pupils who learn from the role model, who was the most prolific

and highly skilled individual of their generation. After learning from the master, the cultural

knowledge / human capital of the pupils is determined from a draw from a distribution. The

person with the highest draw then becomes the master who conveys their knowledge to the next

generation.

   Let zi denote the level of cultural knowledge and human capital of individual i. The role

model's z is denoted zmax and is shown by the vertical line in Figure 5. Also shown is the

probability distribution of draws of z . In the original model, it is assumed that the distribution

is Gumbel (,  ), but subsequent studies find that the predictions hold for a large class of

distributions (Vaesen, 2012).12 Because the role model is the individual with the highest skill

in the previous generation, as shown in Figure 5, students' zi 's tend to be lower than that of the

role model.

   Because the state of knowledge of the next generation, as measured by the zmax of the role

model, is governed by the maximum draw of z in that generation, a larger population (and
  12 Also see Kobayashi and Aoki (2012) for various extensions of the model, including allowing for the more-realistic

assumption that role models are chosen from an individual's network of acquaintances.




                                                         28
                                                       

          Probability imitator acquires zi


                                                                 zmax




                                             Value of zi acquired by the imitator

Figure 5: Illustration of the model of cumulative culture / human capital developed by Henrich
(2004b).


therefore more draws), will result in a higher level of skill for the role model. More specifically,

for the Gumbel distribution, the level of skill of the role model in the next period is given by

                                                zmax =  +  ( + ln N ),

where  is the Euler-Mascheroni constant, which is approximately 0.5772. In addition, the growth

in the average level of human capital in the economy is given by

                                                z = - +  ( + ln N ).

In other words, for sustained knowledge growth (or cumulative cultural evolution), the popula-

tion has to be sufficiently large. In addition, if the population is below a threshold size, then it

can experience technological regress.

   The model has interesting predictions. The rate of knowledge accumulation is increasing in

the size of N . This is knowledge embodied in individuals' minds and the knowledge of the next

generation's master is the max of all N draws. The more draws one has the higher the max will

be. The models also show how a society can have technological regress. If N is too small, then

the maximum among the N draws can be lower than the skill of the master. Henrich (2004b) uses

                                                           29
this to explain the technological regress observed amongst the Tasmanians after Tasmania was

separated from Australia due to the rising sea levels during the Holocene glacial retreat.

   The important point here is that a model of cultural evolution is isomorphic to a model of

human capital accumulation. In this sense, given that human capital has been at the core of our

discipline for centuries, it turns out that we have all been believers in culture (at least according

to the definition of anthropologists) all along.


a. Innovation and the Collective Brain

To drive home the similarity of cultural transmission and knowledge accumulation, both em-

pirically and theoretically, I will compare two ways of thinking about knowledge. One will be

familiar to the reader and is at the center of endogenous growth theory. The other, which will be

less familiar, is from evolutionary anthropology and emphasizes the fact that knowledge creation

occurs through a process of cumulative cultural evolution and cultural transmission.

   As a conceptual framework to aid in the discussion, consider the following setting. Society has

a population of size L. Assume that the fraction  of the population L is exposed to a role model

and thus has the opportunity to innovate. For those with this opportunity, innovation occurs

with probability µ. The extent to which an innovation diffuses into the aggregate economy (e.g.,

through social learning or cultural transmission), increasing the rate of aggregate knowledge
        /A, is increasing in the connectivity and cohesiveness of the population . Thus,
growth A

knowledge growth is given by:
                                                   A
                                                     = µL                                                     (2)
                                                   A
   This is a highly-simplified version of an endogenous growth model with scale effects (meaning

that the rate of innovation is increasing in the population size). However, it can also be interpreted

as a representation of the notion of the `collective brain' from evolutionary anthropology, which

we discuss in further detail below (Muthukrishna and Henrich, 2016).

   Research within the field of economics has tended to focus on two terms in equation (2).

The first is population size, L. The (initially surprising) prediction that the rate of technological

change should be increasing in the size of the population, L, was famously tested and confirmed

by Kremer (1993).13 The second area of focus has been on the level of human capital (e.g., health
  13 Interestingly, this prediction was also confirmed by anthropologists who found a strong positive relationship

between population size and the number and complexity of pre-industrial marine tools across Polynesian islands
(Kine and Boyd, 2010).


                                                       30
or education) which is a primary determinant of µ within the expression (Mankiw, Romer and

Weil, 1992).

   While research within cultural evolution has also studied the importance of scale effects (e.g.,

Derex, Beugin, Godelle and Raymond, 2013), it has also emphasized the importance of parameters

associated with cultural transmission of ideas; namely the extent of connectivity and social

learning within a population:  and . The parameter  captures aspects of a society that influence

the extent to which all individuals are able to participate in the innovative process. Inclusivity

can be along the lines of gender, socioeconomic status, race, ethnicity, place of birth, etc. The

parameter  can be thought of as capturing how cohesive or connected a population is, which

facilitates the diffusion of existing knowledge and new innovations. Within the literature, this is

viewed as the first-order determinant of a society's success. As Joseph Henrich (2004b, p. 214)

puts it: "If you want to have cool technology, it's better to be social than smart." The focus on these

determinants of aggregate knowledge, which are inherently social, has been developed within a

conceptual framework called the `collective brain' (Muthukrishna and Henrich, 2016). Within this

framework, the key to knowledge creation is cumulative cultural evolution and social learning.

This is what effectively allows humans to have access to a larger repertoire of knowledge and

technology that could ever fit into any one individual's brain. This larger network of knowledge

is our `collective brain'.

   This perspective provides insight into findings from recent research within economics that

seeks to understand the determinants of innovation within the United States. Bell, Chetty, Jaravel,

Petkova and Van Reenen (2019) use data from 1.2 million inventors linked to tax records to

document the determinants of innovation within the United States, paying particular attention

to factors related to the childhood environment. They document significant variation across the

United States, with the U.S. South having particularly low levels of innovation. While a (modest)

portion of this is explained by educational attainment, they find other factors to be particularly

important, including race, gender, and parental income. Interestingly, these effects are most

pronounced for the most highly educated children, suggest that education may be a necessary

but not sufficient condition for innovation. There appears to be a missing ingredient that is

needed beyond education and that is correlated with observables like race, income, or residential

location.

   The study then attempts to better understand this missing ingredient. Although they do not


                                                  31
use this terminology, the patterns they find are exactly those that are predicted by models of

the `collective brain' that feature cumulative cultural evolution. They find that the children of

inventors are more likely to be inventors themselves. This itself is not particularly surprising,

but they also find that the innovation of the children tends to occur within the same fine-grained

technology class as their father. The most likely explanation for this is role-model effects and the

transfer of cultural knowledge from fathers to sons. The evidence is not consistent with this being

the intergenerational transmission of more general human capital or knowledge which is more

relevant for certain technology classes. Child innovation plummets drastically within technology

classes that are only one or two classes away from those of the parents' innovations. Thus, this is

consistent with specific knowledge being transmitted from parents to children.

   This finding is perhaps surprising when one is working within the traditional economics view

of innovation where an innovator is tinkering in their garage and come up with a new invention.

However, the collective-brain framework has cumulative culture and social learning at its core.

Thus, innovation, which is cumulative, is impossible if one is not first exposed to ideas, beliefs,

values, and mental models. In addition, since vertical transmission of culture from parents to

children is the core mode of cultural transmission, it is not surprising that a child's ability to

innovate depends on the cultural knowledge of their parents. As Muthukrishna and Henrich

(2016, p. 4) put it: "The most basic structure of the collective brain is the family. Young cultural

learners first gain access to their parents, and possibly a range of alloparents (aunts, grandfathers,

etc.)."

   Bell et al. (2019) also test for the importance of another form of cultural transmission ­

oblique transmission ­ although the authors do not use this terminology and instead refer to

this as transmission from "parents' coworkers to children". They calculate the patent rate among

workers in the father's (NAICS 6-digit) industry of employment. They find that the rate of

innovation in their father's industry of employment is strongly predictive of child innovation as

an adult. In addition, they also find that here too, the child's innovation tends to occur within the

same technology class as the innovation by the parents' coworkers.

   Although the paper does not have a theoretical framework, the authors' conceptualization

of the mechanisms at play is described as follows. ". . . the data point to mechanisms such as

transmission of specific human capital, access to networks that help children pursue a certain

subfield, acquisition of information about certain careers, or role model effects." (Bell et al.,


                                                 32
2019, pp. 688­689). In other words, the authors are describing the collective brain model where

knowledge occurs through cumulative cultural evolution and social learning.

   Complementary evidence for the importance of social learning for innovation can be found

in a recent study by Andrews (2019) that looks at the effects of U.S. prohibition against alcohol

in the early 20th Century. Recognizing the importance of bars, taverns and saloons for building

network connections that facilitated knowledge flows, he estimates the effects that prohibition,

which legally penalized these establishments, had on inventive activity as measured by patenting

rates. He finds that after the imposition of state-level prohibition, previously wet counties had

8­18% fewer patents per year relative to consistently dry counties. Thus, removing these locations

of connectivity had sizeable detrimental effects on innovative activity.

   The logic of cultural evolution and its connection with technology, innovation, and productiv-

ity, helps us to understand the long-term permanent effects that historical events that (temporar-

ily) reduced a population's inclusiveness. An example is slavery within the United States, where

under slavery a large proportion of the population was restricted from basic rights and freedoms.

Even following the abolition of slavery, intimidation, violence, fear, and discriminatory policies

were used to further exclude Americans of African descent. The relationship between slavery

and long-term underdevelopment has been well-documented (e.g., Mitchener and McLean, 2003,

Nunn, 2008). More specific to the mechanisms of cultural evolution and innovation, Cook (2014)

studies the effects of race riots and lynching on the patent rates of African Americans. According

to her estimates, these historical events reduced African American patenting by 15% annually

between 1882 and 1940. This is a sizeable effect and its persistence is a likely suspect for explaining

the racial differences in innovation documented by Bell et al. (2019). According to the logic of

the `collective brain', when a group is excluded or discouraged from participating in cumulative

knowledge creation, this decreases the rate of innovation not only in the current period but also

in all future periods.

   A potentially important factor affecting a society's level of connection and cohesion ­  in

equation (2) ­ is generalized trust. There is a strong positive relationship between generalized

trust and per capita income. This has been shown to be causal and is found whether one looks

across countries, U.S. states or European regions (Algan and Cahuc, 2010, 2013). There is evidence

that at least part of this relationship is due to a causal effect of trust on innovation and knowledge

creation. Micro-level evidence for this is found in a recent study by Nguyen (2018) that studies


                                                  33
the CEOs of 3,598 public firms in the United States. She collects information on the ancestry of

the CEO and of all inventors within the firm and finds that across firms, innovation is more rapid

and of higher quality if a CEO is from a place with higher levels of trust in general and higher

levels of trust in the ancestral origins of the inventors in the firm.

   These benefits raise the question of why all countries do not have higher levels of trust than

they do. One explanation for this is that historical shocks have been documented to have adverse

effects on trust (Nunn and Wantchekon, 2011, Alsan and Wanamaker, 2018, Lowes and Montero,

2017). Alternatively, societies may be stuck in `distrust traps,' where economic activity is low

because trust is low which maintains low levels of trust (Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2008).

   A final answer to this is more subtle and stems from the fact that the positive relationship

between trust and income is only found at the society level ­ e.g., regions or countries. When

one looks at the individual level, the relationship is actually not positive and monotonic but

hump-shaped (Butler et al., 2016). That is, a sufficiently high level of trust is associated with

less, and not more, income. Thus, high levels of trust are associated with better outcomes at the

society level but not at the individual level. In other words, trust is a prosocial cultural trait and

therefore subject to the same trade-off between benefits to the individual and society like other

such traits.

   Another example of the connection between models of the collective brain and research in

economic history can be found in studies of international contact and migration, which can

be thought of as ways to increase the size, diversity, and connectivity of the collective brain.

Consistent with theory, immigration has been shown empirically to be associated with higher

incomes, more innovation, and stronger international business connections, both in the short-,

medium- and long-runs (Burchardi, Chaney and Hassan, 2019, Sequeira, Nunn and Qian, 2020).

The effects that connectivity can have on economic activity were recently studied by Campante

and Yanagizawa-Drott (2018). The authors document a strong effect of the presence of direct

flights between cities on foreign ownership links between these locations.


C. How and Why History Matters

Another important aspect of cultural evolution is that it is cumulative.         As with biological

evolution, the benefit of mutations or the optimal `next step', depends on the current state of

the organism and the environment. In addition, progress must be made in a series of incremental


                                                  34
steps and one is not able to jump to a whole other configuration. Further, each incremental step

has to be one that improves the well-being of the organism.

  To convey the basic logic of this, Richard Dawkins (1996) in his well-known book Climbing

Mount Improbable uses the analogy of climbing hills and mountains. One's location on a slope

is the product of a set of cumulative and incremental steps. An additional requirement in an

evolutionary setting is that one is only able to move uphill. Since elevation represents the payoff

or fitness of an organism, the next step is only taken (i.e., a change is made) if it results in

improvement and moves you uphill. Thus, one is not able to move downhill.

  An example of this process is provided by Figure 6, which provides a visual metaphor of

the evolution of the eye drawn by neurobiologist Michael F. Land (Dawkins, 1996, p. 195). The

figure shows a series of peaks, which represent groupings of the known types of eyes that have

developed in various parts of the animal kingdom. It is estimated that eyes have independently

evolved between forty and sixty times (Dawkins, 1996, p. 139). The figure shows numerous peaks

the heights of which provide some sense of how well-functioning the developed eyes are. The

lower peaks represent the presence of photocells that detect light by capturing photons with a

pigment and translating them into nerve impulses. The highest ranges are the most complex eyes

found in the animal kingdom that provide fine-grained and precise eyesight.

  Two types of peaks are shown: those on the left that represent compound eyes and those on

the right representing camera-type eyes. Camera eyes are the eyes that evolved among many

mammals including humans. They comprise light-sensitive photocells forming a cup, a pinhole,

and a lens (or a curved mirror, denoted by lower peaks). Another completely different type of

eye is the compound eye, which is common among insects, crustaceans, and some worms. The

main difference here is in how photocells are organized to receive photons. With camera eyes

photo cells are organized as if on the inside of a cup backed by an opaque screen, so that they

look inwards to each other. By contrast, with compound eyes, the photocells are placed on the

outside of the cup, causing them to look outwards in different directions.

  In Figure 6, the different peaks represent different equilibrium outcomes or effective steady

states. It is only at these peaks that there is no additional step to be taken. No additional

movement can move one further up a slope. The compound eye peaks are drawn to be lower

than the camera eyes. This is because compound eyes are not able to see in as much detail

as camera eyes unless they are extremely large. For example, for humans to see as well with a


                                                35
Figure 6: Example of a mountain landscape dictating the evolution of the eye. Source: Figure
5.30 of Dawkins (1996).



compound eye as with our camera eye, the compound eye would have to be 24 meters in diameter

(Dawkins, 1996, p. 181).

  Now imagine that one is at one of the compound-eye peaks in Figure 6. Can one move to one

of the even higher peaks within the camera-type eye mountain range? The answer is no. This

would require one to move downhill which is not allowed with evolution. Effectively, there is a

valley between the two peaks that cannot be crossed.

  At the risk of the `no-downhill' rule seeming arbitrary, let's look at its logic with a concrete

example. One characteristic of camera eyes is that the image that is formed is upside down. With

compound eyes, the image is right side up. Thus, if an organism that had compound eyes evolved

to have camera eyes, its image-processing nervous apparatus would no longer match its eyes and

it would be worse off. Such an innovation would not survive. The only way that a switch could

be made is if an animal completely lost its image processing nervous apparatus so that with a

switch from compound to camera eyes the organism is no worse off.

  The analogy of climbing mountains is overly simplistic since it has reduced evolution to three

dimensions. In reality, fitness and payoffs depend on many factors, resulting a setting with very

high dimensionality. However, the analogy still provides important insights into path dependence


                                               36
and why sometimes it is very difficult to undo previous paths taken.

   I now turn from biological evolution to a social setting with cultural evolution. As I discuss,

the same logic applies given the nature of culture and its evolution. The example draws from

a stylized model from Nunn (2007). The model features two cultural types, those who produce

and those who engage in predation, stealing from those who produce. Each type has a bundle of

cultural traits, including accumulated experience, that supports the activity. The model assumes

that each period a thief can steal from at most one producer and producers can only be robbed

once. There is perfect information and no search costs. If a producer is robbed, the thief steals

a fraction q of the producer's output, which is given by A. We let x denote the fraction of the

population with a culture of theft.

   The payoffs to the two cultural traits are shown in Figure 7a for different values of x. Despite

the extreme simplicity of the setting, the model yields multiple equilibria, which are denoted in
               , x and x . When x = 0, the payoff to the cultural trait of hard work is greater
Figure 7a by x0   B     1
                                                         . Here, the only cultural trait that exists is
than to the trait of theft and this is an equilibrium, x0

one of hard work. There are also two additional equilibria, where both cultural traits exist, and
                                           and x .
the payoffs to the two traits are equal, xB     1

   Now consider the fact that cultural evolution is cumulative and that only innovations that

improve one's payoff are adopted. That is, you can only `walk uphill'. Such a restriction can

be micro-founded by assuming that in each period each individual, with some probability ,

has an experience that potentially changes their cultural values.14 As part of this experience,

the individual learns the cultural value and payoff of another randomly chosen individual and

compares it to their own. If the other person has a different cultural value and a higher payoff is

observed, the individual adopts that value with a probability that is equal to  times the difference

between the payoffs. As shown by Gintis (1997), given these assumptions one finds that cultural

traits grow over time if and only if their average payoffs are higher than the average payoff in the

whole population. That is, cultural traits that tend to do better than average grow and those that

tend to do worse shrink. Within the model of Nunn (2007), the cultural evolution is given by:

                                          x
                                            =   R (x) -  (x) ,                                                   (3)
                                          x
  14 Thisassumption is consistent with the existing evidence that events within a person's lifetime, whether it is
attending celebrations, watching certain television programs, or shocks to the macro environment, can affect a person
subsequent cultural values and beliefs (e.g., Madestam and Yanagizawa-Drott, 2011, La Ferrara, Chong and Duryea,
2012, Giuliano and Spilimbergo, 2014, Cornelson, 2018, Bursztyn et al., forthcoming).


                                                         37
                                              Pre-contact:  = 0
     A
                               P (x, , q)
    qA
                 U (x, , q)




          x0                          xB                                x1
                                            (a) No extraction,  = 0
                              Post-contact with high extraction:  = 0.4


                 U (x, , q)
     qA
(1 - )A

                               P (x, , q)




                                                                             x2
                                      (b) Temporary extraction,  = .4


               Figure 7: Temporary historical events and permanent effects.




                                                     38
where  (x) is the average payoff for the whole population, i.e., x R (x) + (1 - x) E (x).

   Given this dynamic, which formalizes the notion that cultural evolution is incremental and

cumulative, a number of insights emerge. The first is that one of the three Nash equilibria above

is unstable. This is the equilibrium marked xB . It is straightforward to verify that a slight change

in x either above or below xB will generate movements in x away from this equilibrium. Thus,

xB is not a peak, but actually a valley that divides two peaks.

   The second insight the model offers is a deeper understanding of why it is so hard for a

society stuck in a socially suboptimal equilibrium to switch to another more socially-beneficial
                                                  . This could describe the low-income situation
equilibrium. Consider a society, in equilibrium x1

in many developing countries.      Here, average payoffs are comparatively low.         Everyone is

optimizing. In other words, those at this peak cannot climb any higher. Just as developing

countries can see the wealth of rich countries, those at this peak see another higher peak far off

in the distance. However, they are not able to get there. Doing so would require individuals

to move downhill; namely, adopting behaviors that make them worse off. In this case, this is

switching from rent-seeking to production. In popular media, and even journal articles, one

regularly observes writers asking the question "why do poor countries stay poor?" Without an

evolutionary perspective, particularly one rooted in cultural evolution, this question may appear

as a puzzle. However, with this perspective, the reason for this is clear and the question itself

seems kind of odd.

   Another insight that emerges involves the importance of history. What determines which

equilibrium of the two a society is located in? The answer in this setting is history. This is due

to the cumulative and incremental nature of evolution. To see this consider two examples. The

first is one where there is stability such that no parameters change over the history of the society.

In such a setting, the long-run equilibrium is determined by the value of x during the very first

time period, x0 . This uniquely determines the equilibrium in the long-run. If x0 < xB , then in
                                                                             . If x > x , then
the long-run the equilibrium is the socially optimal equilibrium where x = x0      0   B

                                                                    . Thus, history, meaning
the long-run equilibrium is the socially suboptimal one where x = x1

the historical conditions of a society, can matter for long-term outcomes. Within an evolutionary

framework, this fact is obvious. Rather than asking `why history matters?', we should be asking

`why wouldn't history matter?'.

   Next, consider a scenario where the parameters of the model change. Figure 7b shows the


                                                 39
effects of a temporary historical event that reduces the payoffs of those who engage in production
                                                                                 equilibrium
relative to those who steal. As shown, the payoffs are tilted so much that the x0
                                                   where a high proportion of the population
disappears leaving a unique equilibrium, denoted x2
                                                         equilibrium, over time, in accordance with
has a culture of theft. For a society initially in the x0

cultural evolution governed by equation (3), those with a culture of work slowly adopt a culture
                                                        equilibrium. In other words, the change
of theft. This occurs as the society converges to the x2

in the environment caused one of the two peaks to disappear leaving a path upwards to a single

peak that is relatively low.

   Even if the episode is short-lived and the society has not fully converged to the new equi-

librium, as long as the culture of theft has become sufficiently prevalent by the end of the

episode, i.e., x > xB , then the temporary event will have permanently moved the society from the
                                                    , to one where most of the population has
equilibrium where everyone has a culture of work, x0
                      . Returning again to the analogy, if the trek upwards towards the low peak
a culture of theft, x1

has progressed sufficiently, even after the high peak returns, it is impossible to get to it. This is

because it would require first going downhill to then climb back up. All the society can do is

continue upwards to the smaller peak.

   This example illustrates another way in which historical events can matter, even if the event

are only temporary. Nunn (2007) argues that such a sequence of events potentially explains

the long-term effects that colonialism and the slave trade appear to have had on many African

societies.


a. Kludges

In the example above, when one is to the right of xB movement towards the lower-peaked
              as individuals switch from production to theft is making those who switch better
equilibrium x1

off. They are optimizing. However, each subsequent step in this direction, in a sense is making

things worse because one is moving away from the highest peak. The further one moves up the

path towards the low peak, the harder it is to get back to the high peak (even if one is allowed to

move downhill).

   Such situations have been termed `kludges' in the popular press and even some academic

literatures. A commonly cited example of a kludge is the bony flatfish (e.g., Dawkins, 1986,

1996). The ancestors of the flatfish used to swim vertically in the ocean. At some point in their


                                                 40
    Figure 8: An example of a kludge: the bony flatfish. Source: Figure 1 of Norman (1934).


evolutionary history, the fish began living on the ocean floor, lying on one side, leaving one eye

looking directly at the sand. Over time and through evolutionary processes, the eye migrated to

the top of the head so that the two eyes were on one side of the fish and looking up (Friedman,

2008). An example of the modern flatfish is shown in Figure 8, which is the first drawing in

Norman's (1934) collection of flatfish sketches. This incremental innovation solved an inefficiency

given the situation at the time but resulted in an overall design that was suboptimal. If one were

to completely redesign the bony flatfish, one would have the fish lie on its stomach so that neither

eye would be in the ground and symmetry could be maintained. The more the flatfish evolved to

its current form, the further away from this ideal it became.

   Although the insight this provides for the social sciences is still under-explored, there are a

few studies within economics that attempt to make progress in this direction. One is a theoretical

analysis by Ely (2011), who provides a formal framework to understand kludges, which he

defines as "an improvement upon a highly complex system that solves an inefficiency but in

a piecemeal fashion and without addressing the deep-rooted underlying problem . . . the kludge

itself ­ because it makes sense only in the presence of the disease it is there to treat ­ intensifies

the internal inefficiency, necessitating either further kludges in the future or else eventually a

complete revolution." (p. 211)

   A subsequent paper takes a more applied approach and uses the notion of kludges to better

                                                 41
understand the evolution of laws or policies (Kawai, Lang and Li, 2018). The paper models the

emergence of kludges in policy in a world with two political parties. In this setting, when a

new political party comes into power they can add or remove previous rules in an incremental

manner. An interesting aspect of the model is that rules can be deleted. That is, it is possible to

move `downhill'. However, the model shows how despite this ability, the political parties choose

not to move `downhill' removing old rules, but instead only choose to add new rules. This occurs

because as policies become more complex ­ i.e., with a longer path of rules being added on ­

the rules become entangled in one another. And so removing an unfavorable rule involves also

removing favorable rules if they are entangled. Thus, when policy complexity is high, there is

entanglement and a bias towards adding rather than deleting rules, generating further additions

and complexity.

   The model shows that even in settings that, ex ante, are different from that of biological

evolution where one can undo innovations, in equilibrium, the environment mirrors biological

evolution and kludges emerge. Interestingly, the theory shows that policy is more likely to exhibit

kludges if political power is balanced, electoral terms are short, and legislative frictions are high.

These are all characteristics of the U.S. political system. The model also predicts that with a

kludged public policy, the policy outcomes are moderate, which is also consistent with the reality

of the United States.

   There are many examples of cultural evolution that can be described as kludges. Consider the

issue of paternity certainty. While men can create multiple children during a short period of time,

women have biological limits on how quickly they can have children. Thus, the main concern for

women is to ensure that the father of her children invests in them sufficiently. That is, she does

not want him to employ a strategy where he is choosing quantity over quality. The concern of a

potential father is that he may invest heavily in a child thinking that it is his but it may not be.

For biological reasons, while a woman is certain that a child is her offspring, there is much less

certainty for men. If there is sufficient paternity uncertainty, then he will be less likely to invest

in his mate's child.

   This is a fundamental issue related to reproductive success which is driven by the nature of

reproduction and the biological differences between men and women. The existing evidence

indicates that societies came up with different innovations to improve upon this. Much like

Dawkins' (1996) analogy of reaching peaks by climbing uphill one step at a time, different societies


                                                 42
climbed different hills; customs and traditions evolved that served to improve upon this issue.

   Among certain groups, matrilineal kinship developed. Here kinship is traced through the

women. Men belong to the lineage of their sisters and mother and children belong to the lineage

of their mother. This means that a father does not belong to the same lineage as his children.

The children belong to their mother's lineage and their father belongs to his mother and sister's

lineage. Because of this, the father is not the most important male adult in a child's life and he is

not the one providing primary financial support. The people who fill this role are the mother's

brothers (i.e., the child's maternal uncles). The logic behind this is that with paternity uncertainty,

there is no guarantee that the father is genetically related to a child. However, it is certain that

the mother's brother is related to the child. The child came from their mother and so is related to

her. The mother and her brother came from the same mother and so they are related. Thus, the

child must be related to their uncle. There is no guarantee that the child is related to the father.

   Thus, incremental innovation in the face of paternity certainty is matrilineal kinship, where

family/clan membership is traced through women. The results of such an incremental innovation

are far reaching and and can be difficult to undo. In this case, it is natural that family members

live in close proximity to one another, and, thus, there is matrilocality, where the nuclear family

lives near the woman's family.

   An alternative incrementally-designed set of innovations that has emerged is as follows. Rather

than having matrilineal kinship, a society has patrilineal kinship. Lineage is traced through the

father's line. At the time of marriage, the wife leaves her lineage and joins her husband's. Due to

the tendency of lineages to live within close proximity, patrilocality develops where families live

close to the husband's parents.

   This then presents another problem. If daughters leave their parents lineage and move away

from them when they are married, what incentive is there for them to invest resources in raising

someone who they will never see again and no longer be part of their family after marriage?

The incremental innovation that emerged to overcome this issue is bridewealth, where a sizeable

transfer of resources from the husband's family to the wife's family at marriage. This is given as a

gift of appreciation and incentivizes the investment of resources in a daughter even knowing that

she will not be a member of the family in the future. The practice of bridewealth is infrequently

observed in matrilineal societies.

   The two evolved solutions to the problem of paternity uncertainty and paternal investment


                                                  43
in children are very different and take societies along different paths with different incremental

improvements. Presumably, one equilibrium is better than the other. For example, Lowes (2018)

finds that within matrilineal households, due to the greater empowerment of women, children are

healthier and more educated. Thus, it is plausible that this evolutionary path is better for fitness.

However, once a society has progressed down the patrilineal path, jumping to the matrilineal

equilibrium is no easy task. This would involve undoing existing customs, leading to a lower

payoff ­ what Dawkins (1996) calls `moving downhill' ­ to then be able to travel along the

matrilineal path. One would need to undo bridewealth, patrilocality, and fundamentally alter

a society's perception of kinship.

   This is potentially an example of a kludge. As the cultural innovations accumulate, the society

is locked in more deeply into a suboptimal equilibrium. The case for a kludge among patrilineal

societies is particularly strong for those who have developed additional cultural innovations that

are harmful to women but are meant to resolve the issue of paternity certainty. As has been

documented, in societies that practice nomadic pastoralism, where men are often absent for long

periods of time, the problem of paternity certainty is particularly acute (Becker, 2019). In these

societies, it appears as if additional innovations are required. It is not possible to move `downhill'

and then back `uphill' to the higher matrilineal `peak'. Instead one must continue upward on the

existing path.

   As documented in Becker (2019), female genital cutting and infibulation developed as customs

that helped husbands ensure greater paternity certainty. With these extreme forms of female

circumcision, sex becomes painful, reducing the temptation to have sexual relations outside of

the marriage, even when the husband is away for extended periods of time. In other parts of the

world, other customs emerged that also served the purpose of controlling women's autonomy and

sexuality, such as the veil or burqa, restrictions on women's mobility, and limits on the decisions

that women could make.


D. Group-Level Selection

Our discussion up to this point has implicitly assumed that the success of a cultural trait depends

on the wellbeing of the individuals with the trait. However, historically a big part of cultural

evolution occurs through the rise and fall of societies. In other words, the fate of individuals

and their success is as much tied to the success of their community as their own relative success


                                                 44
within the community. Thus, what may also be important for the adoption of cultural traits is

how they affect the society as a whole. This is called group-level selection and is often used as one

explanation for why prosocial cultural traits (ones that are costly for the individual but beneficial

for the group), like altruism or proclivity to cooperate, can emerge (Henrich, 2004a, Richerson,

Baldini, Bell, Demps, Frost, Hillis, Mathew, Newton, Naar, Newson, Ross, Smaldino, Waring and

Zefferman, 2016).

   This insight has the potential to increase our understanding of the history process, particularly

at the society level. To see this, recall the famous quote from Charles Tilly (1990) that "war made

the state, and the state made war" (p. 42). While generally not viewed in this light, Tilly's famous

argument that war lies at the heart of the economic rise of Europe is actually an argument about

group-level selection. Those groups, namely states, with characteristics that were beneficial were

able to outcompete other states with less beneficial characteristics. He writes that "states having

access to a combination of large rural populations, capitalists, and relatively commercialized

economies won out. . . their form of state became the predominant one in Europe. Eventually

European states converged on that form: the nation states." (p. 15).

   Recent studies have examined the effects of conflicts, particularly within the European context

(Gennaioli and Voth, 2015, Dincecco and Onorato, 2017).                      Studies have explored the effects

that warfare had on taxation, urbanization, and state formation. However, the most obvious

mechanism outside of economics, group-level selection, has not been explicitly considered, even

though the famous effects of Tilly can be interpreted through this lens.15 With the formation

of groups, such as villages, kingdoms, empires, or nation-states, the wellbeing of the citizens of

each entity are intricately connected. If a kingdom is conquered, everyone in the Kingdom is

conquered. Thus, warfare and interstate conflict are a form of group-level competition. This is

important because this, in turn, leads to group-level selection.16 When an individual's success

is, to a large extent, determined by the success of the group rather than their own success, then

cultural traits that are not individually optimal but are socially beneficial can arise. An example

of such a trait is altruism. Giving to others when they are in need reduces our material wellbeing.
  15 The most extensive research undertaken in this direction is from the evolutionary biologist Peter Turchin, who

applies insights from evolutionary biology to understand the course of human history, including warfare and the rise
and fall of empires. For a sampling of this ambitious research agenda, see Turchin (2003, 2006, 2016) and Turchin,
Currie, Turner and Gavrilets (2013).
  16 To be precise, there are two conditions that are needed for warfare to cause cultural group selection. The first is

that variation in cultural traits between groups causes success in warfare. The second is that success in warfare affects
the spread of the cultural traits (Richerson et al., 2016).



                                                           45
However, if everyone in a society does this, then the society will be better functioning and will

be better off. Of course, just because traits are socially beneficial does not mean they will arise

in equilibrium. This depends on the trade-offs between group-level benefits and individual-level

costs. The stronger group-level selection is the more likely it is that the former will prevail over

the latter (Henrich, 2004a).

   The prediction that arises from the framework of group-level selection is that conflict should

be associated with more prosocial traits (i.e., traits that are socially beneficial). Several recent

studies have stumbled across the counter-intuitive finding that conflict seems to be associated

with higher levels of prosociality and social cohesion. This was confirmed in a recent meta-

analysis Bauer, Blattman, Chytilova, Henrich, Miguel and Mitts (2016). The finding is odd if

one expects that conflict would cause the breakdown of social capital. However, viewed through

the lens of intergroup competition, these relationships make sense. Evolutionary theory predicts

an association between conflict and prosocial behavior. Such an effect may be more pronounced

during periods of conflict. That is, conflict may activate prosocial psychology which is particularly

beneficial in that setting.

   Another explanation for the relationship comes from very recent research in social psychology

that emphasizes the effect that `threat' has on the the extent to which norms are adhered to ­ i.e.,

their `tightness.' According to Gelfand (2018), external threat increases the importance of norm

following and therefore tightness increases. If conflict is a form of threat and a society's baseline

norms are ones of cooperation and prosociality towards in-group members, then past experience

with conflict will lead to greater prosociality. Consistent with this interpretation, subsequent

research by Henrich, Bauer, Cassar, Chytilova and Purzycki (2019) shows that past experience

with conflict is associated with greater religiosity, which can be interpreted as a tightening of

traditional norms. The study uses a survey of 1,709 individuals from three post-conflict societies:

Uganda, Sierra Leone and Tajikistan. They find that conflict exposure is associated with an

increased likelihood of identifying as Christian or Muslim and with more frequent participation

in religious gatherings and rituals.

   A case study illustrating the logic of group-level competition is provided by Nunn and Sanchez

de la Sierra (2017). The authors described events in a village in the Eastern Democratic Republic of

the Congo. The village had a history of being regularly pillaged by a Hutu militia group called the

FDLR. The raiding and pillaging had occurred multiple times per year for well over a decade. This


                                                 46
was until 2012 when an elderly man in the village, through a dream, learned how to bulletproof

the people of the village by having them undertake a specific ritual. Beliefs in bulletproofing are

common in the region and are connected to traditional religious beliefs. As is common, this form

of bulletproofing came with conditions that had to be followed for the protection to work. Thus, if

someone who had been known to have been bulletproofed died, then it must be the case that they

did not follow the necessary conditions. Due to the bulletproofing, the villagers, particularly the

young men, were able to fight back when they were attacked. Over the course of multiple years,

the FLDR eventually gave up trying to attack the village and concentrated their efforts elsewhere.

For the first time in over a decade, the village had been liberated.

   In their analysis, Nunn and Sanchez de la Sierra (2017) try to understand these events. They

interpret the production function of producing the village's freedom as one with team production,

meaning there are strong complementarities to effort. As is well known, the equilibrium level of

effort is lower than is socially optimal in such settings. Beliefs in bulletproofing serve to reduce

the perceived cost of effort and to raise the equilibrium level of effort so that it is closer to the

socially optimal level. Thus, these beliefs, even if false, are beneficial for society. However, this

benefit does not guarantee the existence of such beliefs. As discussed above, socially benefi-

cial beliefs or preferences that are individually suboptimal only arise with strong group-level

selection. The authors argue that the Eastern DRC which has experienced decades of sustained

conflict is a setting where group-level selection is expected to be strong. Thus, in their setting,

conflict generated group-level competition, which resulted in beliefs that are socially beneficial

although individually suboptimal. This interpretation is consistent with the fact that beliefs about

bulletproofing appear to be common in many conflict-ridden areas, not only in the contemporary

period but also historically (Kamarck, 2009, ch. 4, Sinclair-Thomas and Challis, 2017).

   The best evidence for whether historical warfare would have been significant enough to

generate group-level selection is from a recent study by Samuel Bowles (2009). In it, he takes a

more historical perspective and asks whether the group-level selective pressures due to intergroup

conflict during Late Pleistocene and early Holocene could have been sizeable enough to affect

the evolution of prosocial cultural traits. The study combines models of group-level selection,

archaeological data from the period, and ethnographic data from contemporary hunter-gatherers.

It finds that the levels of mortality associated with intergroup warfare would have been sizeable

enough to have a large effect on prosocial traits, promoting behaviors that while individually


                                                 47
costly would have been beneficial for the group overall.

   While the examples discussed to this point have focused on warfare as the source of group-level

competition, the exact same logic applies to competition that occurs through market forces. While

this form of competition might not be particularly important for those studying cultural evolution

over the course of human history, it is highly relevant for the field of economics where markets

are central.

   One of the few pieces of research along these lines is a recent study by Francois, Fujiwara and

van Ypersele (2018). In the study, the authors examine selection arising from firm competition.

They begin by first showing a relationship between the competitiveness of an industry and the

level of trust of individuals who work in that industry. They look at both the United States and

Germany and show this relationship holds both in the cross-section and over time for workers

who switch industries. In this setting, firms are the group and firm competition is the form of

group-level competition. Given this, group-level selection is expected to facilitate the emergence

of group-level beneficial traits, like generalized trust. Firms with trusting employees perform

better and are more likely to survive. This is true despite evidence that suggests that if trust is

too high it can lower individual income (Butler et al., 2016). In other words, even though trust is

socially beneficial it is not necessarily individually beneficial.

   The authors confirm these findings and their interpretation by undertaking an event study

exploiting the wave of bank deregulation across U.S. states in the 1980s, which led to more com-

petitive industries. Lastly, they show that the effect of group-level selection on generalized trust

can be replicated in a behavioral experiment. Using 220 participants from France, individuals

played a series of one-shot anonymous public goods games against others within a group of

20 individuals. One of two randomly-selected groups had payoffs that were determined by the

relative performance of their group compared to another. They find that group-level selection,

resulted in higher contributions, and importantly in higher levels of self-reported trust at the end

of the experiments.

   The study is important because it provides valuable evidence that market competition can

result in group-level selection. This provides a new perspective from which one can think about

market competition and its effects.




                                                   48
E. Biology, Sex, and Gender

There are well-known biological differences between men and women among the human species.

Relative to women, men tend to be taller, larger in stature, and have greater upper body strength

(Ruff, 2002, Gustafsson and Lindenfors, 2004). The two sexes have very different roles in repro-

duction. The role of men is to fertilize an egg, while that of women is to carry the egg as it

develops, give birth, and (typically) breastfeed the newborn for the first years of life.

   These biological differences place different constraints on reproduction for the two sexes.

Women can only have only one offspring (ignoring the case of twins) per 1­2 year period. By

contrast, men can have a much larger number of offspring during this same time. However, due

to the nature of sex and childbirth, men have much less certainty that a child that is born is theirs

biologically. By contrast, women have essentially perfect certainty that a child is biologically her

offspring.

   This suggests different biological concerns for men and women and as a consequence different

optimal mating strategies, which have been studied extensively (e.g., Trivers, 1972, Buss and

Scmitt, 1993, Buss, 1994). As we will see, these strategies have implications for gender relations

and social structure more generally. For women, the concern is that men will choose a quantity

over quality mating strategy and not invest sufficient resources into the child. For men, the

concern is that the child is not theirs and they are spending resources on another male's child. If

this is believed, they may not invest the necessary resources to raise the child.

   These biologically-based concerns have important social consequences that have been studied

in the economic history literature. As mentioned above, Becker (2019) studies how the fundamen-

tal issue of paternity uncertainty differs depending on ecological conditions and what effects this

has on the social structure in society. Her study shows that parts of the world that are particularly

well-suited to pastoralism ­ namely, places that are marginal for agriculture but suitable for the

grazing of animals ­ exhibit much greater control of woman's sexuality by men. This can take

the form of norms about female decision-making autonomy and practices such as infibulation

and veiling. This is because, in a pastoral society, grazing requires men to be absent from the

community as their herds move to new pastures. These prolonged periods of absence raised

concerns of infidelity, which resulted in the evolution of restrictions on female sexuality.

   Another evolved response to the issue of paternal uncertainty has been matrilineal kinship.

Rather than the father being the primary supporter of a child, it is the mother's brother (i.e.,

                                                 49
the maternal uncle). With matrilineal kinship, lineage is traced through women. Men belong

to the lineage of their sisters and mothers, and children belong to the lineage of their mother.

Thus, a father does not belong to the same lineage as his children. The children belong to their

mother's lineage and the father belongs to his mother and sister's lineage. As a consequence, the

father is not the most important male adult in his children's lives and, often, he is not the one

who provides primary financial support. Instead, this is the mother's brothers (i.e., the children's

maternal uncles). As explained above, the logic behind this is that while there is no guarantee that

the father is genetically related to the children, it is certain that the mother's brother is related

to the children. Thus, the fundamental problem of how to incentivize the father to invest in

his children if perceived paternal uncertainty is high is solved by having developed norms and

customs where maternal uncles are the ones who invest in children.

   As we have discussed, matrilineal kinship and control over women's sexuality are two different

evolutionary paths that serve to address the same fundamental biologically-based problem. A

testable prediction of this evolutionary perspective behind these customs is that the two customs

are substitutes and should be negatively correlated in the ethnographic record. Consistent with

this, one does find that matrilineal kinship is associated with greater female empowerment

(Lowes, 2018). In addition, if one looks at ethnographic data, one finds that matrilineal kinship

is associated with weaker control of women's sexuality. Although data are limited, there is some

information on these cultural traits in the Ethnographic Atlas. Within the database, there are

244 patrilineal and 59 matrilineal ethnic groups for which data are available on societal norms

about premarital sexual behavior of girls, which we take to be an indicator of sexual norms more

generally. For matrilineal groups with data, only 6.7% (4 of 59) have norms that prohibit any

sex before marriage. Among patrilineal groups with data, the same statistic is 34% (82 of 244).

By contrast, among matrilineal groups with data, 54% (32 of 59) have norms that fully permit

premarital sex, while among patrilineal groups with data, this figure is only 33% (80 of 244).

   Another biological difference between men and women is differences in their body size and

strength, which is an example of a more general biological phenomenon referred to as sexual

dimorphism. Differences between men and women has been fairly stable (i.e., a 15% difference in

body mass) for Homo sapiens since the Pleistocene (Ruff, 2002). Recent research within economics

has studied the consequence of sexual dimorphism for modern gender norms and how it is

mediated by historical technologies that made the physical differences more or less important.


                                                 50
Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2013b) provide evidence that the greater physical size and strength

of males was an important determinant of a gender-based division of labor historically, but

primarily in agricultural societies that had adopted intensive plow agriculture. With this form

of agriculture, significant upper body strength was needed to control or pull the plow. As a

consequence, in these societies, there was a gendered division of labor where men worked outside

the home in agriculture and women tended to work within the home. As shown by Alesina et

al. (2013b), this division generated norms about the appropriate role of women in society, which

persist in the modern era and affect female employment outside the home today. The form of

traditional agriculture has even been found to affect preferences for sons over daughters, which

results in male-biased sex-ratios (Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn, 2018).



            4. Contributions of Economics to Cultural Evolution

The study of cultural evolution is a recent area of research, with the bulk of findings emerging

in the last few decades. The field began with a small number of scholars who adapted models

from evolutionary biology to cultural evolution (e.g., Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman, 1981, Boyd

and Richerson, 1985). An important contribution of economics has been to use these theoretical

foundations to build more elaborate models that remain tractable and provide insight into a range

of economic issues, including preference heterogeneity and segregation (Bisin and Verdier, 2000,

2001b), entrepreneurship (Doepke and Zilibotti, 2014), occupational choice (Doepke and Zilibotti,

2008), female labor force participation (Fernandez, 2013), parenting strategies (Bisin and Verdier,

2001a, Doepke and Zilibotti, 2017), or domestic institutions (Tabellini, 2008, Bisin and Verdier,

2017). A related area of research that has developed within economics is theoretical work that

exploits the dynamics of natural selection to understand various aspect of economic growth over

the very long-run (e.g., Galor and Moav, 2002, Galor and Michalopoulos, 2012, Galor and Ozak,

2016, Galor and Savitskiy, 2018).

  One way to think about the difference between the theoretical analysis of cultural evolution

within evolutionary anthropology and economics is that the prior has tended to focus on study-

ing the emergence of culture and its transmission between individuals. Thus, culture and its

evolution is the outcome of interest in the models. By contrast, within economics, culture and




                                                51
its transmission is taken as given and the analysis follows based on this assumption.17 Thus,

the theoretical work within evolutionary anthropology provides the micro foundations for the

assumptions used in a wide range of models within cultural economics.

   While the origins of the field of cultural evolution were primarily theoretical, the field has

subsequently become increasingly quantitative (Mesoudi, 2016). It is this line of analysis to

which economic historians and growth economists have made the greatest contributions. A large

body of evidence documents how the historical environment or historical shocks ­ what other

disciplines would call a society's ecology ­ affects the long-term evolution of cultural traits.18

For the interested reader, an overview of this body of evidence is provided in Table 1. The table

reports the citation, the cultural trait that is being explained, the determinant which is the focus of

the paper, the unit of observation, the sample, and the primary statistical method used. Although

the list provided is certainly incomplete, it still illustrates that economists have made important

contributions to a deeper understanding of the historical and ecological factors that have shaped

the evolution of cultural traits.

   Very recently, there has been a push for multidisciplinary research that takes a histori-

cal/evolutionary perspective, involving both economists and evolutionary anthropologists. An

example is a recent collaboration between anthropologist Joseph Henrich and three economists

(Schulz, Bahrami-Rad, Beauchamp and Henrich, 2019). Together, the authors study the historical

origins of Western European psychology. They document how the policies of the medieval Roman

Catholic Church, such as the prohibition on cousin marriage, weakened extended kinship ties

and lead to a more individualistic social structure and psychology. To do this, the authors used

data from a range of disciplines, including historical data on the duration of exposure to the

medieval Western church, ethnographic data on the traditional prevalence of kinship practices like

cousin marriage and polygamy, and contemporary data on various psychological and behavioral

characteristics.

   Another way that economics has contributed to the study of cultural evolution is by evidence

for the effects that shorter-term factors can have on cultural traits. This literature is summarized

in Table 2. It has the same structure as Table 1 except that it summarizes studies that estimate

the more-immediate effects of the factors of interest; namely, effects that are felt within a person's
 17 An    exception is Bisin and Verdier (2001a).
 18 See   Nunn (2021) for a summary of this literature.




                                                          52
                                  Table 1: Summary of the literature on the long-term determinants of cultural traits.

     Study                                    Traitbeingexplained                           Determinantbeingtested                         Unitofobservation                       Scopeofsample                        Statisticalstrategy

     Alesina&Fuchs-Schundeln(2007)            Preferencesforgovernmentredistribution        Communism                                      Individuals                             EastandWestGermany                   Naturalexperiment,OLS
     Alesinaetal (2013)                       Genderroles&genderattitudes                   Ploughagriculture                              Inividuals,ethnicities,countries        Global                               OLS,IV
     Alesinaetal (2018)                       Male-femalesexratioifchildren                 Ploughagriculture                              Countries                               Global                               OLS,IV
     Alsan&Wanamaker(2018)                    Trustofmedicalsystem                          Tuskegeeexperiment                             Individuals                             UnitedStates                         DD
     Andersenetal(2016)                       Workethic                                     CatholicOrderofCistercians                     Counties                                England                              OLS
     Ang(forthcoming)                         Individualism                                 Laborintensiveagriculture                      Countries,ethnicities                   Global                               OLS
     AngandFredriksson(2017)                  Strengthoffamilyties                          Wheatagriculture                               Individuals,districts,countries         UnitedStatesandGlobal                OLS
     Baranovetal (2018)                       Attitudesaboutgaymarriage                     19thCenturysexratios                           Individuals,counties                    Australia                            OLS,IV
     Bazzietal (2018)                         Individualism/collectivism                    Frontierexperience                             Counties                                UnitedStates                         OLS,DD,IV
     Becker(2019)                             Femalegenitalcutting                          Pastoralism                                    Individuals,ethnicgroups                Africa,global                        OLS,IV
     Beckeretal (2016)                        Trustofstatebureaucracy                       Habsburgempire                                 Individuals                             EasternEurope                        RD
     BenYishayetal (2017)                     Matrilinealinheritance                        Presenceofcoralreefs                           Islandsandethnicgroups                  Global                               OLS
     Blouin(2018)                             Interpersonaltrust                            Colonialproductionquotas                       Individuals                             Rwanda                               Naturalexperiment,OLS
     Brodeur&Haddad(2019)                     Attitudestowardshomosexuality                 19thCenturygoldrush                            Counties                                UnitedStates                         OLS,DD
     Campa&Serafinelli(2019)                  Attitudestowardsgenderequality                Communism                                      Women,cohorts                           Germany,Central&E.Europe             IV,RD,DD
     Campante&Yanagizawa-Drott(2016) Authoritativeparentingstyle            Father'swarexperience                                          Individuals                             UnitedStates                         Naturalexperiment,IV
     Cervellatietal (2019)           Ethnicaffiliation,endogamy             Prevalenceofmalaria                                            Individuals,ethnicgroups                Africa                               OLS
     Chaudharyetal (2019)            Cooperation(contributiontoapublicgood) Colonialrule(directvs.indirect)                                Individuals,villages                    Rajasthan,India                      Naturalexperiment
     Cornelson(2018)                          AfricanAmericaneducationalattainment          RolemodelsfromCosbyShow                        Cities&birthcohorts                     UnitedStates                         DD,IV
     Couttenieretal (2017)                    Homicides                                     Timingofmineraldiscoveries                     Counties                                UnitedStates                         OLS
     Delletal (forthcoming)                   Cooperation                                   DaiVietKingdom                                 Villages,individuals                    Vietnam                              RD
     Dell&Querubin(2018)                      AttitudestowardstheU.S.                       Militarybombing                                Villages,individuals               Vietnam                                   RD
     Enke(2019)                               Universal/limitedmorality                     Strengthofkinshipties                          Individuals,ethnicgroups,countries Global                                    OLS,IV
     Fenske(2015)                             Polygyny                                      Historicalmissionstationsandeducation          Individuals                             Africa                               OLS,IV
     Fernandezetal(2004)                      Genderattitudes                               FemalewartimeemploymentduringWWII              Marriedwomen                            UnitedStates                         OLS,DD
     Fouka&Schlapfer(2020)                    Workethic                                     Marginalreturnstolaborofcropmix                Individuals,districts,countries         Europe                               OLS
     Galor&Ozak(2016)                         Patience                                      Agriculturalsuitabilityoftraditionalcrops      Individuals,countries              Global                                    OLS,DD
     Galor&Savitskiy(2018)                    Lossaversion                                  Climaticvolatility                             Individuals,ethnicgroups,countries Global                                    OLS




53
     Gershman(2019)                           Supernaturalbeliefs                           Trans-Atlanticslavetrade                       Individuals,ethnicgroups,regions   AfricaandLatinAmerica                     OLS,IV
     Giuliano&Nunn(2013)                      Supportfordemocracy                           Traditionalvillageleadership                   Individuals,countries                   Global                               OLS
     Giuliano&Nunn(forthcoming)               Importanceoftradition                         Similarityofenvironmentacrossgenerations Individuals,ethnicgroups,countries Global                                          Naturalexperiment,OLS
     Grosjean(2014)                           Acultureofhonor                               Scotch-Irishimmigration                        Counties                                UnitedStates                         OLS
     Grosjean&Khattar(2018)                   Attitudesaboutgenderequality                  18thCenturymale-biasedsexratios                Counties                                Australia                            IV
     Guisoetal (2016)                         Self-efficacy,civicmindedness                 Medievalindependentcitystates                  Individuals,villages                    Italy                                IV,DD,OLS
     Heldring(2018)                           Obediencetostate                              Stateformation                                 Individuals                             Rwanda                               Naturalexperiment
     Karaja&Rubin(2017)                       Interpersonaltrust                            Habsburgvs.Ottoman/Russianstate                Individuals,villages                    RegionofRomania                      Naturalexperiment
     Lowesetal (2017)                         Rulefollowing                                 Stateformation                                 Individuals                             ProvinceintheDRC                     Naturalexperiment
     Lowes&Montero(2017)                      TrustinWesternmedicine                        ColonialmedicalCampaigns                       Individuals,districts                   FrenchColonialAfrica                 IV,OLS
     Lowes&Montero(2019)                      Socialcohesion                                Forcedrubbercollection                         Individuals,villages                    DemocraticRepublicoftheCongo         RD,OLS
     Michalopoulos(2012)                      Ethnicaffiliation                             Variationinagriculturalsuitability             Gridcells                               Global                               OLS
     Michalopoulosetal (2018)                 AdherencetoIslam                              Traderoutes,landsuitability                    Countriesorethnicgroups                 Global                               OLS
     Mosconaetal (2017)                       Ingroupandoutgrouptrust                       Traditionalsegmentarylineageorganization Individuals,ethnicgroups                      Africa                               OLS
     Nunn(2010)                               BeliefinChristianity                          Colonialmissionstations                  Individuals,ethnicgroups,villages             Africa                               OLS
     Nunn&Wantchekon(2011)                    Trust                                         Slavetrades                              Individuals                                   Sub-SaharanAfrica                    IV
     Okoye(2017)                              Trust                                         18thCenturyChristianmissions                   Individuals,ethnicgroups                Nigeria                              OLS
     Olken(2009)                              Socialcohesion                                IntroductionofTV&Radio                         Villages,individuals                    Indonesia                            OLS
     Ramos-Toro(2019)                         Prosociality,in-groupbias,trustinmedicine     Ancestorsbeingkeptinalepercolony               Individuals                             Colombia                             OLS
     Rubin(2014)                              Religiousbeliefs(Protestantism)               Earlyaccesstoprintingpress                     Cities                                  Europe                               OLS
     Rustagi(2019)                            Conditionalcooperation                        Medievaldemocracy                              Individuals,municipalities              Switzerland                          OLS,IV
     Schulz(2017),Schulzetal (2019)           Kinshipties                                   CatholicChurch'smedievalpolicies               Cities,regions,countries                EuropeandGlobal                      DD,OLS
     Teso(2019)                       Genderroles                                           Slavetrades                                    Individuals,ethnicgroups                Sub-SaharanAfrica                    OLS,IV
     TurPratsandValenciaCaicedo(2020) Interpersonaltrust                                    SpanishCivilWar                                Individuals                             Spain                                OLS,RD,IV
     Xue(2018)                        Genderroles                                           Cottonweaving                                  Counties                                China                                IV

     Notes : The statistical strategies list in the last column of the table include: natural experiments, instrumental variables (IV), regression discontinuity (RD), difference-in-difference estimates (DD), or randomized control trials (RCT).
     Natural experiments are cases where the determinant of interest occurs in locations or to individuals in an idiosyncratic manner that is close to randomly assigned. Instrumental variables is employed when one can find a variable (i.e.,
     instrument) that is correlated with the determinant and only affects the outcome of interest through the determinant. In such cases, the instrument can be used to obtain a consistent causal estimate of the effect of the determinant on the
     outcome. Regression discontinuity can be employed when the treatment of interest has strict idiosyncratically determined borders delineating the treated group from untreated group. In such cases, differences in the outcome of interest
     can be compared at the boundary and this provide an unbiased causal estimate of the treatment of interest. Difference-in-difference estimates exploit variation in a treatment over time and estimates effects by looking at how the outcome
     changes for the treatment group relative to the control group after, relative to before, the treatment occurs. Another strategy is for the researcher to manipulate the implementation of a treatment of interest so that the implementation is
     done randomly (RCT). This allows the researcher to obtain causal estimates by comparing the randomly chosen treatment group to the randomly chosen control group. Lastly, OLS refers to ordinary least squares, which indicate that the
     studyreliesonevidencefromconditionalcorrelations.
                                    Table 2: Overview of the economics literature on the shorter-term determinants of cultural traits.

     Study                                      Traitbeingexplained                                     Determinantbeingtested                     Unitofobservation               Scopeofsample                         Statisticalstrategy
     Alesina&Fuchs-Schundeln(2007)              Changingpreferencesforgovernmentredistribution UnificationofGermany                                Individuals                     EastandWestGermany                    Naturalexperiment,OLS
     Bau(2019)                                  Differentialchildpreference                    Governmentpension                                   Individuals                     Indonesia&Ghana                       DD
     Baueretal (2014)                           Prosociality&in-groupbias                               Civilconflict                              Individuals                     Rep.ofGeorgiaandSierraLeone           OLS
     Beamanetal (2009)                          Attitudesaboutwomenandpolitics                          Reservationofpositionforwomen              Individuals                     India                                 Naturalexperiment
     Bentzen(2018)                              Religiosity                                             Earthquakes                                Individuals                     Global                                Naturalexperiment,DD
     Bergh&Ohrvall(2019)                        Trust                                                   Movementtonewcountry                       Individuals                     SwedishExpatriates                    Naturalexperiment,OLS
     Boothetal (forthcoming)                    Competitiveness                                         Growingupundercommunism                    Women                           Beijing&Taipei                        Naturalexperiment,DD
     Bursztynetal (forthcoming)                 Attitudesaboutgenderequality                            Informationprovision                       Men                             SaudiArabia                           Randomizedintervention
     Campante&Yanagizawa-Drott(2015)            Religiosity&subjectivewell-being                        Ramadanfasting                             Individuals                     Global                                Naturalexperiment,DD
     Cassaretal (2013)                          Trust                                                   Civilconflict                              Individuals                     Tajikistan                            OLS
     Cantonietal (2017)                         Politicalbeliefs&attitudes                              Schoolcurricula                            Students                        China                                 DD
     Clingingsmithetal (2009)                   Attitudesaboutgenderequality                            Hajjpilgrimage                             Individuals                     Global(allvisaapplicants)             Naturalexperiment
     DellaVigna&Kaplan(2007)                    Politicalpreferences(voting)                            AccesstoFoxNews                            Towns                           UnitedStates                          Naturalexperiment,DD
     Depetris-Chauvinetal (2020)                Nationalidentityvs.coethnicidentity                     Nationalsoccerteamvictories                Individuals                     Africa                                RD,Naturalexperiment
     Fernandezetal (2019)                       Opennesstohomosexuality                                 AIDSepidemic                               Individuals                     UnitedStates                          OLS,DD
     Fouka(2020)                                Culturalassimilation                                    Languagerestrictions                       Individuals                     GermanimmigrantsintheU.S.             Naturalexperiment,DD
     Francoisetal (2010)                        Trust                                                   Firmcompetition                            Workers,industries              UnitedStates                          OLS




54
     Francoisetal (2018)                        Trust                                                   Bankingderegulation,firmcompetition        Workers,industries              UnitedStates,Germany                  OLS,DD
     Giuliano&Spilimbergo(2014)                 Luckvs.effort,preferencesforresdistribution             Childhoodrecession                         Individuals                     UnitedStates&37Countries              DD
     Henrichetal (2019)                         Religiosity                                             War                                        Individuals                     Uganda,SierraLeone,Tajikistan         OLS
     Jakiela&Ozier(2019)                        Exposuretoelectionviolence                              Riskaversion                               Individuals                     Kenya                                 Naturalexperiment,DD,IV
     Jensen&Oster(2009)                         Gendernorms,femaleempowerment                           Cable&satellitetelevision                  Villages                        India                                 DD
     Kosseetal (forthcoming)                    Altruism,trust,&other-regardingbehavior                 Mentorprogram                              Children                        Germany                               RCT
     LaFerraraetal (2012)                       Normsaboutfertility                                     Televisionsoapoperas                       Women                           Brazil                                Naturalexperiment,DD
     Madestametal (2011)                        Politicalpreferences                                    FourthofJulyfestivities                    Individuals                     UnitedStates                          Naturalexperiment,DD
     Madestametal (2013)                        Politicalpreferences                                    TeaPartyprotests                           Counties                        UnitedStates                          Naturalexperiment,DD
     Mitrunen(2019)                             Assimilation&patriotism                                 Compulsorypatrioticactsinschools           Children                        UnitedStates                          Naturalexperiment,OLS
     Qian(2008)                                 Genderbias(seximbalance)                                Femaleincome                               Individuals                     China                                 DD
     Rao(2019)                                  Altruismtowardoutgroup                                  Schoolintegrationpolicies                  Children                        PrivateschoolsinDelhi,India           Naturalexperiment,DD
     Riley(2017)                                Educationalsuccess                                      Watchinginspirationalmovie                 Secondaryschoolstudents         SchoolsinUganda                       Randomizedintervention

     Notes : The statistical strategies list in the last column of the table include: natural experiments, instrumental variables (IV), regression discontinuity (RD), difference-in-difference estimates (DD), or randomized control trials (RCT). Natural
     experiments are cases where the determinant of interest occurs in locations or to individuals in an idiosyncratic manner that is close to randomly assigned. Instrumental variables is employed when one can find a variable (i.e., instrument)
     that is correlated with the determinant and only affects the outcome of interest through the determinant. In such cases, the instrument can be used to obtain a consistent causal estimate of the effect of the determinant on the outcome.
     Regression discontinuity can be employed when the treatment of interest has strict idiosyncratically determined borders delineating the treated group from untreated group. In such cases, differences in the outcome of interest can be
     compared at the boundary and this provide an unbiased causal estimate of the treatment of interest. Difference-in-difference estimates exploit variation in a treatment over time and estimates effects by looking at how the outcome changes for
     the treatment group relative to the control group after, relative to before, the treatment occurs. Another strategy is for the researcher to manipulate the implementation of a treatment of interest so that the implementation is done randomly
     (RCT). This allows the researcher to obtain causal estimates by comparing the randomly chosen treatment group to the randomly chosen control group. Lastly, OLS refers to ordinary least squares, which indicate that the study relies on
     evidencefromconditionalcorrelations.
                                  Table 3: Overview of the economics literature on the consequences of differences in cultural traits.

     Study                                      Outcomebeingaffected                                  Traitbeingexamined                         Unitofobservation               Scopeofsample                    Statisticalstrategy
     Aghionetal (2010)                          Governmentregulation                                  Distrust                                   Individuals,countries           Global                           OLS
     Algan&Cahuc(2010)                          Economicgrowth                                        Generalizedtrust                           Individuals,countries           Global                           Naturalexperiment,IV
     Ashrafetal (forthcoming)                   Education                                             Brideprice                                 Individuals,ethnicgroups        Indonesia&Zambia                 OLS,DD
     Atkin(2016)                                Malnutrition                                          Foodpreferences                            Households                      India                            Naturalexperiment,OLS
     Becker&Woesmann(2008)                      Femaleeducation,gendergap                             Religiousbeliefs(Protestantism)            Counties                        Prussia                          OLS,IV
     Becker&Woesmann(2009)                      Education&economicgrowth                              Religiousbeliefs(Protestantism)            Counties                        Prussia                          OLS,IV
     Butleretal (2016)                          Income                                         Generalizedtrust                                  Individuals                     Global                           OLS
     Campante&Chor(2017)                        Industrialspecializationofproduction           Workplaceobedience                                Countries&industries            Global                           OLS,DD
     Campante&Yanagizawa-Drott(2015)            Happiness,economicoutput                       Religiosityduetofasting                           Individuals,countries           Islamiccountries                 Naturalexperiment
     Cornoetal (forthcoming)                    Earlymarriageandfertilitydifferenesduetodroughts
                                                                                               Bridepriceordowry                                 Women                           Sub-SaharanAfricaandIndia        OLS
     Dohmenetal (2018)                          Capitalaccumulation&economicgrowth             Patience                                          Countries                       Global                           OLS
     Enke(forthcoming)                          VotinginU.S.Presidentialelections                     Universalvs.group-basedmorality            Counties                        UnitedStates                     OLS
     Enke(2019)                                 Economicgrowth                                        Kinshiptightness,universalmorality         Ethnicgroups,countries          Global                           OLS
     Enkeetal (2019)                            Politicalpreferences                                  Universalvs.group-basedmorality            Individuals,countries           UnitedStatesandEurope            OLS




55
     Figlioetal (forthcoming)                   Educationalperformance                                Long-termorientation                       ImmigrantstudentsinU.S.         Global                           OLS
     Gorodnichenko&Roland(2011,2017)            Economicgrowth                                        Individualismvs.collectivism               Countries                       Global                           OLS,IV
     Gorodnichenko&Roland(2015)                 Autocracticvs.democraticnationalgovernment            Individualismvs.collectivism               Countries                       Global                           OLS,IV
     Gorodnichenkoetal(2018)                    Foreignoutsourcingvs.foreigndirectinvestment          Culturaldifferencebetweencountries         Countrypairs                    Global                           OLS,DD
     Guisoetal (2009)                           Bilateraltrade&foreigndirectinvestment                Trustbetweencountries                      Countries                       Europeancountries                OLS
     Jayachandran&Pande(2017)                   Childhoodstunting                                     Sonpreference                              Children                        India&Africa                     OLS
     Lowes(2018)                                Householdcooperation,femaleandchildwellbeing          Matrilinealkinship                         Individuals,ethnicgroups        Dem.RepublicoftheCongo           RD,OLS
     Mosconaetal (2019)                         Conflict                                              Segementarylineagesystems                  Ethnicgroups,gridcells          Africa                           OLS,RD
     Nguyen(2018)                               Innovation                                            Interpersonaltrust                         CEOs,workers,companies          UnitedStates                     OLS
     Nunnetal (2019)                            Politicalturnover                                     Generalizedtrust                           Countries,U.S.counties          Global&UnitedStates              DD

     Notes : The statistical strategies list in the last column of the table include: natural experiments, instrumental variables (IV), regression discontinuity (RD), difference-in-difference estimates (DD), or randomized control trials (RCT).
     Natural experiments are cases where the determinant of interest occurs in locations or to individuals in an idiosyncratic manner that is close to randomly assigned. Instrumental variables is employed when one can find a variable (i.e.,
     instrument) that is correlated with the determinant and only affects the outcome of interest through the determinant. In such cases, the instrument can be used to obtain a consistent causal estimate of the effect of the determinant on the
     outcome. Regression discontinuity can be employed when the treatment of interest has strict idiosyncratically determined borders delineating the treated group from untreated group. In such cases, differences in the outcome of interest
     can be compared at the boundary and this provide an unbiased causal estimate of the treatment of interest. Difference-in-difference estimates exploit variation in a treatment over time and estimates effects by looking at how the outcome
     changes for the treatment group relative to the control group after, relative to before, the treatment occurs. Another strategy is for the researcher to manipulate the implementation of a treatment of interest so that the implementation is
     done randomly (RCT). This allows the researcher to obtain causal estimates by comparing the randomly chosen treatment group to the randomly chosen control group. Lastly, OLS refers to ordinary least squares, which indicate that the
     studyreliesonevidencefromconditionalcorrelations.
lifetime rather than multiple generations into the future.

   An additional contribution that economics has made is to estimate the effects that cultural

traits have on economic outcomes. Research has shown that culture affects a host of outcomes,

including trade, foreign direct investment, political turnover, conflict, innovation, savings, in-

vestment, and economic growth. An overview of the key studies from this body of research is

provided in Table 3.19

   A particularly noteworthy aspect of the body of economic research summarized in Tables 1­3

is that the scope of societies studied is relatively broad. This can be seen with a quick glance

at the `Scope of sample' column in the three tables. There are many studies of non-Western

societies. This is important since it is now well-recognized that the cultural traits of Western

European societies ­ what Henrich, Heine and Norenzayan (2010b) famously term `WEIRD'

societies ­ are not the modal or even median traits of the World. Instead, they appear to be

highly exceptional (Henrich et al., 2010b, Henrich, 2020, Muthukrishna, Bell, Henrich, Curtin,

Gedranovich, McInerney and Thue, 2020). Many disciplines that seek to better understand

human culture and human behavior, most notably psychology, have a very strong tendency

to focus almost exclusively on Western societies (Henrich, Heine and Norenzayan, 2010a). In

addition, because they are not particularly interested in cross-cultural variation, they then do

not ask the question of where this variation is from, which would then cause them to look at

history for answers. Thus, there is also a tendency for analysis to be ahistorical (Muthukrishna

and Slingerland, forthcoming). While behavioral economics often shares the same `WEIRD' bias,

research within cultural economics generally considers a broad cross-section of societies and

takes a historical perspective. The reason for this approach is likely due to the origins of the field,

which lie in economic history, economic development, and economic growth, each of which has

traditionally been historical and/or global in their focus. In the future, expect research in this area

to continue to become increasingly interdisciplinary, particularly as fields like psychology begin to

look beyond WEIRD societies and then seek to understand the historical origins of cross-societal

differences on culture and psychology.

   An important contribution that I can envision economists ­ particularly economic historians

and political economists ­ making to evolutionary research is a greater emphasis on the presence

of power and coercion and an explicit inclusion of states and state actors into theory and empirics.
 19 For   a review of the early literature documenting the economic consequences of culture see Guiso et al. (2006).



                                                           56
In the simplest evolutionary models, the evolution of particular traits depends on the relative

success of each.   However, in reality, the success of different groups often depends on the

institutions and power structures within societies. While there are existing evolutionary studies

that incorporate power, coercion, and institutions (e.g., Vehrencamp, 1983), there is scope for a

greater and more explicit focus of these aspects of human society within evolutionary frameworks.

While there has already been important progress using an evolutionary perspective to think about

states and institutions (e.g., Bowles and Gintis, 1998b,a, Gintis, 2000, Platteau, 2000, Aoki, 2001,

Bowles and Gintis, 2002, Bowles, 2004, Tabellini, 2008, Bisin and Verdier, 2017, Besley and Persson,

forthcoming), there is much more that remains to be done.

   A recent example of research along these lines is the theoretical study by Tabellini (2008) which

models the interplay between culture and institutions. In the model, a cooperative cultural trait

evolves through vertical transmission. He then introduces institutions, which are `rules of the

game' that affect the payoffs to the different cultural types in the model. The institutions are

determined by majority voting. A potential equilibrium in the model is one where there are a

large number of non-cooperative types. They vote for institutions that do not punish those who do

not cooperate, which in turn increases the payoffs to non-cooperators. In another equilibrium, the

number of cooperators is high, they are able to implement institutions that punish deviations from

cooperation, which reduce the payoff to non-cooperators and increase the payoffs to cooperators,

thus sustaining this equilibrium. The model, therefore, shows how culture, which is endogenous

to the institutional structure, underpins the type of institutions that emerge.

   While I expect research on the interplay between culture and institutions to develop further

­ see Bisin and Verdier (2017) for a more recent example ­ I also expect the empirical research

on these questions to also develop further. There are a few examples of recent papers that have

sought to understand the effect of states and institutions on the evolution of cultural traits, but

much more remains to be understood. For example, the effect of state presence appears to be

different in the limited number of settings that have been studied and we really don't have a clear

sense of why yet (e.g., Becker, Boeckh, Hainz and Woessmann, 2016, Lowes, Nunn, Robinson and

Weigel, 2017, Dell, Lane and Querubin, 2018, Heldring, 2020).

   More generally, whatever specific direction future research takes, I expect that the contribution

of economists, particularly economic historians and political economists, to the study of cultural

evolution will continue to increase.


                                                 57
                                       5. Conclusions

In this chapter, I considered the benefits of viewing history through an evolutionary lens. The

first part of the chapter focused on thinking about the benefits of culture, discussing both the

theory and empirical evidence for the benefits of cultural evolution. The primary benefit of

culture is that it allows one to conserve on information acquisition costs and to relying on the

accumulated body of knowledge that has evolved during previous generations or in other parts

of society. Thus, culture allows the collective knowledge of a society to be much greater than

the information that any one person could learn in their lifetime. The theoretical models and

empirical evidence that I reviewed convincingly show that societies are better off when decision

making occurs through cultural processes.

   I then turned to a discussion of how an evolutionary perspective provides insights into a range

of phenomena that are important within economics. I discussed how insights into the reality of

knowledge and innovation can be gained by thinking of these as cumulative cultural processes.

I discussed how an understanding the nature of cultural evolution helps us better understand

the nature of historical persistence, path dependence, and variation in the success of societies.

I discussed evolutionary insights that improve our understanding of human history. These in-

cluded concepts such as environmental mismatch, the collective brain, cumulative improvements,

kludges, group-level selection, sexual dimorphism, and reproduction strategies. I discussed how

these provide insights into key aspects of economics history; namely, including human capital,

innovation, warfare, state formation, cooperation, social structure, gender roles, kinship, social

structure, path dependence, and comparative economic development.

   I ended the chapter by discussing the recent wave of research within economic history and

growth economics that studies, both theoretically and empirically, cultural evolution and its

importance for social and economic outcomes. I discussed the way this research has contributed

to the field of cultural evolution and how I expect this to continue in the future.



                                          References
Aghion, Philippe, Yann Algan, Pierre Cahuc, and Andrei Shleifer, "Regulation and Distrust,"
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (3), 1015­1049.

Alesina, Alberto and Nicola Fuchs-Schundeln, "Good-Bye Lenin (or Not?): The Effect of Com-
  munism on People's Preferences," American Economic Review, 2007, 94 (4), 1507­1528.


                                                 58
  , Edoardo Teso, and Stefanie Stantcheva, "Mobility and Preferences for Redistribution," Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 2013, 108 (2), 521­554.

  , Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, "On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the
  Plough," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (2), 469­530.

  , , and , "Traditional Agricultural Practices and the Sex Ratio Today," PLoS ONE, 2018, 13
  (1), e0190510.

Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc, "Inherited Trust and Growth," American Economic Review, 2010,
  100 (5), 2060­2092.

  and    , "Trust and Growth," Annual Review of Economics, 2013, 5, 521­549.

Alsan, Marcella and Marianne Wanamaker, "Tuskegee and the Health of Black Men," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (1), 407­455.

Andersen, Thomas Barnebeck, Jeanet Bentzen, Carl-Johan Dalgaard, and Paul Sharp, "Pre-
 Reformation Roots of the Protestant Ethic," Economic Journal, 2016, 127 (604), 1756­1793.

Andrews, Michael, "Bar Talk: Informal Social Interactions, Alcohol Prohibition, and Invention,"
 2019. Working paper.

Ang, James B. and Per G. Fredriksson, "Wheat Agriculture and Family Ties," European Economic
 Review, 2017, 100, 236­256.

  and    , "Wheat Agriculture and Family Ties," Journal of Economic Growth, forthcoming.

Aoki, Masahiko, Towards a Comparative Institutional Analysis, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2001.

Ashraf, Nava, Natalie Bau, Nathan Nunn, and Alessandra Voena, "Bride Price and Female
  Education," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (2), 591­641.

Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor, "The "Out of Africa" Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity,
  and Comparative Economic Development," American Economic Review, 2012, p. forthcoming.

Atkin, David, "The Caloric Costs of Culture: Evidence from Indian Migrants," American Economic
  Review, 2016, 106 (4), 1144­1181.

Baranov, Victoria, Ralph De Haas, and Pauline Grosjean, "Men. Roots and Consequences of
  Masculinity Norms," 2018. Working paper, University of Melbourne.

Bau, Natalie, "Can Policy Change Culture? Government Pension Plans and Traditional Kinship
  Practices," 2019. Working paper, University of California Los Angeles.

Bauer, Michal, Alessandra Cassar, Julie Chytilova, and Joseph Henrich, "War's Enduring Effects
  on the Development of Egalitarian Motivations and In-Group Biases," Psychological Science,
  2014, 25 (1), 47­57.

  , Christopher Blattman, Julie Chytilova, Joseph Henrich, Edward Miguel, and Tamar Mitts,
  "Can War Foster Cooperation?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2016, 30 (3), 249­274.

Bazzi, Samuel, Martin Fiszbein, and Mesay Gebresilasse, "Frontier Culture: The Roots and
  Persistence of "Rugged Individualism" in the United States," 2018. Working paper, Boston
  University.



                                              59
Beaman, Lori, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia Topalova,
  "Powerful Women: Does Exposure Reduce Bias?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4),
  1497­1540.

Becker, Anke, "On the Economic Origins of Restrictions on Women's Sexuality," 2019. Working
  Paper, Harvard University.

Becker, Sascha O. and Ludger Woessmann, "Luther and the Girls: Religious Denomination and
  the Female Education Gap in Nineteenth-Century Prussia," Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
  2008, 110 (4), 777­805.

   and , "Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of Protestant Economic History,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (2), 531­596.

  , Katrin Boeckh, Christa Hainz, and Ludger Woessmann, "The Empire is Dead, Long Live the
  Empire! Long-Run Persistence of Trust and Corruption in the Bureaucracy," Economic Journal,
  2016, 126 (590), 40­74.

Bell, Alex, Raj Chetty, Xavier Jaravel, Neviana Petkova, and John Van Reenen, "Who Becomes
  an Inventor in America? The Importance of Exposure to Innovation," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2019, 134 (2), 647­713.

Benjamin, Daniel J., David Cesarini, Christopher F. Chabris, Edward L. Glaeser, David I. Laib-
  son, Vilmundur Guonason, Tamara B. Harris, Lenore J. Launer, Shaun Purcell, Albert Vernon
  Smith, Magnus Johannesson, Patrik K.E. Magnusson, Jonathan P. Beauchamp, Nicholas A.
  Christakis, Craig S. Atwood, Benjamin Hebert, Jeremy Freese, Robert M. Hauser, Taissa S.
  Hauser, Alexander Grankvista, Christina M. Hultman, and Paul Lichtenstein, "The Promises
  and Pitfalls of Genoeconomics," Annual Review of Economics, 2012, 4, 627­662.

Bentzen, Jeanet Sinding, "Acts of God? Religiosity and Natural Disasters Across Subnational
  World Districts," Economic Journal, 2019, 129 (622), 2295­2321.

BenYishay, Pauline Grosjean Ariel and Joe Vecci, "The Fish is the Friend of Matriliny: Reef
  Density and Matrilineal Inheritance," Journal of Development Economics, 2017, 127, 234­249.

Bergh, Andreas and Richard Ohrvall, "A Sticky Trait: Social Trust Among Swedish Expatri-
  ates in Countries with Varying Institutional Quality," 2019. Journal of Comparative Economics,
  forthcoming.

Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson, "Democratic Values and Institutions," forthcoming. Amer-
  ican Economic Review ­ Insights, forthcoming.

Billing, Jennifer and Paul W. Sherman, "Antimicrobial Functions of Spices: Why Some Like it
  Hot," Quarterly Review of Biology, 1998, 73 (1), 3­49.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier, "Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Marriage
  and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2000, 115,
  955­988.

   and , "Agents with Imperfect Empathy May Survive Natural Selection," Economics Letters,
  2001, 71, 277­285.

  and , "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of Preferences," Journal of
  Economic Theory, 2001, 97, 298­319.


                                              60
   and , "On the Joint Evolution of Culture and Institutions," 2017. NBER Working Paper
  23375.

Bloom, Nicholas, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts, "Do Management
  Interventions Last? Evidence from India," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2020,
  12 (2), 198­219.

  , Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts, "Does Management
  Matter? Evidence from India," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (1), 1­51.

Blouin, Arthur, "Culture and Contracts: The Historical Legacy of Forced Labour," 2018. Working
  Paper, University of Toronto.

Booth, Alison, Elliott Fan, Xin Meng, and Dandan Zhang, "Gender Differences in Willingness
  to Compete: The Role of Culture and Institutions," Economic Journal, 2019, 129 (618), 734­764.

Bowles, Samuel, Microeconomics: Behavior, Institutions, and Evolution, Princeton: Princeton Univer-
  sity Press, 2004.

  , "Did Warfare among Ancestral Hunter-Gatherers Affect the Evolution of Human Social
  Behaviors?," Science, 2009, 324, 1293­1298.

   and Herbert Gintis, "How Communities Govern: The Structural Basis of Prosocial Norms,"
  in Avner Ben-Ner and Louis Putterman, eds., Economics, Values, and Organization, Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press, 1998, pp. 206­230.

   and , "The Moral Economy of Communities: Structured Populations and the Evolution of
  Pro-Social Norms," Evolution and Human Behavior, 1998, 19, 3­25.

  and    , "Social Capital and Community Governance," Economic Journal, 2002, 112, F419­F436.

Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process, London: University of
  Chicago Press, 1985.

   and , "Why Does Culture Increase Human Adaptability?," Ethology and Sociobiology, 1995,
  16, 125­143.

  and    , The Origin and Evolution of Cultures, London: Oxford University Press, 2005.

  , , and Joseph Henrich, "The Cultural Evolution of Technology: Facts and Theories," in Pe-
  ter J. Richerson and Morten Christiansen, eds., Cultural Evolution: Society, Technology, Language,
  and Religion, Strungmann Forum Reports, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013, pp. 119­142.

Brodeur, Abel and Joanne Haddad, "Institutions, Attitudes and LGBT: Evidence from the Gold
  Rush," 2018. Mimeo, University of Ottawa.

Burchardi, Konrad B., Thomas Chaney, and Tarek A. Hassan, "Migrants, Ancestors, and Invest-
  ments," Review of Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (4), 1448­1486.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Alessandra Gonzalez, and David Yanagizawa-Drott, "Misperceived Social
  Norms: Female Labor Force Participation in Saudi Arabia," forthcoming. American Economic
  Review.

Buss, David, The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human Mating, New York: Basic Books, 1994.

Buss, David M. and David P. Scmitt, "Sexual Strategies Theory: An Evolutionary Perspective on
  Human Mating," Psychological Review, 1993, 100, 204­232.

                                                61
Butler, Jeffrey V., Paola Giuliano, and Luigi Guiso, "The Right Amount of Trust," Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 2016, 14 (5), 1155­1180.
Campa, Pamela and Michel Serafinelli, "Politico-Economic Regimes and Attitudes: Female
  Workers under State-socialism," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2019, 101 (2), 233­248.
Campante, Felipe and David Yanagizawa-Drott, "Does Religion Affect Economic Growth and
  Happiness? Evidence from Ramadan," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (2), 615­658.
   and , "The Intergenerational Transmission of War," 2016. Working paper, Harvard Kennedy
  School.
  and , "Long-Range Growth: Economic Development in the Global Network of Air Links,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (3), 1395­1458.
   and Davin Chor, ""Just Do Your Job": Obedience, Routine Tasks, and the Pattern of Special-
  ization," 2017. Working paper, Harvard Kennedy School.
Cantoni, Davide, Yuyu Chen, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Y. Jane Zhang, "Curriculum
  and Ideology," Journal of Political Economy, April 2017, 125 (2), 338­392.
Cassar, Alessandra, Andrew Healy, and Carl von Kessler, "Trust, Risk, and Time Preferences
  After a Natural Disaster: Experimental Evidence from Thailand," World Development, 2017, 94,
  90­105.
  , Pauline Grosjean, and Sam Whitt, "Legacies of Violence: Trust and Market Development,"
  Journal of Economic Growth, 2013, 18, 285­318.
Cavalli-Sforza, L.L. and M.W. Feldman, Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative
  Approach, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981.
Cervellati, Matteo, Giorgi Chiovelli, and Elena Esposito, "Bite and Divide: Malaria and Ethno-
  linguistic Diversity," 2019. Working paper, University of Bologna.
Cesarini, David, Christopher T. Dawes, James H. Fowler, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichten-
  stein, and Bjorn Wallace, "Heritability of Cooperative Behavior in the Trust Game," Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, March 2008, 105 (10), 3721­3726.
  , , , , , and , "Genetic Variation in Preferences for Giving and Risk Taking," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, May 2009, 124 (2), 809­842.
Chaudhary, Latika, Sriya Iyer, Jared Rubin, and Anand Shrivastava, "Culture and Colonial
 Legacy: Evidence from Public Goods Games," 2018. Working paper, Naval Postgraduate
 School.
Chudek, Maciek, Michale Muthukrishna, and Joseph Henrich, "Cultural Evolution," in
 David M. Buss, ed., Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology, 2nd Edition, New York: Wiley, 2015.
Claessens, Leon P.A.M., Hanneke J.M. Meijer, and Julian P. Hume, "The Morphology of the
  Thirioux Dodos," Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 2015, 35, 29­187.
Clark, Gregory, A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World, Princeton: Princeton
  University Press, 2007.
Clingingsmith, David, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Michael Kremer, "Estimating the Impact of the
  Hajj: Religion and Tolerance in Islam's Global Gathering," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009,
  124 (3), 1133­1170.

                                               62
Cook, Lisa, "Violence and Economic Growth: Evidence from African American Patents, 1870­
 1940," Journal of Economic Growth, 2014, 19 (2), 221­257.

Cornelson, Kirsten, "Media Role Models and Black Educational Attainment: Evidence from the
  Cosby Show," 2018. Working paper, University of Notre Dame.

Corno, Lucia, Nicole Hildebrandt, and Alessandra Voena, "Age of Marriage, Weather Shocks,
  and the Direction of Marriage Payments," 2019. Econometrica, forthcoming.

Couttenier, Mattheu, Pauline Grosjean, and Marc Sangnier, "The Wild West is Wild: The
  Homicide Resource Curse," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2017, 15 (3), 558­585.

Dawkins, Richard, The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence of Evolution Reveals a Universe without
 Design, New York: W.W. Norton, 1986.

  , Climbing Mount Improbable, New York: W.W. Norton, 1996.

Dell, Melissa and Pablo Querubin, "The Historical State, Local Collective Action, and Economic
 Development in Vietnam," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (2), 701­764.

  , Nathan Lane, and Pablo Querubin, "The Historical State, Local Collective Action, and
  Economic Development in Vietnam," Econometrica, 2018, 86 (6), 2083­2121.

  , , and , "The Historical State, Local Collective Action, and Economic Development in
  Vietnam," Econometrica, 2019, 86 (6), 2083­2121.

Della Vigna, Stefano and Ethan Kaplan, "The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting,"
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122, 1187­1234.

Depetris-Chauvin, Emilio, Ruben Durante, and Felipe R. Campante, "Building Nations
 Through Shared Experiences: Evidence from African Football," American Economic Review, 2020,
 110 (5), 1572­1602.

Derex, Maxime, Marie-Pauline Beugin, Bernard Godelle, and Michel Raymond, "Experimental
 Evidence for the Influence of Group Size on Cultural Complexity," Nature, 2013, 503, 389­391.

Dincecco, Mark and Massimiliano Gaetano Onorato, From Warfare to Wealth, Cambridge: Cam-
  bridge University Press, 2017.

Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti, "Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism,"
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (2), 747­793.

   and , "Culture, Entrepreneurship, and Growth," in Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf,
  eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, New York: Elsevier, 2014, pp. 1­48.

   and , "Parenting with Style: Altruism and Paternalism in Intergenerational Preference
  Transmission," Econometrica, 2017, 67 (5), 1331­1337.

Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, "Patience and Comparative
 Development," 2018. Working paper, University of Bonn.

Easterly, William, The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists? Adventures and Misadventures in the
  Tropics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.

Ehrenfeld, David W. and Archie Carr, "The Role of Vision in the Sea-Finding Orientation of the
  Green Turtle (Chelonia Myadas)," Animal Behavior, 1967, 15 (1), 25­26.


                                              63
Ely, Jeffrey C., "Kludged," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2011, 3, 210­231.

Enke, Benjamin, "Kinship, Cooperation, and the Evolution of Moral Systems," Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2019, 134 (2), 953­1019.

  , "Moral Values and Voting," forthcoming. Journal of Political Economy.

  , Ricardo Rodriguez-Padilla, and Florian Zimmerman, "Moral Universalism and the Structure
  of Ideology," 2019. Working paper, Harvard University.

Fenske, James, "African Polygamy: Past and Present," Journal of Development Economics, 2014,
  117, 58­73.

Fernandez, Raquel, "Cultural Change as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force Partici-
  pation over a Century," American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1), 472­450.

  , Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti, "Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and
  Female Labor Force Dynamics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119, 1249­1299.

  , Sahar Parsa, and Martina Viarengo, "Coming Out in America: AIDS, Politics, and Cultural
  Change," 2019. Working paper, New York University.

Figlio, David, Paola Giuliano, Umut Ozek, and Paola Sapienza, "Long-Term Orientation and
  Educational Performance," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2019, 11 (4), 272­309.

Fouka, Vasiliki, "Backlash: The Unintended Effects of Language Prohibition in U.S. Schools after
  World War I," Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (1), 204­239.

   and Alain Schlapfer, "Agricultural Returns to Labor and the Origins of Work Ethics," Economic
  Journal, 2020, 130 (628), 1081­1113.

Francois, Patrick, Thomas Fujiwara, and Tanguy van Ypersele, "Competition Builds Trust," 2010.
  Working paper, University of British Columbia.

  , , and , "The Origins of Human Prosociality: Cultural Group Selection in the Workplace
  and the Laboratory," Science Advances, 2018, 4 (9), eaat2201.

Friedman, Matt, "The Evolutionary Origin of Flatfish Asymmetry," Nature, 2008, 454, 209­212.

Galef, Bennett G. and Elaine E. Whiskin, "Effects of Environmental Stability and Demonstrator
 Age on Social Learning of Food Preferences by Young Norway Rats," Animal Behavior, 2004, 68
 (4), 897­902.

Galor, Oded and Omer Moav, "Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth," Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (4), 1133­1191.

   and Omer Ozak, "The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference," American Economic Review,
  2016, 106 (10), 3064­3103.

   and Stelios Michalopoulos, "Evolution and the Growth Process: Natural Selection of En-
  trepreneurial Traits," Journal of Economic Theory, 2012, 147 (2), 759­780.

  and Viacheslav Savitskiy, "Climatic Roots of Loss Aversion," 2018. Working paper, Brown
  University.

Gelfand, Michele, Rule Makers, Rule Breakers, New York: Simon & Schuster Inc., 2018.


                                               64
Gennaioli, Nicola and Hans Joachim Voth, "State Capacity and Military Conflict," Review of
 Economic Studies, 2015, 82, 1409­1448.

Gershman, Boris, "Witchcraft Beliefs as a Cultural Legacy of the Atlantic Slave Trade: Evidence
 from Two Continents," 2019. Working paper, American University.

Gigerenzer, Gerd and Daniel G. Goldstein, "Reasoning the Fast and Frugal Way: Models of
  Bounded Rationality," Psychological Review, 1996, 103 (4), 650­669.

Gintis, Herbert, "A Markov Model of Production, Trade, and Money: Theory and Artificial Life
  Simulation," Computation & Mathematical Organization Theory, 1997, 3, 19­41.

  , Game Theory Evolving, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2000.

Giuliano, Paola and Antonio Spilimbergo, "Growing Up in a Recession," Review of Economic
  Studies, 2014, 81 (3), 787­817.

  and Nathan Nunn, "The Transmission of Democracy: From the Village to the Nation State,"
  American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2013, 103 (3), 86­92.

   and , "Understanding Cultural Persistence and Change," forthcoming. Review of Economic
  Studies.

Gold, Maria Eugenia Leone, Estelle Bourdon, and Mark A. Norell, "The First Endocast of the
 Extinct Dodo (Raphus Cucullatus) and an Anatomical Comparison Amongst Close Relatives
 (Aves, Columbiformes)," Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 2016, 177, 950­963.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Gerard Roland, "Individualism, Innovation, and Long-Run Growth,"
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2011, 108 (4), 21316­21319.

   and , "Culture, Institutions, and Democratization," 2015. Working paper, University of
  California Berkeley.

   and , "Culture, Institutions, and the Wealth of Nations," Review of Economics and Statistics,
  2017, 99 (3), 402­416.

  , Bohdan Kukharskyy, and Gerard Roland, "Cultural Distance, Firm Boundaries, and Global
  Sourcing," 2018. Working paper, University of California Berkeley.

Greif, Avner, "Reputation and Coalitions in Medieval Trade: Evidence on the Maghribi Traders,"
 Journal of Economic History, 1989, 49, 857­882.

  , "Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The Maghribi Traders'
  Coalition," American Economic Review, 1993, 83 (3), 525­548.

  , "Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on
  Collectivist and Individualist Societies," Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102 (5), 912­950.

Grosjean, Pauline, "A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor as a Determinant of Homicide
 in the U.S. South," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2014, 12 (5), 1285­1316.

  and Rose Khattar, "It's Raining Men! Hallelujah? The Long-Run Consequences of Male-Biased
  Sex Ratios," Review of Economic Studies, 2018, 86 (2), 723­754.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, "Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?,"
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (2), 23­48.


                                               65
  , , and , "Social Capital as Good Culture," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2008,
  6 (2-3), 295­320.

  , , and , "Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124
  (3), 1095­1131.

  , , and , "Long-Term Persistence," 2016. Journal of the European Economic Association,
  forthcoming.

Gustafsson, Anders and Patrik Lindenfors, "Human Size Evolution: No Evolutionary Allometric
 Relationship Between Male and Female Stature," Journal of Human Evolution, 2004, 47 (4), 253­
 266.

Heldring, Leander, "The Origins of Violence in Rwanda," 2020. Review of Economic Studies,
 forthcoming.

Heller, Sara B., Anuj K. Shah, Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan, and
 Harold A. Pollack, "Thinking, Fast and Slow? Some Field Experiments to Reduce Crime and
 Dropout in Chicago," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (1), 1­54.

Henrich, Joseph, "Cultural Group Selection, Coevolutionary Processes and Large-Scale Cooper-
 ation," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2004, 53 (1), 3­35.

  , "Demography and Cultural Evolution: How Adaptive Cultural Processes can Produce Mal-
  adaptive Losses ­ The Tasmanian Case," American Antiquity, 2004, 69 (2), 197­214.

  , The Secret of Our Success, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2016.

  , The Weirdest People in the World: How Westerners Became Psychologically Peculiar and Particularly
  Prosperous 2020.

  , Michal Bauer, Alessandra Cassar, Julie Chytilova, and Benjamin Grant Purzycki, "War
  Increases Religiosity," Nature Human Behavior, 2019, 3, 129­135.

  , Steven J. Heine, and Ara Norenzayan, "Most People are not WEIRD," Nature, 2010, 466 (29).

  , , and     , "The Weirdest People in the World," Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2010, 33 (2/3),
  1­75.

Hume, Julian P., "The History of the Dodo Raphus Cucullatus and the Penguin of Mauritius,"
 Historical Biology, 2006, 18 (2), 69­93.

Jakiela, Pamela and Owen Ozier, "The Impact of Violence on Individual Risk Preferences:
  Evidence from a Natural Experiment," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2019, 101 (3), 547­559.

Jayachandran, Seema and Rohini Pande, "Why Are Indian Children So Short? The Role of Birth
  Order and Son Preference," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (9), 2600­2629.

Jensen, Robert and Emily Oster, "The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women's Status in
  India," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1057­1094.

Kahneman, Daniel, Thinking, Fast and Slow, London: Macmillan, 2011.

Kamarck, Andrew M., Culture Under Cross-Examination: International Justice and the Special Court
 for Sierra Leone, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009.



                                                 66
Karaja, Elira and Jared Rubin, "The Cultural Transmission of Trust Norms: Evidence from a Lab
 in the Field on a Natural Experiment," 2017. Working paper, Chapman University.

Katz, S.H., M.L. Hediger, and L.A. Valleroy, "Traditional Maize Processing Techniques in the
 New World," Science, 1974, 184 (4138), 765­773.

Kawai, Keiichi, Ruitian Lang, and Hongyi Li, "Political Kludges," American Economic Journal:
 Microeconomics, 2018, 10 (4), 131­158.

Kine, Michelle A. and Robert Boyd, "Population Size Predicts Technological Complexity in
  Oceania," Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 2010.

Kobayashi, Yutaka and Kenichi Aoki, "Innovativeness, Population Size, and Cumulative Cul-
 tural Evolution," Theoretical Population Biology, 2012, 82, 38­47.

Kosse, Fabian, Thomas Deckers, Hannah Schildberg-Horisch, and Armin Falk, "The Formation
 of Prosociality: Causal Evidence on the Role of the Social Environment," 2019. Journal of Political
 Economy, forthcoming.

Kremer, Michael, "Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108 (3), 681­716.

La Ferrara, Eliana, Alberto Chong, and Suzanne Duryea, "Soap Operas and Fertility: Evidence
  from Brazil," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2012, 4 (4), 1­31.

Long, Jason and Joseph Ferrie, "Occupational Mobility in Great Britain and the United States
  since 1850," American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (4), 1109­1137.

Lowes, Sara, "Matrilineal Kinship and Spousal Cooperation: Evidence from the Matrilineal Belt,"
  2018. Working paper, Stanford University.

   and Eduardo Montero, "Mistrust in Medicine: The Legacy of Colonial Medicine Campaigns
  in Central Africa," 2017. Working paper, Bocconi University.

  and , "Concessions, Violence and Indirect Rule: Evidence from the Congo Free State," 2019.
  Working paper, Stanford University.

  , Nathan Nunn, James A. Robinson, and Jonathan Weigel, "The Evolution of Culture and
  Institutions: Evidence from the Kuba Kingdom," Econometrica, 2017, 85 (4), 1065­1091.

Madestam, Andreas and David Yanagizawa-Drott, "Shaping the Nation: The Effect of the Fourth
 of July on Political Preferences and Behavior in the United States," 2011. Working paper,
 Harvard University.

  , Daniel Shoag, Stan Veuger, and David Yanagizawa-Drott, "Do Political Protests Matter?
  Evidence from the Tea Party Movement," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (4), 1633­1685.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil, "A Contribution to the Empirics of
 Economic Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107, 407­437.

McElreath, Richard, Mark Lubell, Peter J. Richerson, Timothy M. Waring, William Baum,
 Edward Edstein, Charles Efferson, and Brian Paciotti, "Applying Evolutionary Models to
 the Laboratory Study of Social Learning," Evolution and Human Behavior, 2005, 26, 483­508.

Mesoudi, Alex, "Cultural Evolution: A Review of Theory, Findings and Controversies," Evolu-
 tionary Biology, 2016, 43, 481­497.

                                                67
Michalopoulos, Stelios, "The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity," American Economic Review,
 2012, 102 (4), 1508­1539.

  , Alireza Naghavi, and Giovanni Prarolo, "Trade and Geography in the Spread of Islam,"
  Economic Journal, 2018, 128 (616), 3210­3241.

Mitchener, Kris James and Ian W. McLean, "The Productivity of U.S. States Since 1880," Journal
 of Economic Growth, 2003, 8, 73­114.

Mitrunen, Matti, "Can you Make an American? Compulsory Patriotism and Assimilation of
 Immigrants," 2019. Working paper, University of Chicago.

Mokyr, Joel, A Culture of Growth: The Origins of the Modern Economy, Princeton: Princeton
 University press, 2018.

Moscona, Jacob, Nathan Nunn, and James A. Robinson, "Keeping It in the Family: Lineage
 Organization and the Scope of Trust in Sub-Saharan Africa," American Economic Review Papers
 and Proceedings, 2017, 107 (5), 565­571.

  ,  , and , "Kinship and Conflict: Evidence from Segmentary Lineage Societies in Sub-
  Saharan Africa," 2019. Econometrica, forthcoming.

Muthukrishna, Michael, Adrian V. Bell, Joseph Henrich, Cameron M. Curtin, Alexander
 Gedranovich, Jason McInerney, and Braden Thue, "Beyond Western, Educated, Industrial,
 Rich, and Democratic (WEIRD) Psychology: Measuring and Mapping Scales of Cultural and
 Psychological Distance," Psychological Science, 2020, 31 (6), 678­701.

   and Edward Slingerland, "Psychology as a Historical Science," Annual Review of Psychology,
  forthcoming.

   and Joseph Henrich, "Innovation and the Collective Brain," Philosophical Transactions B, 2016,
  371, 20150192.

  , Ben W. Shulman, Vlad Vasilescu, and Joseph Henrich, "Sociality Influences Cultural Com-
  plexity," Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 2014, 281, 20132511.

Nguyen, Kieu-Trang, "Trust and Innovation within the Firm: Evidence from Matched CEO-Firm
 Data," 2018. Working paper, London School of Economics.

Norman, J.R., A Systematic Monograph of the Flatfishes (Heterosomata). Vol. 1. Psettotidae, Bothidae,
 Pleuronectidae, London: The Trustees of the British Museum, 1934.

Nunn, Nathan, "Historical Legacies: A Model Linking Africa's Past to its Current Underdevel-
 opment," Journal of Development Economics, 2007, 83 (1), 157­175.

  , "Slavery, Inequality, and Economic Development in the Americas: An Examination of the
  Engerman-Sokoloff Hypothesis," in Elhanan Helpman, ed., Institutions and Economic Perfor-
  mance, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008, pp. 148­180.

  , "Religious Conversion in Colonial Africa," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
  2010, 100 (2), 147­152.

  , "On the Causes and Consequences of Cross-Cultural Differences: An Economic Perspective,
  Volume 8," in Michele J. Gelfand, Chi-Yue Chiu, and Ying-Yi Hong, eds., Advances in Culture
  and Psychology, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2021, p. forthcoming.


                                                 68
   and Leonard Wantchekon, "The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa," American
  Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3221­3252.

   and Raul Sanchez de la Sierra, "Why Being Wrong Can Be Right: Magical Warfare Technolo-
  gies and the Persistence of False Beliefs," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2017,
  107 (5), 582­587.

  , Nancy Qian, and Jaya Wen, "Distrust and Political Turnover," 2019. Working paper, Harvard
  University.

Okoye, Dozie, "Things Fall Apart? Missions, Institutions, and Interpersonal Trust?," 2017.
 Working paper, Dalhousie University.

Olken, Benjamin, "Do Television and Radio Destroy Social Capital?," American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (4), 1­33.

Platteau, Jean-Philippe, Microeconomics: Behavior, Institutions, and Evolution, Singapore: Harwood
  Academic Publishers, 2000.

Qian, Nancy, "Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effects of Sex-Specific Income
  on Sex Imbalance," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (3), 1251­1285.

Ramos-Toro, Diego, "Social Exclusion and Social Preferences: Evidence from Colombia's Leper
  Colony," 2019. Working paper, Brown University.

Rao, Gautam, "Familiarity Does Not Breed Contempt: Diversity, Discrimination, and Generosity
  in Delhi Schools," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (3), 774­809.

Richerson, Peter, Ryan Baldini, Adrian V. Bell, Kathryn Demps, Karl Frost, Vicken Hillis,
  Sarah Mathew, Emily K. Newton, Nicole Naar, Lesley Newson, Cody Ross, Paul E. Smaldino,
  Timothy M. Waring, and Matthew Zefferman, "Cultural Group Selection Plays and Essential
  Role in Explaining Human Cooperation: A Sketch of the Evidence," Behavioral and Brain
  Sciences, 2016, 39, e30.

Riley, Emma, "Increasing Students' Aspirations: The Impact of Queen of Katwe on Students'
  Educational Attainment," 2017. CSAE Working Paper WPS/207-13.

Rogers, Alan R., "Does Biology Constrain Culture?," American Anthropologist, 1988, 90 (4), 819­
 831.

Rubin, Jared, "Printing and Protestants: An Empirical Test of the Role of Printing in the Refor-
 mation," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2014, 96 (2), 270­286.

Ruff, Christopher, "Variation in Human Body Size and Shape," Annual Review of Anthropology,
 2002, 31, 211­232.

Rustagi, Devesh, "Historical Self-Governance and Norms of Cooperation," 2019. Working paper,
 Brown University.

Sacerdote, Bruce, "How Large Are the Effects from Changes in Family Environment? A Study of
  Korean American Adoptees," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (1), 119­157.

Salmon, Michael, Melissa Garro Tolbert, Danielle Pender Painter, Matthew Goff, and Ray-
  mond Reiners, "Behavior of Loggerhead Sea Turtles on an Urban Beach. II. Hatchling Orienta-
  tion," Journal of Herpetology, 1995, 29 (4), 568­576.


                                                69
Schulz, Jonathan, "The Churches' Bans on Consanguineous Marriages, Kin Networks and
  Democracy," 2017. Working paper, Yale University.
  , Duman Bahrami-Rad, Jonathan Beauchamp, and Joseph Henrich, "The Church, Intensive
  Kinship, and Global Psychological Variation," Science, 2019, 366 (6466), eaau5141.
Sequeira, Sandra, Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian, "Immigrants and the Making of America,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (1), 382­419.
Sinclair-Thomas, Brent and Sam Challis, "The `Bullets to Water' Belief Complex: A Pan-
  Southern African Cognate Epistemology for Protective Medicines and the Control fo Projec-
  tiles," Journal of Conflict Archaeology, 2017, 12 (3), 192­208.
Speck, Frank G., Naskapi: The Savage Hunters of the Labrador Peninsula, Norman: University of
  Oklahoma Press, 1935.
Spolaore, Enrico and Romain Wacziarg, "The Diffusion of Development," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2009, 124 (2), 469­529.
Tabellini, Guido, "The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2008, 123 (3), 905­950.
Talhelm, Thomas, X. Zhang, S. Oishi, C. Shimin, D. Duan, X. Lan, and X. Kitayama, "Large-
  Scale Psychological Differences Within China Explained by Rice Versus Wheat Agriculture,"
  Science, 2014, 344 (6184), 603­608.
Teso, Edoardo, "The Long-Term Effects of Demographic Shocks on the Evolution of Gender Roles:
  Evidence from the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2019,
  17 (2), 497­534.
Tilly, Charles, Coercion, Capital and European States, A.D. 990­1990, Cambridge: Blackwell Pub-
  lishers, 1990.
Todd, Gerd Gigerenzer Peter M. and The ABC Research Group, Simple Heuristics that Make Us
  Smart, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Toelch, Ulf, Marjolijn J. van Delft, Matthew J. Bruce, Rogier Donders, Marius T.H. Meeus, and
  Simon M. Reader, "Decreased Environmental Variability Induces a Bias for Social Information
  Use in Humans," Evolution and Human Behavior, 2009, 30 (1), 32­40.
Trivers, Robert L., "Parental Investment and Sexual Selection," in B. Campbell, ed., Sexual
  Selection and Descent of Man, 1871­1971, Chicago: Aldine, 1972, pp. 136­179.
Tur-Prats, Ana and Felipe Valencia Caicedo, "The Long Shadow of the Spanish Civil War," 2020.
  Working paper, University of British Columbia.
Turchin, Peter, Historical Dynamics: Why States Rise and Fall, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
  2003.
  , War and Peace and War: The Life Cycles of Imperial Nations, New York: Pi Press, 2006.
  , How 10,000 Years of War Made Humans the Greatest Cooperators on Earth, Chaplin, Connecticut:
  Beresta Books, 2016.
  , Thomas E. Currie, Edward A. L. Turner, and Sergey Gavrilets, "War, space, and the evolution
  of Old World complex societies," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013, 110, 16384­
  16389.

                                                 70
Vaesen, Krist, "Cumulative Cultural Evolution and Demography," PLoS One, 2012, 7 (7), e40989.

Vehrencamp, Sandra L., "A Model for the Evolution of Despotic Versus Egalitarian Societies,"
  Animal Behavior, 1983, 31, 667­682.

Xue, Melanie Meng, "High-Value Work and the Rise of Women: The Cotton Revolution and
  Gender Equality in China," 2018. Working paper, Northwestern University.




                                             71
