                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            CONFIDENCE AND THE PROPAGATION OF DEMAND SHOCKS

                                  George-Marios Angeletos
                                         Chen Lian

                                     Working Paper 27702
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27702


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




This paper subsumes earlier versions that were entitled "A (Real) Theory of the Keynesian
Multiplier" and "On the Propagation of Demand Shocks" and that contained somewhat different
frameworks. For helpful comments and suggestions, We are grateful to the editor, Veronica
Guerrieri, and three anonymous referees for extensive feedback that helped improve and reshape
the paper. We also thank for useful comments Marty Eichenbaum, Susanto Basu, and seminar
participants at NYU, MIT, FSU, the 2018 AEA meeting, the 2018 SED meeting, and the 2020
NBER Summer Institute. Angeletos acknowledges the financial support of the National Science
Foundation (Award #1757198). Lian acknowledges the financial support from Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation Pre-doctoral Fellowship in Behavioral Macroeconomics, awarded through the NBER.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by George-Marios Angeletos and Chen Lian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Confidence and the Propagation of Demand Shocks
George-Marios Angeletos and Chen Lian
NBER Working Paper No. 27702
August 2020
JEL No. E03,E10,E13,E32

                                         ABSTRACT

We revisit the question of why shifts in aggregate demand drive business cycles. Our theory
combines intertemporal substitution in production with rational confusion (or bounded
rationality) in consumption. The first element allows aggregate supply to respond to shifts in
aggregate demand without nominal rigidity. The second introduces a "confidence multiplier,"
namely a positive feedback loop between real economic activity, consumer expectations of
permanent income, and investor expectations of returns. This mechanism amplifies the business-
cycle fluctuations triggered by demand shocks (but not those triggered by supply shocks); it helps
investment to comove with consumption; and it allows front-loaded fiscal stimuli to crowd in
private spending.


George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics, E52-530
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu

Chen Lian
Evans Hall
University Dr
Berkeley, CA 94720
chen_lian@berkeley.edu
1        Introduction

Fluctuations in consumer spending, such as those triggered by financial shocks, appear to cause busi-
ness cycles in the data (Mian and Sufi, 2014). Yet, the theoretical mechanism through which such a
drop in aggregate demand can precipitate a recession is debatable.
        To fix ideas, take the textbook New Keynesian model and consider a negative discount rate shock--
a standard proxy for shocks in consumer credit and other shifts in consumer spending. Insofar as
monetary policy stabilizes inflation, which is the same as replicating flexible-price outcomes, the drop
in aggregate demand does not generate a recession. It only triggers a perfectly-offsetting movement in
the natural rate of interest. How does the model then make room for demand-driven business-cycles?
By equating aggregate demand shocks to monetary contractions (relative to flexible-price outcomes)
and to movements along a Phillips curve (requiring a positive relationship between real economic
activity and inflation).
        This seems unsatisfactory, not only for intellectual reasons but also on empirical grounds. Phillips
curves are elusive in the data (Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Møller, and Stock, 2014; McLeay and Tenreyro,
2020). And the principal component of the business cycle fits better the template of a non-inflationary,
non-monetary demand shock (Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas, 2020). In our view, this calls for a theory
that is Keynesian in the sense of letting aggregate demand shocks be the main business-cycle driver
but neoclassical in the sense of not relying on nominal rigidity.
        The theory articulated in this paper combines two key elements. The first element, intertemporal
substitution in production via variable utilization, opens the door to demand-driven fluctuations in
the natural rate of output. The second element, rational confusion or bounded rationality in the
demand side of the economy, introduces a "confidence multiplier." This is a feedback loop between
outcomes and expectations that amplifies demand shocks (but not necessarily supply shocks), helps
investment comove with consumption, and lets government spending crowd in private spending.

A non-vertical AS curve. In the textbook New Keynesian model, there is no room for demand-driven
business cycles because Aggregate Supply (AS) is vertical in the sense that the aggregate production
of today's goods is irresponsive to their relative price, i.e., the real interest rate.1 Our contribution
starts with the elementary observation that the AS curve becomes non-vertical once we allow for
intertemporal substitution in production via variable capacity utilization.2
        This supply-side margin, which does not require any departure from full information, seems em-
pirically relevant on its own right: utilization is strongly pro-cyclical in the data. But a literal interpre-
tation of this element of our theory is not strictly needed: as long as there is some neoclassical margin
    1
     Note that here we have in mind an AS curve in the space of real output today vs its relative price. This differs from
the Keynesian tradition that casts the AS curve a Phillips curve, namely as a positive relation between real output and the
nominal price level, or the nominal inflation rate.
   2
     More specifically, our baseline model introduces variable utilization of land. This mimics capital utilization (e.g.,
Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman, 1988) but abstracts, tentatively, from investment. An extension adds investment and
clarifies that the relevant margin remains active as long as there are adjustment costs to capital.


                                                            1
of intertemporal substitution in production, the second part of our contribution, which regards the
Aggregate Demand (AD) side of the economy, goes through.

AD and the confidence multiplier. With fully informed and fully rational consumers, the AD side of
our model is standard: it boils down to the Euler condition of a representative consumer. We depart
from this benchmark by letting consumers confuse aggregate and idiosyncratic income fluctuations
when deciding how much to spend. In our main analysis, such confusion is rational, resulting from
lack of information about, or inattention to, aggregate economic conditions.3 But it could also be the
product of bounded rationality. Our key insight is that this friction introduces a Keynesian feedback
loop in our neoclassical economy.
       Following a negative AD shock, firms cut down on utilization and, along with it, labor demand
and production. Consumers experience a drop in their current employment and income but can't tell
whether this was because of a negative AD shock or an adverse idiosyncratic shock. For the reason
explained next, this causes them to perceive a reduction in their permanent income even though no
such reduction actually takes place.
       In our environment, AD shocks have zero effect on aggregate permanent income, regardless of how
large or persistent they are; they only shift the intertemporal decomposition of aggregate permanent
income, not its total value. This property may seem counterintuitive under Keynesian thinking. But
in a neoclassical economy such as ours, it follows naturally from a dynamic translation of Hulten's
theorem.4 And it has the following key implication for our purposes: as long as consumers confuse
aggregate income fluctuations for idiosyncratic ones, a negative AD shock causes them to turn pes-
simistic about their permanent income, even though permanent income is actually fixed.
       Consumers thus lose confidence, in the sense that they become excessively pessimistic relative to
the full-information benchmark. As they do so, they also spend less, amplifying the original drop
in aggregate demand. This feeds into a further cut in employment and output, a further drop in
confidence, and so on. This is the crux of our "confidence multiplier."

Discounting the GE adjustment in the real interest rate. Our confidence multiplier is active even
if the AD shock lasts only one period. When it is persistent, an additional mechanism emerges: con-
sumers discount the future GE adjustment in real interest rates, because they perceive the concurrent
adjustment as "noise" and/or they under-estimate how much others are reducing their spending.
       This mechanism is akin to the form of GE attenuation articulated in Angeletos and Lian (2018) with
the help of incomplete information, and the close relatives obtained in Farhi and Werning (2019) and
Gabaix (2020) with the help of bounded rationality. But whereas in the New Keynesian context of those
   3
     This follows the traditions of Lucas (1973) and Sims (2003). See also Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009) for why agents
may optimally choose to be little informed about aggregate shocks, and Carroll et al. (2020) for a related application in
consumption that supports the kind of confusion assumed here.
   4
     Another way to understand this property is this: In the textbook New Keynesian model, AD shocks influence permanent
income by triggering procyclical gaps from the natural rate of output. But as long as monetary policy replicates flexible-price
outcomes, AD shocks do not affect permanent income, regardless of whether they affect the natural rate of output itself.



                                                              2
papers GE attenuation translates to under-reaction of the output gap to news about future monetary
policy, in our neoclassical context it maps to over-reaction of the natural rate of output to aggregate
demand shocks.5 This mechanism thus complements our confidence multiplier in amplifying the
business cycles triggered by such shocks.

Behavioral reinterpretation. The last paragraph hinted at how bounded rationality could substitute
for incomplete information vis-a-vis the form of discounting discussed above. A similar point applies
to our confidence multiplier: the same feedback loop may obtain in variants in which agents are fully
informed but form simple extrapolative beliefs as in Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) and Gennaioli, Ma,
and Shleifer (2016), or hold a sparse representation of the world as in Molavi (2019). This clarifies that
the essential friction is the failure of consumers to differentiate their behavior between idiosyncratic
and aggregate shocks as finely as assumed in standard macro models. And it allows for a behavioral
re-interpretation of our confidence multiplier, which we welcome.

Supply shocks. Consider aggregate supply shocks, namely aggregate TFP shocks. Such shocks do
affect permanent income, so their confusion with idiosyncratic shocks has an ambiguous effect on
consumer confidence: consumers under-estimate the aggregate fluctuations in permanent income at
the same time that they over-estimate the idiosyncratic ones. In an empirically plausible benchmark,
these effects wash out and our confidence multiplier is switched off.
       Furthermore, because the GE adjustment in the real interest rate triggered by supply shocks is the
reverse of that triggered by demand shocks, the effect of the second mechanism is also the reverse:
when consumers under-estimate the adjustment in future real interest rates, they respond more to
demand shocks but less to supply shocks.
       All in all, supply shocks are thus dampened at the same time that demand shocks are amplified. In
combination with the assumption of flexible prices, or the absence of a Phillips curve, this allows our
theory to match the disconnect of the business cycle from both inflation and TFP.6

Comovement. Our baseline analysis abstracts from investment. If we add investment but let it be de-
cided with full information and full rationality, we run on a familiar comovement "puzzle." Whenever
consumers spend less, investment picks up some of the slack, simply because the cost of investment
(the real interest rate) goes down in equilibrium. Consumption and investment thus move in opposite
directions, which is at odds with the data.7
   5
     This reflects an important difference in the underlying form of strategic interaction, or the way higher-order beliefs
matter. See Section 5.4 for more details.
   6
     Consistent with our theory, here we have in mind utilization-adjusted TFP in the data, as in Basu, Fernald, and Kimball
(2006). See also Blanchard and Quah (1989), Gali (1999), Barsky and Sims (2011) and Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2020)
for additional facets of the disconnect between technology and business cycles.
   7
     This puzzle extends from the baseline RBC framework to state-of-the-art DSGE models despite their use of flat Phillips
curves, accommodative monetary policies, and various "bells and whistles." It is present, for instance, in Justiniano,
Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010) and Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014) not only for discount-rate shocks but also for
the kind of investment-specific shocks these papers focus on.




                                                             3
        A version of our confidence multiplier applied to investment decisions helps resolve this puzzle.
Insofar as investors are subject to a similar confusion as consumers, a temporary drop in either the
household or the business component of aggregate demand can trigger a drop in both consumer
confidence (expectations of income) and investor sentiment (expectations of returns). This allows
investment and consumption to comove. All in all, our theory therefore has the potential of fitting
simultaneously the following key stylized facts: positive comovement between aggregate employment,
output, consumption and investment, without commensurate comovement in either TFP or inflation.

Borrowers and savers.             For essentially the same reason as that articulated above, our theory helps
generate comovement across different consumers. In particular, when only a subset of the population
is hit by an exogenous discount-rate shock (think of them as "borrowers" responding to a "credit
crunch"), both the misperception of permanent income and the discounting of the future GE ad-
justment in the real interest rate contribute towards making the remaining agents (the "savers") cut
down their spending, too. This illustrates how our theory is distinct from, but also complementary to,
theories emphasizing credit constraints.

Fiscal policy. Commentators often claim that fiscal policy can "boost confidence" without clarifying
what this means.8 Our theory provides a way to think about this idea. On the one hand, it allows fiscal
stimuli to boost consumer confidence in the sense defined here. On the other hand, it qualifies that
this is possible only when the stimulus is front-loaded. Such a stimulus raises the aggregate demand
for today's goods, putting our confidence multiplier in motion. When this multiplier is large enough,
the stimulus can crowd in private spending, despite the higher tax burden. By contrast, news of a
backloaded stimulus fails to raise consumer confidence and necessarily crowds out private spending.


2        Related literature

All in all, our theory is consistent with the Keynesian view of demand-driven business cycles but does
not equate such fluctuations to output gaps, or to movements along a Phillips curve. It therefore fits
the template of the "main business cycle shock" provided by Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2020): the
principal component of the business-cycle fluctuations in unemployment, GDP, hours worked, con-
sumption and investment in the data is largely disconnected from both technology and inflation. In
the view of those authors and ours, this calls for a theory of non-inflationary, non-monetary, demand-
driven fluctuations. A similar case is made in Beaudry and Portier (2013).
    8
    For instance, Robert Shiller made such a claim during the Great Recession (a similar claim is echoed in Akerlof and
Shiller, 2010), prompting the following response by N. Gregory Mankiw (http://gregmankiw.blogspot.com/2009/01/):
          "Yale's Bob Shiller argues that confidence is the key to getting the economy back on track. I think a lot of
          economists would agree with that. The question is what it would take to make people more confident. ...
          Until we figure it out, it is best to be suspicious of any policy whose benefits are supposed to work through the
          amorphous channel of `confidence.'"




                                                                 4
       By providing such a theory, we connect to a recent literature that share the above motivation but
not our insights (Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas, 2018; Angeletos and La'O, 2013; Bai, Rios-Rull, and
Storesletten, 2019; Beaudry and Portier, 2013, 2018; Huo and Rios-Rull, 2020), as well as to the older
literature on coordination failures (Benhabib and Farmer, 1994; Cooper and John, 1988; Diamond,
1982). Our contribution derives from two novel elements: the margin for intertemporal substitution on
the supply side; and the confidence multiplier on the demand side. And although some of these works
make room for fluctuations in "confidence," they do so by equating such fluctuations to exogenous
shifts across multiple equilibria or other extrinsic shocks to higher-order beliefs. We instead allow
confidence to vary endogenously, and in response to intrinsic shocks.
       Closely related in this respect are Chahrour and Gaballo (2020) and Ilut and Saijo (2020). These pa-
pers share with ours the broader theme of letting intrinsic shocks drive certain "wedges" in consumer
or producer beliefs. In addition, Chahrour and Gaballo (2020) features a form of rational confusion that
reminds ours but works over different shocks: while in our paper households confuse a positive aggre-
gate demand shock for good news about idiosyncratic permanent income, in that paper households
confuse a negative aggregate supply shock that raises house prices for such good news. Ilut and Saijo
(2020), on the other hand, shares the idea of letting the aforementioned belief wedges be the source
of comovement. Ultimately, though, the main difference is that both of these works focus on different
phenomena and mechanisms than we do. The first focuses on how increases in housing prices driven
by adverse supply shocks can be confused for good news about wealth, the second on how ambiguity
and learning modify the propagation of shocks in the New Keynesian model.
                                                                           ` la Lucas (1972), Sims (2003),
       Our confidence multiplier originates from an informational friction a
and Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009). Empirical evidence in support of such a friction abounds.9
Most recently, Andrade et al. (2020) document that firms confuse aggregate and idiosyncratic (industry-
specific) shocks. We suspect the same is true for consumers. This is in line with the case made in Carroll
et al. (2020), albeit for other purposes. And while we commit on incomplete information for our main
analysis, we welcome behavioral reinterpretations, such as those spelled out in Section 6.5. From this
perspective, our work then complements Akerlof and Shiller (2010), which has a behavioral take on
confidence.
       Our combination of informational frictions and demand shocks is reminiscent of Lorenzoni (2009).
That paper proposes a new micro-foundation of demand shocks, in terms of noise in expectations
of future productivity and income. But it maintains the propagation mechanism of the New Key-
nesian model, translating such shocks to procyclical gaps from flexible-price outcomes. Our paper
instead revisits the propagation mechanism itself, dropping nominal rigidity altogether and allowing
for demand-driven fluctuations in the natural rate of output itself.
       Last but not least, our paper connects to the RBC literature on utilization (Burnside, Eichenbaum,
   9
    See, inter alia, Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers (2004), Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015), Coibion, Gorodnichenko,
and Ropele (2019), Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia (2017), Kohlhas and Walther (2019), and Angeletos, Huo, and Sastry
(2020). See also Gabaix (2019) for a review of the broader empirical and theoretical literatures on inattention.


                                                           5
and Rebelo, 1995; Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman, 1988; King and Rebelo, 1999). These works
emphasize how variable utilization-- alone or together with increasing returns--helps flatten the ag-
gregate labor demand curve and amplify the response of aggregate employment and output to produc-
tivity and government spending shocks. But they do so in settings that render the choice of utilization
to a static decision. Our paper instead models utilization as a forward-looking decision, thanks to
the accommodation of capital adjustment costs. This resolves the Barro and King (1984) conundrum
and allows aggregate employment and output to comove with aggregate consumption in response to
discount-rate shocks.10


3         The Model

We consider a neoclassical economy, with flexible prices. There is a single aggregate shock, which
proxies for fluctuations in aggregate demand, and various idiosyncratic shocks, which play the dual
role of introducing idiosyncratic income fluctuations and of allowing for an informational friction.
This friction is the core element of the demand block of our model. The core element of the supply
block is a margin for intertemporal substitution in production.

Islands. We represent the economy as a continuum of islands, indexed by i  [0, 1]. On each island,
there is a continuum of firms, each being a monopolistically competitive producer of a differentiated
good. We use (i, j ) to identify both the j -th variety produced on island i and the firm producing it, with
j  [0, 1]. On each island, there is also a representative household (or consumer), indexed by h = i.
Time is discrete and horizons are infinite. In each period t  {0, 1, · · · }, the household is employed on
the particular island it resides in but consumes the goods of all islands.

Household preferences. The preferences of any household h are represented by


                                U ch    h   h    h h      h h    h h
                                   0 , n0 + 0 U c1 , n1 + 0 1 U c2 , n2 + · · · ,                                           (1)


where ch      h                                            h
       t and nt are its consumption and labor supply at t, t is its discount factor between t and t + 1,
and U is the per-period utility function. The latter is given by

                                                                   1        1
                                                           c1-     n1+ 
                                                U (c, n) =     1 -     1,                                                   (2)
                                                           1-      1+ 

where  > 0 and  > 0 are, respectively, the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in consumption
and the Frisch elasticity of labor supply.
         Consumption is given by ch       h                       h         h
                                  t = F {ci,t , i,t }i[0,1] with ci,t = H {ci,j,t }j [0,1] , where F and H are
CES aggregators, ch                                                                 h
                  i,j,t is the consumption of variety j from island i in period t, ci,t is a consumption
    10
    For additional explanation of this element of our contribution, see the discussion after Proposition 1. Also, note that this
element alone does not allow investment to comove. It is our confidence multiplier that fixes this part.


                                                               6
index for all the varieties consumed from island i in period t, and i,t is an island-specific taste shock.
The latter follows an AR(1) process with persistence   [0, 1):

                                                                                            
                                                   log i,t =  log i,t-1 + log               i,t ,                                                     (3)

                                               2 ) is i.i.d. across (i, t) and independent from other shocks.
where i,-1 = 1 and log            i,t    N (0, 
       One can think of the islands as different categories of expenditure. To simplify the exposition, we
fix the elasticity of substitution across them to 1. On the other hand, we let the elasticity of substitution
                                                         1
across the different varieties of the same island be 1 + µ , for some µ > 0 that ultimately pins down the
monopoly markup.11 Perfect competition is nested as µ  0.12

AD shocks. The household's discount factor follows an AR(1) process with persistence   [0, 1):

                                       h                       h                                              ,h
                                   log t = (1 -  ) log  +  log t -1 - log t + log                             t ,                                     (4)

                                                    h
where   (0, 1) is the steady-state discount factor, -                    2
                                                      1 = , log t  N (0, AD ) is the aggregate
                                                                                                    ,h          2 ) is the idiosyncratic
innovation, i.i.d. across t, and independent of all other shocks, log                               t     N (0, 
innovation, i.i.d. across (h, t), and independent of other shocks. The aggregate innovation introduces
fluctuations in aggregate demand. Note in particular that t enters (4) with a minus, so that a positive
realization for t corresponds to an urge to consume more, or a positive AD shock. Finally, the sole
                                                                ,h
modeling role of the idiosyncratic shock,                       t ,       is to make sure that the household does not know the
aggregate shock even though it knows its own discount factor.

Inter-temporal trading. Let Rt denote the aggregate, real, gross, interest rate between t and t +1. The
corresponding rate faced by the household in island i is given Ri,t = Rt                                     R,      where log            R            2)
                                                                                                                                                 N (0, R
                                                                                                             i,t                          i,t
is an idiosyncratic shock, i.i.d. across (i, t), and independent from other shocks. This idiosyncratic
shock can be interpreted as the product of a random intermediation cost and its sole modeling role is
to limit the information extracted from interest rates.13 Rational inattention (Sims, 2003; Mackowiak
and Wiederholt, 2009) can play a similar modeling role: the results are essentially unchanged if we
reinterpret       R     as idiosyncratic noise in the observation of Rt .
                  i,t

Household budget.              The household's total income in period t is wh,t nh
                                                                                 t + eh,t , where wh,t is the wage
on the island i = h the household lives in, and eh,t is the sum of the local profits, which the household

  11                                                    i,t ln(ch
                                                                i,t )di                                                    1      µ
       That is, F {ch
                    i,t , i,t }i[0,1] = exp
                                               i[0,1]
                                                            i,t di
                                                                           and H {ch
                                                                                   i,j,t }j [0,1] =      j [0,1]
                                                                                                                   (ch
                                                                                                                     i,j,t ) dj
                                                                                                                            µ         .
                                                  i[0,1]
  12
      Monopoly power is allowed but not strictly needed. It only facilitates the narrative that firms respond to consumer
demand instead of Walrasian prices, and a bridge to the New Keynesian model (Appendix A).
   13
      Although we do not explicitly model this interpretation, here is a sketch of it. Let borrowing and lending take place via a
two-tier market. On the bottom, there is a local market for each island, where households trade with financial intermediaries.
On the top, there is a centralized market where only intermediaries trade. Idiosyncratic variation in either the resource
("iceberg") cost of such intermediation or the rents extracted by intermediaries could then offer a micro-foundation of R i,t . An
earlier version of our paper (Angeletos and Lian, 2019) contained a complementary micro-foundation, using decentralized
trading and random matching to generate idiosyncratic variation in the intertemporal prices faced by households.



                                                                             7
receives as dividends. Its budget constraint can therefore be written as follows:

                                                                       -1 h
                                                 pi,j,t ch                              h           h
                                                         i,j,t djdi + Rh,t bt+1 = wh,t nt + eh,t + bt ,                      (5)
                              i[0,1]   j [0,1]


where pi,j,t is the price of good (i, j ) in period t and bh
                                                           t is the net amount of bonds held at the start of
period t, with bh
                0 = 0. All goods prices and wages in period t are real and quoted in the basket of goods
in period t.

Firms and production.           Consider firm j on island i. Production is given by a Cobb-Douglas form
between labor and land services, so the firm's physical output in period t is given by


                                                 qi,j,t = (li,j,t ) (ui,j,t ki,j,t )1- ,                                     (6)


where li,j,t is the labor input and ui,j,t ki,j,t are land services. The latter are given by the product of
effective land quantity, ki,j,t , and utilization rate, ui,j,t .
    Each firm is a monopolist in the market for the particular commodity it produces and a price
taker in the labor market of the island it operates in (and so is the island's representative household).
The firm's operating profit in period t is given by i,j,t = pi,j,t qi,j,t - wi,t li,j,t , where pi,j,t is the price
of good (i, j ) and wi,t is the wage of the local labor market in island i. The firm owns its own land,
and is itself owned by the local household. It follows that the firm's objective is its expectation of
                                            i[              s   h
  s=0 mi,t,t+s i,j,t+s ,   where mi,t,t+s  Et               l=0 l-1     Uc (ci      i
                                                                             t+s , nt+s )] is the local pricing kernel, or the
marginal utility of consumption for household h = i. Finally, since each firm in island i distributes its
profits as dividends to the local household, the latter's dividend income is given by eh,t =                     h,j,t dj.

Land and utilization. The "effective" quantity of land obeys the following law of motion:


                                                  ki,j,t+1 = (1 -  (ui,j,t )) ki,j,t ,                                       (7)

                                                             ¯0 > 0. The term  (ui,j,t ) captures the
where  (·) is an increasing and convex function and ki,j,0 = k
negative effect that higher land utilization today has on land productivity tomorrow. This resembles
models where the depreciation of capital increases with its utilization, except that here there is no
investment margin. Accordingly, and to guarantee the existence of a steady state, we require that  is
such that  (u ) = 0, where u is the steady-state value of utilization.14

Information. We assume away any informational friction among the firms so as to isolate the role
of the informational friction in aggregate consumption, or the demand side of the economy. We then
   14
      Once we add investment in Section 6.4, the steady-state value of depreciation is allowed to be any number in [0, 1), for
whatever that number is, it is offset in steady state by gross invest investment. The present economy can then be recast as a
limit with infinite adjustment costs, or with investment pegged at its steady-state value.




                                                                   8
specify the information set of household h in each period t as follows:

                                  h    h     h
                                 It = It -1  t  wh,t , eh,t , Rh,t , (pi,l,t )i[0,1],l[0,1]  {t-1 } .                             (8)


That is, the household learns its current discount factor, all the objects that enter its current budget (its
income, its interest rate, and all commodity prices), and the past aggregate shock.
    These properties, the entire structure of the economy, and the fact that agents have rational expec-
tations are common knowledge. It follows that, in equilibrium, households have common knowledge
of the past aggregate outcomes. Had we let learning be slow, we would presumably have been able to
deliver not only amplification and comovement but also additional persistence.15 But we would have
also sacrificed the ability to deliver sharp analytical results, because of the familiar difficulty in tracking
the dynamics of higher-order beliefs in GE settings with persistent shocks and slow learning.

Equilibrium. The solution concept is (Noisy) Rational Expectations Equilibrium. Because of the CES
specification and the symmetry of the firms within each island i, the demand faced by each firm (i, j )
in period t can always be written as

                                                                                                 1
                                                                                            - 1+ µ
                                                    ch
                                                     i,j,t dh = (yi,t /pi,t ) (pi,j,t /pi,t )           i, j, t,                  (9)
                                           h[0,1]


where pi,t is the ideal price index of the goods produced in island i and yi,t is the total spending on these
goods. We denote the corresponding economy-wide aggregates as pt and yt , and that for consumption
by ct .16 We can then define an equilibrium as follows:

   1. Each household h chooses contingent plans for consumption and labor supply so as to maximize
          its expected utility subject to the budget constraint given in (5) and the informational constraints
          embedded in (8).

   2. Each firm (i, j ) chooses contingent plans for inputs, production, and prices so as to maximize its
          expectation of its local valuation subject to (7) and (9).

   3. The goods and labor markets clear: for every island i, every period t, and every realization of
          uncertainty,
                                                       ch
                                                        i,j,t dh = qi,j,t j        and          ni
                                                                                                 t =             li,j,t dj.     (10)
                                             h[0,1]                                                    j [0,1]


We do not explicitly require that the bond market clears, because this follows from Walras' law once
goods and labor markets clear. Finally, by our choice of numeraire, pt = 1 and yt = ct . In the monetary
   15
      The role of informational frictions in generating persistence is the subject of a large literature, albeit in different contexts
(e.g., Mankiw and Reis, 2002; Sims, 2003; Woodford, 2003; Nimark, 2008; Angeletos and Huo, 2019).
                                                -1/µ                                                                  qi,t
   16
      To be precise, we let pi,t  ( j [0,1] pi,j,t dj )-µ , yi,t  h[0,1] j [0,1] pi,j,t ch i,j,t djdh, pt                  p di, yt 
                                                                                                               i[0,1] yt i,t

 i[0,1]
          yi,t di =   i[0,1]
                               pi,t qi,t di, and ct    h[0,1]
                                                                ch
                                                                 t dh.




                                                                              9
extension spelled out in Appendix A, this maps to a monetary policy that stabilizes the nominal price
level and replicates flexible-price outcomes.

Steady state, log-linearization and notation. To keep the analysis tractable, we henceforth work
with the log-linearization of the model around its steady state.17 With abuse of notation, we hence-
forth reinterpret all the variables as the log-deviations from their steady-state counterparts.18 Finally,
because firms are symmetric within islands, we can drop the firm index from all the relevant variables:
li,j,t = li,t , ui,j,t = ui,t , qi,j,t = qi,t and pi,j,t = pi,t for all firms j within any given island i.


4         Aggregate Supply, Aggregate Demand, and Beliefs

In this section, we derive the equilibrium conditions of the economy. We organize them in two blocks,
one representing aggregate supply (AS) and another representing aggregate demand (AD). We further
show how consumer beliefs are determined and how they enter the demand block.19 We thus set
the stage for the next section, which completes the equilibrium characterization by studying the fixed
point between aggregate supply, aggregate demand, and beliefs.


4.1         Aggregate Supply

We characterize the supply side in two steps. First, we momentarily take the utilization decisions as
given and obtain aggregate employment and aggregate output as functions of the aggregate utilization
and the aggregate stock of land. Second, we work out the optimal utilization decisions.
         By the Cobb-Douglas specification of the production function, the local output is


                                                qi,t = (1 - )(ui,t + ki,t ) + li,t .                                       (11)


By the first-order condition (FOC) of the firm's problem with respect to its labor input, the local de-
mand for labor is
                                                       li,t = pi,t + qi,t - wi,t .                                         (12)

By the corresponding FOC for household h = i, the local supply of labor satisfies

                                                                  1 i 1 i
                                                         wi,t =    n + c.                                                  (13)
                                                                   t  t

By market clearing in the local labor market, li,t = ni
                                                      t . Finally, by the Cobb-Douglas specification of the
    17
         For the existence and characterization of the steady state, see Appendix B.
    18                                                                        bh      
     The only exception to this rule is that we let the new bh
                                                             t be given by c , where c is steady-state spending. This takes care
                                                                            t

of the issue that the log-deviation of the asset position is not well defined because the steady-state value is b = 0 and is
standard in the literature (e.g., Woodford, 2011).
  19
     Keep in mind that, although the supply side of our model is forward-looking, the informational friction enters the
equilibrium only via the demand side, because it is consumers, not firms, who are imperfectly informed.



                                                                  10
preferences across islands, local demand, or local firm revenue, can be expressed as follows:


                                               pi,t + qi,t = yi,t = yt + i,t .                                           (14)


    Aggregating all these conditions, and combining them, we can solve for aggregate output as func-
tions of ut and kt , the aggregate utilization rate, and the aggregate land stock. In particular,


                                                 yt = (1 - ~ ) (ut + kt ) ,                                              (15)

                            1
                   (1-)(1+    )
where ~  1-         1+ 1
                         -+ 
                                   (0, 1). This reduced-form aggregate production function embeds labor-
                            
market equilibrium. This in turn explains why ~ depends on , the Frisch elasticity of labor supply.
Indeed, insofar as labor supply is procyclical, a higher  maps to a lower ~ , or less diminishing returns
in the reduced-form production function seen above.20
    Consider now a firm's optimal choice of utilization. Because more utilization increases output
today at the expense of degrading the effective stock of land, the optimal utilization choice is naturally
forward-looking. Let i,t denote the shadow value of land at the end of period t, i.e., the "Q" in the
Q-theory of investment. The typical firm's FOC for utilization can then be expressed as follows:


                                          pi,t + qi,t - ui,t - ki,t = i,t + ui,t ,                                       (16)


where  > 0 is a scalar that parameterizes the elasticity of utilization.21 The left-hand side measures
the benefit of more utilization in terms of higher current production. The right-hand side measures the
cost in terms of higher land depreciation and, thereby, lower production in the future. The evolution
of the shadow value of land is finally given by the following asset-pricing-like condition:


                    i,t = -Ri,t + (1 -  ) Et [pi,t+1 + qi,t+1 - ki,t+1 - ui,t+1 ] +  Et [i,t+1 ] ,                       (17)


where Et [·] is the full-information rational expectation in period t.
    Combining and aggregating (16)-(17), replacing aggregate output from (15), using the law of motion
for land, and solving for ut , we reach the following Euler condition for aggregate utilization:

                                                        
                                               ut =   ~ + Rt
                                                               +  Et [ut+1 ] .                                           (18)


This epitomizes the supply-side part of our theory. Other things equal, an increase in the relative price
  20
     In the model as is, labor supply is procyclical if and only if  > 1. But this  , which derives from condition (12) and
parameterizes the wealth effect on labor supply, is conceptually distinct from the  that shows up in Proposition 2 and that
governs the elasticity of aggregate demand with respect to the real interest rate. The two concepts can be disentangled by
                                                                                                  1 i
replacing the optimal labor supply (12) with an exogenous "wage schedule" of the form wi,t =        nt + ci               1
                                                                                                          t , for some  =  . A
                                                                                         
zero wealth effect on labor supply can then be nested with  = 0 and maps to     ~ = 1+ (1-) .
  21                               (u )u            
     This scalar is defined by    (u ) , where u denotes the steady-state level of utilization. A higher  therefore means
a more convex cost for utilization, which translates in equilibrium to a more inelastic utilization margin.



                                                             11
of today's goods stimulates utilization, thus also increasing the aggregate supply of today's goods.
Naturally, the elasticity of this margin is negatively related to , the convexity of the convex cost of
utilization. And it is positively related to , the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, because a more elastic
labor supply maps, via ~ , to less diminishing returns in production with respect to utilization.
       The supply block is completed with the law of motion for the effective stock of land, which can be
expressed in log-linearized form as kt+1 = kt - ut , for some scalar .22 Putting everything together,
we reach the following result.

Proposition 1 (Aggregate Supply). The optimal behavior of the firms, the optimal labor supply of the
households, and market clearing impose the following equilibrium restrictions for all t:


                                                      yt = (1 - ~ ) (ut + kt ) ,                                              (19)
                                                               
                                                      ut =   ~ + Rt
                                                                        +  Et [ut+1 ] ,                                       (20)
                                                    kt+1 = kt - ut ,                                                          (21)

                ¯0 exogenously fixed.
along with k0 = k

       Because the above result does not use the optimality of consumer spending, it can be interpreted as
a description of the "AS curve" of our model. In the limit as   , this curve becomes vertical: utiliza-
tion and output are pegged at their steady state values. This captures the textbook scenario mentioned
at the start of our Introduction. Away from this degenerate case, our AS curve is "upward slopping"
in the sense that an increase in the real interest rate triggers an increase in aggregate utilization and,
thereby, an increase in aggregate employment and output.
       As evident in Proposition 1, our form of upward-sloping AS curve rests on utilization being a forward-
looking decision. This depends on the investment margin being absent (as in the present model)
or subject to adjustment costs (as in the extension of Section 6.4). Such adjustment costs are em-
pirically relevant (Caballero and Engel, 1999; Bachmann, Caballero, and Engel, 2013). But they are
absent in the early RBC literature on variable utilization, such as the notable contributions of Burnside,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (1995), Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988), and King and Rebelo
(1999). These works have thus modeled utilization as a static decision, which explains why they do not
share our supply-side mechanism. The same is true for the DSGE literature that builds on Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007), albeit for a different reason: although
these works include adjustment costs to investment, they recast the cost of utilization in terms of to-
day's goods as opposed to future capital, thus shutting down the forward-looking nature of utilization
and our margin of intertemporal substitution in production.23
                                    (u )u
  22
       This scalar is given by     1- (u )
                                           ,   where u denotes the steady-state level of utilization. As explained in the Appendix,
                            1-
 ends up coinciding with     
                              in the steady state.
  23
     Basu and Kimball (1997) allow utilization to be forward-looking in a similar way as in our paper, but do not study the
general-equilibrium implications for discount-rate shocks, as we do here. The same is true for Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009),



                                                                   12
      It is also worth emphasizing that we have expressed aggregate supply as an increasing function
of the relative price of goods today vis-a-vis goods tomorrow. This is like "Econ-101" but unlike the
Keynesian tradition, which instead expresses aggregate supply as an increasing function of either the
nominal price level or the rate of inflation.
      This distinction is not just about graphs. In the textbook New Keynesian model, it is possible--
although unusual--to express aggregate supply as a positive function of the real interest rate by ap-
propriately combining the Phillips curve with the Taylor rule for monetary policy and the Fisher equa-
tion.24 Still, this possibility hinges exclusively on the presence of nominal rigidity and a monetary
policy that fails to replicate flexible prices: in the flexible-price core of that model, AS is invariant to
the real interest rate. By contrast, the reason that AS responds to the real interest rate in our model
has nothing to do with either nominal rigidity or monetary policy: it is a feature of the "natural" level
of output and it reflects the accommodation of intertemporal substitution in production via variable
utilization.


4.2     Aggregate Demand

We now turn to optimal consumption and aggregate demand. Consider household h. As standard, the
Euler equation and the relevant transversality condition are necessary and sufficient for optimality.
Combining these conditions with the household's budget constraint, we arrive at the following char-
acterization of the household's (log-linearized) consumption function.

Lemma 1. For every h and t, household h's optimal consumption in period t is given by:

                                         +                                                +
               ch          h
                t =(1 -  )bt -                  k Et
                                                   h          h
                                                     Rh,t+k + t +k         + (1 -  )                h
                                                                                                 k Et [yh,t+k ] ,             (22)
                                         k=0                                              k=0

       h [·] = E ·|I h is the household's expectation at period t.
where Et        t   t

      The first term captures initial wealth. The second term combines two intertemporal-substitution
effects: that for interest rates and that for intertemporal preference shocks. The last term captures
permanent income. In this last part, we have used the fact the household's income coincides with
who instead focus on news about future TFP in the presence of adjustment costs to investment a la Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (2005). This particular type of adjustment costs introduces a desire to smooth investment, which in turn causes
investment to respond positively to news about future TFP       , helping that paper to generate comovement out of such news.
But this mechanism is clearly different from the ones studied here, and is also absent in with the classic, Q-theory-like,
formulation of adjustment costs to capital, which instead suffices for our purposes.
   24
      Write the Phillips curve as t = (yt - yt    n
                                                    ) + Et [t+1 ], the Taylor rule as it = ¯ it + t , and Fisher equation as it =
                                                                                                         n
Rt + Et [t+1 ], where, for the purposes of this footnote, t denotes the rate of inflation, yt - yt         denotes the output gap
(relative to the natural, or flexible-price, benchmark), it denotes the nominal interest rate, and Rt denotes the real interest
rate. Suppose next that yt  n
                               = 0, meaning the natural rate of output is fixed, and ¯it = 0, meaning that monetary policy does
not tract the natural rate of interest (as it ought to do). Finally, to drive the point as fast as possible, assume Et [t+1 ] = t
for some   [0, 1]. We can treat  as a free parameter if expectations are non-rational (as, e.g., in Gabaix, 2020), or equate it
to the persistence of the aggregate demand shock in the rational-expectations version of the model. Either way, the Phillips
                                     
curve can be rewritten as t = 1-       t
                                        y , while the Taylor rule plus the Fisher equation give Rt = it - Et [t+1 ] = ( - )t .
                         (1- )
Combining, we get yt =   (-) t
                               R,   which gives the sought-after AS curve in the (R, y ) space instead of the (, y ) space.


                                                               13
yh,t = ph,t + qh,t = yt + h,t , or the total revenue of the firms operating in the island where the household
lives, works, and receives profits from.
   To obtain a representation for aggregate demand, we aggregate (22) and use the facts that aver-
age bond holdings are zero, that each household knows its current interest rate, and that the future
idiosyncratic shocks to interest rates are unpredictable. This yields the following expression:

                                                             +                                +
                ct = -  (Rt + t ) -                                    h
                                                                    k Et [Rt+k ] dh +                   h
                                                                                                     k Et h
                                                                                                          t +k dh                   (23)
                                                             k=1                              k=1
                                                                    +
                                            + (1 -  )                      k Et
                                                                              h
                                                                                [yh,t+k ] dh .
                                                                    k=0


We next manipulate this condition as follows. We rewrite the first integral in (23) as

                                       +                                    +
                                                   k    h
                                                       Et [Rt+k ] dh   =           k Et [Rt+k ] - 1
                                                                                                    Gt ,                            (24)
                                       k=1                                  k=1


where
                                                       +
                                     Gt  -                   k       h
                                                                    Et [Rt+k ] - Et [Rt+k ] dh                                      (25)
                                                       k=1

captures the average misperception of the future adjustment in the real interest rate. Similarly, we
rewrite the second integral as

                   +                                                                                   +
                            k    h   h                                    h           
                                Et   t +k    dh =                         t dh    =      t =                  k Et [t+k ],          (26)
                                                  1 -                               1 - 
                   k=1                                                                                 k=1


and the third integral as

                                      +                                    +
                                               k    h                                               
                                                   Et [yh,t+k ] dh     =          k Et [yt+k ] +   1- Bt ,                          (27)
                                      k=0                                  k=0


where
                                                       +
                                            1-
                                     Bt                      k       h
                                                                    Et [yh,t+k ] - Et [yt+k ] dh,                                   (28)
                                                       k=0

captures average misperception of permanent income. Combining the above and replacing ct with yt ,
we obtain the following expression for aggregate demand:

                                 +                                                           +
                                        k
    yt = - (Rt + t ) -                  Et [Rt+k + t+k ] + (1 -  ) yt +                             k Et [yt+k ]   +  B t +  Gt .   (29)
                                 k=1                                                         k=1


Finally, rewriting this condition in a recursive form, we reach the following result.




                                                                       14
Proposition 2 (Aggregate Demand). Aggregate spending satisfies the following condition:


                                    yt = - (Rt + t ) + Et [yt+1 ] + (Bt + Gt ) ,                                     (30)


where Bt and Gt are defined in conditions (25) and (28).

       This is the "AD curve" of our model. It looks like the Euler condition of a textbook, representative-
agent economy, except for the inclusion of the terms Bt and Gt . When households share the same infor-
         h [·]= E [·] for all h and these terms vanish. Both terms thus originate from the informational
mation, Et       t

friction. But each one captures a different mechanism.


4.3      The Two Belief Wedges

Consider first Bt . This term captures the average error in households' beliefs of their permanent in-
come. When Bt > 0, households on average over-estimate their permanent income, and this con-
tributes, other things equal, to higher spending today. (The converse is of course true when Bt < 0.)
       To understand how Bt behaves, we first characterize the true aggregate permanent income.

Proposition 3 (A Hulten's Theorem for AD shocks). Aggregate permanent income satisfies

                                                 +
                                                                         1-
                                                        k Et [yt+k ] =     ~
                                                                         1- kt                                       (31)
                                                 k=0


and is invariant to t , the current aggregate demand shock.

       As anticipated in the Introduction, this is a corollary of an intertemporal version of Hulten's theo-
rem (Hulten, 1978). The present discounted value of aggregate income in our dynamic economy is the
equivalent of aggregate GDP in a static economy. In the latter context, Hulten's theorem, which only
requires production efficiency, implies that aggregate GDP is invariant to intra-sectoral taste shocks.
The translation of this result to our context, where production efficiency is effectively preserved even
though the demand side is ridden with an informational friction,25 gives Proposition 3 above. In other
words, just as in the static context taste shocks affect the cross-sectoral decomposition of GDP without
altering its total value, in our dynamic context aggregate demand shocks shift aggregate output from
one period to another without altering its present discounted value.
       Using this property, which is itself known to households, we can reduce Bt in (28) to

                                                        +
                                                 1-
                                          Bt =                k     h
                                                                   Et [h,t+k ] dh.
                                                        k=0
  25
   To be precise, production efficiency holds in our setting when firms are perfectly competitive, or µ = 0. But even when
µ > 0, Proposition 3 still holds because the monopoly distortion is state- and time-invariant.




                                                              15
That is, misperceptions of total permanent income reduce to misperceptions of idiosyncratic perma-
                                   h [          k h             h                  h
nent income. Furthermore, because Et  h,t+k ] =  Et [h,t ] and Et [h,t ] = yh,t - Et [yt ], we have


                                                     1-           ¯t [yt ] ,
                                          Bt =      (1- )
                                                             yt - E                                   (32)

      ¯t [·] 
where E             h [·] dh. That is, whenever households underestimate the increase in current aggre-
                   Et
gate income, they also misperceive an increase in their permanent income, and this misperception is
larger the more persistent the idiosyncratic income fluctuations are.
    Consider next Gt . By construction, this term captures the average error in beliefs of future real
interest rates. When Gt > 0, households on average under-estimate the future real interests, and this,
too, contributes towards higher spending today. (The converse is of course true when Gt < 0.)
    The characterization of Gt is a bit more complicated than that of Bt , because the present discounted
value of the real interest rate, unlike that of aggregate income, does vary with the AD shock. However,
it can be shown that the innovations in the equilibrium expectations of future interest rates are pro-
portional to the innovations in the current discount factor. It follows that

                                   2      ¯                       2                ¯t [t ] ,
                          Gt = -     
                                 + 1- t - Et [t ] =               + 1-         t - E

            1-~
with       ~ + .
                   Therefore, whenever agents underestimate the current aggregate shock, they also
underestimate the future GE adjustment in the real interest rate, and this underestimation is larger
the more persistent the AD shock is.
    In the next section, we show how both of these "wedges" contribute towards amplification. For
now, we summarize their characterization in the following result.

Lemma 2. With incomplete information,

                            1-          ¯t [yt ]                          2              ¯t [t ] ,
                   Bt =    (1- )
                                   yt - E              and        Gt =    + 1-       t - E

      ¯t [·] 
where E          h [·] dh is the average expectation across households.
                Et


5    Equilibrium Characterization

We complete the characterization of the equilibrium in five steps. First, we recast AS and AD in a more
convenient form. Second, we show how to measure the informational friction by a scalar   (0, 1].
Third, we isolate the role of the confidence multiplier. Fourth, we study the complementary role of
discounting GE adjustment in interest rates. Finally, we show that there is a unique fixed point between
the aggregate dynamics and the signal extraction problem of the households, which completes the
existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium and pins down the value of .



                                                        16
5.1     Normalized AS and AD

For given beliefs, the equilibrium dynamics are characterized by equations (19)-(21), which character-
ize AS, together with equation (30), which characterizes AD. To solve this system, it is useful to drop the
backward-looking variable kt and re-express the equilibrium conditions as a purely forward-looking
system.26 To this goal, we introduce the following transformation:

                                                  1                          1-~
                                            ~t 
                                            y         (yt - (1 - ~ )kt ) =     ut .                                       (33)


The first part defines y
                       ~t as aggregate output appropriately normalized by the stock of land. The second
part notes that y
                ~t is proportional to utilization, which is purely forward-looking. We can then combine
Propositions 1 and 2 to obtain the following representation of the equilibrium in our economy.

Proposition 4 (AS and AD). A path for y
                                      ~t and Rt is part of an equilibrium if it satisfies the terminal
condition limt  t y
                  ~t = 0 along with the following two dynamic equations:


                                       y
                                       ~t = Rt +  Et [~
                                                      yt+1 ] ,                                                            (34)
                                       ~t = -Rt +  Et [~
                                       y               yt+1 ] + Bt + Gt - t ,                                             (35)

              1-          ¯t [~              2               ¯t [t ] , and         1-~
with Bt =    1-      ~t - E
                     y        yt ] , Gt =    + 1-        t - E                    ~ + .
                                                                                  

      Conditions (34) and (35) are the "normalized" versions of, respectively, aggregate supply (AS) and
aggregate demand (AD). Both equations are forward-looking. In the case of AS, it is because utilization
is forward-looking. In the case of AD, it is because consumption is forward-looking. Their slopes with
respect to the real interest rate are, respectively,  and -. Finally, the terms Bt and Gt , which are present
in the AD equation and encapsulate the two mechanisms of interest, have now been restated in terms
of the transformed variable y
                            ~t rather than the original variable yt .
      The system provided above is easier to work with than the original given earlier in Propositions 1
and 2, because the new system is purely forward looking whereas the original contains a backward-
looking variable.27 But one has to keep in mind that any solution for y
                                                                      ~t must be transformed back to
a solution for yt . In particular, holding y
                                           ~ constant for all  > t, an increase in y
                                                                                   ~t maps to an increase
in current aggregate income but also a decrease in future aggregate income. This underscores that an
increase in y
            ~t represents an intertemporal shift in resources--which, circling back to our version of
Hulten's theorem, is exactly what a "shift in aggregate demand" means in a neoclassical context.
  26
     This simplification is possible here thanks to the abstraction from investment. In Section 6.4, which adds investment, we
instead have to work with a more complicated dynamic system, which in turn explains the greater complexity of the formal
arguments in the proof of Proposition 14 relative to those in our baseline model.
  27
     The relevant backward-looking state variable, the effective stock of land, has dropped out of the new system thanks to
the adopted transformation of variables. This transformation also explains why Et [~ yt+1 ] is discounted by  in the normalized
AD curve (35), whereas there is no such discounting in the original AD curve (30).




                                                              17
5.2     Beliefs: a Simple Representation

We now put more structure on the expectation terms that show up in aggregate demand. Recall that,
in any given period t, the past is common knowledge and the only aggregate innovation is t . It follows
that the innovations in the average expectations of all current and future aggregate outcomes, as well
in the aggregate outcomes themselves, are all proportional to t . That is, for any aggregate variable x
in the set {, y, y
                 ~, R} and any s  0,

                                                                         x
                                             Et [xt+s ] = Et-1 [xt+s ] + s t ,                                         (36)

                x .28 Note that this condition uses the full-information expectation operator, not the
for some scalar s
expectation of the typical household in the economy. But because the information in Et is a superset of
                    h , the expectation of the typical household, and because the latter itself contains
the information in Et
the information in Et-1 , the following is also true:

                                  h            h                               x h
                                 Et [xt+s ] = Et [Et [xt+s ]] = Et-1 [xt+s ] + s Et [t ].

                                                                              ¯t [t ] on t , we get
Aggregating across h and letting  denote the coefficient of the projection of E

                             ¯t [xt+s ] = Et-1 [xt+s ] +  x E
                             E                              ¯                      x
                                                         s t [t ] = Et-1 [xt+s ] + s t .                               (37)


Combining (36) and (37), we finally reach the following result.

Proposition 5. In any equilibrium, there exists a scalar   (0, 1) such that, for any aggregate variable x
in the set {, y, y
                 ~, R} , the average forecast of it satisfies

                              ¯t [xt+s ] = (1 - ) Et-1 [xt+s ] + Et [xt+s ]
                              E                                                   t, s  0.


      That is, it is as if the economy is populated by two representative agents: one that only knows the
past, and another that also knows the present, with respective population weights 1 -  and . By the
same token,  is an inverse measure of the severity of the informational friction: the smaller  is, the
further away the economy is from the complete-information benchmark.
      The exact value of  is determined from the fixed point between the aggregate outcomes and the
typical household's inference problem. But the endogeneity of  is not essential for understanding our
main results. We thus postpone its characterization and focus first on completing the characterization
of the equilibrium aggregate dynamics for a given .
   28             x
      The vector {s }s0 , which identifies the Impulse Response Function of variable x with respect to the AD innovation, is
of course endogenously determined in equilibrium. For the present argument, however, this endogeneity is not relevant.




                                                            18
5.3     Isolating the Confidence Multiplier

We first consider the case  = 0, meaning an aggregate demand shock lasting only one period. This
             ~t = 0, and therefore that the AS and AD equations take the following, simpler forms:
implies that G


                                    y
                                    ~t = Rt ,                                                      (38)
                                                               1-
                                    ~t = -Rt + (1 - )
                                    y                         1-         ~t +t .
                                                                         y                         (39)
                                                             Bt


This system is essentially static, allowing a straightforward characterization of how the economy re-
sponds to the aggregate demand shock.
      Consider a negative realization for t and start with the complete-information benchmark (herein
nested as  = 1). In this case, Bt = 0 and the AD curve shifts down by an amount equal to t . This is
represented in Figure 1 by the shift of the AD curve from ADold to AD1 . The intersection of AD1 with
AS thus identifies the equilibrium pair of y
                                           ~ and R that obtain under complete information.
      Consider now the role of incomplete information. Had Bt been zero, the shock would have trig-
gered the same shift in AD as under complete information. But because this "first-round" shift in AD
causes current aggregate income to fall, and because households confuse aggregate and idiosyncratic
movements in current income, they incorrectly perceive a decrease in their permanent income--even
though, as already explained, there is no actual change in their permanent income, only an intertem-
poral shift. As this happens, the AD curve shifts further down, from AD1 to AD2 in Figure 1, triggering
a further reduction in aggregate income. This in turn feeds to additional misperception (a further
reduction in B ), a further downward shift in the AD curve, and so on.

                              R
                                                                  AS


                             Rold




                            Rnew
                                                                            ADold

                                                                          AD1
                                                                   AD2
                                                      ADnew

                                          ~new
                                          y           ~old
                                                      y                             y
                                                                                    ~

                                         Figure 1. Feedback Mechanism


      This series of feedbacks, whose limits correspond to the "final-round" curve ADnew in the figure,
explains the economics behind our confidence multiplier. The formal result is offered below.


                                                     19
Proposition 6 (The confidence multiplier). Suppose the aggregate demand shock is entirely transitory
( = 0). The equilibrium response of real aggregate output is given by

                                         yt
                                            = 0 · mconf (,  ) ,
                                         t

             
where 0       +   is the complete-information counterpart and

                                                            +
                                mconf (,  )              -
                                                                     >1                            (40)
                                                +  -  11
                                                       - (1 - )


is the "confidence multiplier," namely a multiplier that captures the mechanism described above.

      Note that mconf (,  ) is decreasing in  and increasing in  . A lower  means more confusion of
the aggregate fluctuations for idiosyncratic income fluctuations, a higher  means more extrapolation
of the present to the future and therefore a larger change in perceived permanent income for a given
aggregate demand shock. Both forces contribute to a larger shift of the AD curve in each step of the
series of feedbacks described in Figure 1, and hence also to a larger confidence multiplier.


5.4     The General Case: Confidence Plus Discounting of Future Interest Rates

We now allow the aggregate demand shock to be persistent. This does not affect the logic that the
aggregate demand shock has no actual effect on aggregate permanent income: the aggregate demand
shock still represents an intertemporal shift between "the long run" and "the short run," although the
short run now last multiple periods (in expectation). It also does not affect the size of our confidence
multiplier. What changes, though, are the expectations that households form about future real interest
rates and their impact on aggregate demand under both complete and incomplete information. This
amounts to an additional multiplier, which we formalize below.

Proposition 7 (The General Case). Allow the aggregate demand shock to be persistent (  0). The
equilibrium response of real aggregate output is given by

                                   yt
                                      =  · mconf (,  ) · mGE (,  ) ,
                                   t

             
where             1
              + 1-     is the complete-information counterpart, mconf (,  ) is the same confidence mul-
tiplier as that defined in Proposition 6 above, and

                                                        
                                   mGE (,  )  1 +        (1 - )  1                                 (41)
                                                       +

is another multiplier, which captures the mechanism we refer to as "discounting the future GE adjust-
ment in real interest rates."



                                                      20
       Note that the confidence multiplier is invariant to  and remains exactly the same as in the case
of a transitory AD shock. This is because the size of the misperception in permanent income naturally
depends on  , the persistence of the idiosyncratic income fluctuations, but is invariant to  , the per-
sistence of the AD shock, thanks to our version of Hulten's theorem. Conversely,  is irrelevant to the
second multiplier, because this has nothing do with expectations of income. Instead, this multiplier
has to do with expectations of future interest rates, whose persistence is governed by  .
       Let us explain this new multiplier. When a negative aggregate demand shock hits the economy,
it triggers in equilibrium a reduction in the real interest rate, which in turn moderates the original
reduction in aggregate demand. This represents a "neoclassical GE adjustment" that partially offsets
the direct, PE effect of the shock on aggregate demand. Furthermore, the fall in the real interest rate is
as persistent as the demand shock itself.
       With complete information, households not only see the current drop in the real interest rate, but
also perfectly foresee how much the real interest rate will fall in the future. With incomplete informa-
tion, households still observe the current drop in real interest rates but under-estimate their future
drop. This arrests the forward-looking component of the aforementioned GE adjustment, leaving
aggregate demand to move more strongly with the exogenous shock than what it would have done
under complete information.29
       We refer to this mechanism as "discounting the GE adjustment in real interest rates." At a high level,
this mechanism is the same as that articulated in Angeletos and Lian (2018), Gabaix (2020) and Farhi
and Werning (2019) in the context of forward guidance for monetary policy at the zero lower bound.
But there are two key differences, on top of the obvious difference in the topics under consideration.
       The first difference regards the identity of the object that adjusts in GE. In the context of the afore-
mentioned works, this object is the output gap. In our context, instead, it is the natural rate of output.
       The second difference regards the form of strategic interaction, or the way higher-order beliefs
matter. The New Keynesian model studied in the aforementioned works corresponds to a game of
strategic complementarity : when I expect others to spend more in the near future, I want to spend more
myself today, because I expect monetary policy to fail to track the natural rate of interest and, instead,
accommodate a boom. The kind of RBC model studied here instead corresponds to a game of strategic
substitutability : when I expect others to spend more in the near future because of a persistent AD
shock, I want to spend less myself, because I expect the real interest rate to increase. Under-estimating
the responses of others leads to under-reaction (dampening) in the first type of games and to over-
reaction (amplification) in the latter.30 This explains why the same elementary mechanism maps to
diametrically opposite effects in our setting than in the aforementioned works.
       Putting aside these clarifications, the key observation for our purposes is that this mechanism
  29
     Had we allowed households to be inattentive to the current real interest rate, because of rational inattention (Sims, 2003)
or sparsity (Gabaix, 2014), we would have arrested the countervailing effect of the concurrent adjustment in the real interest
as well, which of course would only increase the related multiplier.
  30
     For clear articulations of this point in more abstract settings or other applications, see Angeletos and Lian (2017) and
Angeletos and Sastry (2020).


                                                              21
works hand-in-hand with our confidence multiplier: they both help sustain larger movements in AD,
and thereby in equilibrium output and employment, than under complete information.
      We conclude with a note on comparative statics. As evident from (41), mGE (,  ) is decreasing in 
and increasing in  . Intuitively, the larger the informational friction or the longer the GE adjustment in
interest rates, the larger the multiplier associated with the discounting of this adjustment. Combining
this property with the one obtained earlier for the confidence multiplier, we get the following result.

Corollary. The overall multiplier, m(,  ,  )  mconf (,  )mGE (,  ), is increasing in the severity of
the informational friction and the persistence of both kinds of shocks.

      Finally, although our model is too stylized to permit a quantitative evaluation, let us do a simple,
back-of-the-envelope calculation. Suppose the slopes of the AS and AD curves are comparable (   ),
the discount factor is close to 1, idiosyncratic income follows a random walk (  1), the persistence
of the aggregate fluctuations in the model are comparable to the those in the data (  0.95), and
  1/2 (think of it as half the population being perfectly informed and the rest being completely
uninformed). Then, m  5/3, which suggests that the documented amplification could be substantial.


5.5     Signal Extraction and the Fixed Point for 

In the preceding analysis, we have treated the value of  as given. However, the severity of the informa-
tional friction depends on how much households can extract from the available market signals. This
implies that the value of  in our economy is the solution to a fixed point problem that relates the
informativeness of these signals to the responsiveness of aggregate output and the real interest rate to
the aggregate demand shock: the greater this response, the more precise the information revealed by
the aforementioned signals, and the smaller the friction. This fixed point is characterized below.

Proposition 8. There exists a unique   (0, 1) in equilibrium and is given by the solution of the
following fixed point problem:

                       -2   -2                                  2     -2
                          + R   -1   -1 m (,  ,  ) -                +    {m (,  ,  )}2
                =                                                                          ,          (42)
                    -2
                    AD + -2   -2
                            + R  { -1  [ -1 m (,  ,  ) -  ]}2 + -2
                                                                   {m (,  ,  )}2

where m (,  ,  )  mconf (,  )mGE (,  ) is the overall multiplier.

      The above condition, which follows from the standard formula for combining multiple Gaussian
signals, reflects the fact that the household has three such signals about the underlying AD shock:
                       h ; her local interest rate R ; and her own income, or the local demand,
her own discount rate, t                            h,t

yh,t . And whereas the informativeness of the first signal is exogenous, that of the other two signals is
endogenous. In particular, their informativeness increase with the multiplier: the larger the multiplier,
the more these market signals moves with the AD shock, and hence the more precise the information



                                                     22
households can extract from them about the underlying shock. This explains why the right-hand side
of the above condition decreases with , which in turn guarantees the uniqueness of the equilibrium.31
         It is also immediate to verify that, for given  and  ,  is a decreasing function of the ratio /AD
for any   { , R ,  }. By varying these "noise" parameters, we can indeed induce any value for  in
the (0, 1) range. This, together with the uniqueness of , justifies our earlier treatment of it as a "free"
parameter. Finally, by combining the comparative statics of m with the comparative statics of the fixed
point in condition (42) we reach the follow result.

Proposition 9. Let m denote the overall multiplier evaluated at the equilibrium value of . This is
necessarily increasing in the ratio /AD for any   { , R ,  }, as well as in both  and  .

         That is, our statement "a larger friction implies a larger multiplier," which was previously formal-
ized with the monotonicity of m(,  ,  ) in  treating the latter as exogenous, is now recast as the
monotonicity of m in deeper noise parameters. And the lesson that the overall multiplier increases
with the persistence of both shocks, which was previously articulated holding  constant, is robust to
taking into account the endogeneity of .
         We close this section with the following remark on the interpretation of . In the present version
of our model, the value of  hinges on the availability of information about the aggregate shock, or
the state of the economy. This in turn suggests that a policymaker could regulate the magnitude of
the business cycle by providing more or less information to consumers. But this need not be true
in two realistic variants, in which the relevant confusion is present even if information about the
aggregate state is abundant. In one variant, consumers rationally choose not to pay enough attention
to the aggregate state (or to any related communications by policymakers), for the reasons articulated
in Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009). In another, consumers are boundedly rational, in the sense
described in Section 6.5 These variants preserve our predictions about amplification, which were the
topic of the previous subsections, but not those about the precise value of , which were the topic of
the present subsection. This explains why we "trust" the former predictions more than the latter.


6         Extensions and Variants

In this section, we consider four extensions/variants of our baseline model. The first two explore our
theory's predictions for the economy's response to aggregate supply shocks and fiscal stimuli. The
remaining two shows how our theory can rationalize comovement between "borrowers" and "savers,"
and between consumption and investment. In addition, we discuss how the mechanisms at work can
be recast as the product of bounded rationality instead of informational friction.
    31
    In general, signal extraction problems in GE settings can admit multiple equilibria; see Gaballo (2017) and Chahrour and
Gaballo (2020) for examples. But this is not an issue here because our setting features, in effect, strategic substitutability in
signal extraction.




                                                               23
6.1      Aggregate Supply Shocks

The main analysis has focused on AD shocks, in the sense of aggregate discount-factor shocks. We now
turn to AS shocks, in the sense of aggregate productivity shocks. The lesson delivered below is that the
documented mechanisms tend to dampen AS shocks at the same time they amplify AD shocks.
       The model is the same, except that we shut down the shocks to the household's discount factor and,
instead, introduce aggregate productivity shocks. In particular, a firm's output is given by


                                        yi,j,t = A1
                                                  t
                                                    -
                                                      (li,j,t ) (ui,j,t ki,j,t )1- ,


where At is an aggregate TFP shock. This follows an AR(1) process with persistence A  [0, 1) :

                                                                    A
                                              log At = A log At-1 + t ,                                              (43)

      A  N 0,  2 and A
where t       A       -1 is normalized at 1. Finally, the household's information set in period t
             h = I h  w , e , R , (p
is given by It    t-1  h,t h,t h,t   i,l,t )i[0,1],l[0,1]  {At-1 } . It follows that, although the identity

of the aggregate shock is different, local income and local interest rates serve again as noisy signals of
the underlying aggregate shock.
       We once again log-linearize the equilibrium conditions and re-interpret all the variables as log-
deviations from their steady-state counterparts. Following similar steps as in Section 5, we reach the
following characterization of AS and AD.

Proposition 10. (i) Aggregate supply is given by


                                 yt = At + (1 - ~ ) (ut + kt ) ,                                                     (44)
                                                                      
                                ut =   ~ +
                                             (At - Et [At+1 ]) +    ~ + Rt    +  Et [ut+1 ] ,                        (45)
                              kt+1 = kt - ut .                                                                       (46)


       (ii) Aggregate demand is given by


                                         yt = -Rt + Et [yt+1 ] + (Bt + Gt ) ,                                        (47)


where Bt and Gt are defined as (25) and (28).

       The characterization of AS is similar to before, except, of course, for the accommodation of the TFP
shock.32 Turning to AD, this is exactly the same as before, and Bt and Gt have the same mathematical
definition. However, both terms behave differently from before.
  32
    This shows up, not only in (44), the production function, but also in (45), the optimality condition for utilization.
Intuitively, the optimal intertemporal pattern of production depends, not only on the relative price of today's goods, but
also on their relative cost. The former is captured in condition (45) by Rt , the latter by At - Et [At+1 ] .




                                                            24
       Consider first Bt , which maps to our confidence multiplier. In the case AD shocks, the actual
aggregate permanent income was fixed, guaranteeing that the confusion of aggregate and idiosyn-
cratic income fluctuations had an unambiguous effect on confidence: following a positive shock,
households were necessarily over-estimating their permanent income, so Bt was necessarily positive.
This is not the case with AS shocks. Because such shocks do influence actual aggregate permanent in-
come, imperfect knowledge of the shock naturally translates to under-estimation of the corresponding
movements in permanent income. In particular, following a positive shock, a consumer over-estimates
the idiosyncratic component of her permanent income, which pushes Bt positive, but also under-
estimates the aggregate component, which pushes Bt negative. This explains why our confidence
multiplier is weakened or even turned upside down.
       Consider next Gt , which corresponds to the discounting of the GE adjustment in real interest rates.
In the case of AD shocks, this mechanism contributed towards amplification. Here, it does the exact
opposite. When information is complete, a persistent positive TFP shock triggers a persistent drop
in real interest rates, which in turn stimulates aggregate demand. When information is incomplete,
consumers under-estimate the drop in future real interest rates and this reduces aggregate demand
relative to the complete-information case. This explains why Gt is necessarily negative following a
positive TFP shock, or why the corresponding multiplier is necessarily reversed.

Proposition 11 (Technology Shocks). The equilibrium response of aggregate output to an aggregate
technology shock is given by

                                        yt         conf
                                         A
                                           =  A · mA (,  , A ) · mGE
                                                                  A (, A ) ,
                                        t

where  A > 0 is the complete-information counterpart, mGE
                                                       A (, A ) is a multiplier that captures the
                                                                                            conf
effect of Gt , or the discounting of the GE adjustment in interest rates, and mA                   (,  , A ) is a multiplier
that captures the combined effect of Bt , or the overall confusion of idiosyncratic and aggregate income
fluctuations. Furthermore,

                                          conf
                                        mA       (,  , A ) < 1 if and only if  < ¯ ,


for some ¯ = ¯ (A ) that is itself increasing in A , and


                                                  mGE
                                                   A (, A ) < 1 necessarily.


       To sum up, as long as aggregate TFP shocks and idiosyncratic income shocks have comparable per-
sistence, our first mechanism, the confidence multiplier, is basically switched off or even reversed.33
But our second mechanism, the discounting of the GE adjustment in the real interest rate, is neces-
sarily reversed. All in all, our theory therefore dampens AS shocks at the same time it amplifies AD
  33
       Note that ¯ (1) = 1. Hence, when both shocks are highly persistent, the confidence multiplier is muted.


                                                               25
shock. This completes our theory's fit vis-a-vis the following key empirical regularity: the majority of
the business cycle in the data is disconnected from technology (Basu, Fernald, and Kimball, 2006).


6.2      Government Spending

We now study a different kind of AD shocks, namely shocks to government spending. Unsurprisingly,
these shocks have similar effects as those featured in our baseline analysis, both with and without
common knowledge. But there is an interesting twist, regarding the distinction between front-loaded
and back-loaded fiscal stimuli.
       The model is the same, except for two modifications. First, we drop the shocks to the household's
discount factor and, instead, add shocks to government spending. And second, we abstract from the
wealth effect on labor supply. It is well understood both what this effect does in the theory and that is
probably very weak in reality. By removing it, we isolate what's new.34
       In each period, the government purchases a basket of all the goods in the economy. The overall
expenditure, denoted by Gt , follows an AR(1) process with persistence G  [0, 1):

                                                                    G
                                                      Gt = G Gt-1 + t ,                                                         (48)

                  G  N 0,  2 is i.i.d. across t and independent from other shocks. The composi-
where G-1 = 0 and t       G
tion of Gt mirrors that of private spending.35
       Turning to taxes, we let government spending be financed by lump-sum taxation and, without
further loss of generality, impose budget balance in each period, i.e. Gt = Tt . At the same time, we
prevent one's own tax from being a perfect signal of the aggregate level of government spending by
introducing idiosyncratic tax shocks. Specifically, we let the lump-sum tax levied to household h in
period t be given by Tth = Tt + h                                   h       2
                                t , where Tt is the average tax and t  N 0,  also follows an AR(1)
process with persistence G , and independent from any other shock.36
       We close the model by letting the information structure be the same as in the baseline model,
                                                 h is now replaced with the knowledge of  G and
modulo, of course, that the knowledge of t-1 and t                                       t-1
                h = I h  T h  w , e , R , (p
Tth . That is, It    t-1  t    h,t h,t h,t
                                                                   G
                                             i,l,t )i[0,1],l[0,1]  t-1 .

       As in the baseline model, we log-linearize the equilibrium conditions, re-interpret all the variables
as log-deviations from their steady-state counterparts.37 Following similar steps as in Section 5, we
  34
      Here, we shut this effect down in the manner described earlier in footnote 20. Similar results obtain if we assume GHH
preferences, as we did in an earlier draft.
   35
      That is, we impose, for all i, j, and t,
                                                 pi,j,t gi,j,t         p     ch dh
                                                                 h[0,1] i,j,t i,j,t
                                                               =                    ,
                                                     Gt                 ct
where gi,j,t is the government's purchase of variety j from island i in period t.
   36
      By equating the persistence of the idiosyncratic tax shock to that of aggregate government spending, we make sure that
households correctly perceive the tax burden of any fiscal stimulus. Relaxing this property may be interesting on its own
right--see, for example, Gabaix (2020) for an example that goes in this direction with the help of bounded rationality instead
of incomplete information--but it is not the issue we wish to study here.
   37
      The following exception applies: Gt , Tt , gi,j,t and Tth henceforth represent, respectively, Gt /y  , Tt /y  , gi,j,t /y  , and


                                                                 26
reach the following result.

Proposition 12. (i) Aggregate supply remains the same as in Proposition 1.
     (ii) Aggregate demand satisfies


                                  yt = -Rt + (1 - G ) Gt + Et [yt+1 ] + (Bt + Gt ) ,                                      (49)


and Bt and Gt are defined the same as in (28) and (25), modulo the replacement of  with G .
     (iii) The equilibrium response of real aggregate output is given by

                                        yt
                                         G
                                           =  G · mconf (,  ) · mGE (, G ) ,
                                        t

               (1-G )
where  G =        +      is the complete-information counterpart and mconf (·, ·) and mGE (·, ·) are the same
multipliers as those in Propositions 6­7.

     In a nutshell, (1 - G ) Gt replaces -t as the AD shock in Proposition 2. The rest is the same. And
the following is then immediate.

                                                  yt
Corollary. With complete information,             tG    < 1 necessarily. With incomplete information, instead,
yt
tG                              ¯ G > 1, where m
     > 1 is possible insofar as m              ¯ is the maximum of the overall multiplier defined above.
That is, whereas an increase in government spending crowds out private consumption under complete
information, it can crowd in under incomplete information.

     Our theory therefore helps accommodate the Keynesian narrative of how a fiscal stimulus can help
boost consumer spending despite the increase in the tax burden. But unlike the Keynesian framework,
our theory does not rely on nominal rigidity and not require the boom to be inflationary.
     The fiscal-policy predictions of our theory are even more distinct from those of the Keynesian
paradigm if we shift the focus from "front-loaded" to "back-loaded" fiscal stimuli. By front-loaded
stimuli, we mean unanticipated shocks to current government spending, such as those modeled above.
By back-loaded stimuli, we instead have news about future government spending.
                                     news , where  news is i.i.d. across time and realized at t - 1. In this
     To capture the latter, let Gt = t -1         t-1
case, the AS curve remains again the same, whereas the AD curve can be written as

                                                  news
                                       Yt = -Rt - t    + Et [yt+1 ] + Bt + Gt .


News of a future fiscal stimulus is therefore akin to a negative demand shock today. The following is
then immediate.
Tth /y  , where y  is the steady-state (also, complete-information) value of aggregate output. This is a standard trick in
the literature on fiscal multipliers (e.g., Woodford, 2011) and it simply takes care of the issue that the log-deviation of the
government spending is not well defined when its steady-state value is 0.




                                                              27
Corollary. While an increase in today's government spending is expansionary, news of an increase in to-
morrow's government spending is contractionary, and the more so the larger the informational friction.

       A back-loaded fiscal stimulus is therefore contractionary in our economy. This is true even in the
absence of informational friction, thanks to optimal intertemporal reallocation in production: when
the economy expects an increase in the demand for goods tomorrow, it responds by economizing
on its use of resources today. But when information is imperfect, the reduction in current income
is misperceived by the consumers as a reduction in permanent income. Our confidence multiplier
thus kicks in, amplifying the contraction trigger by news of future increases in government spending.
       Finally, the fact that government spending crowds in private consumption when the informational
friction is large enough hints at our theory's broader ability to generate positive comovement among
different components of aggregate demand. We expand on this point in the next two subsections.


6.3      Borrowers and Savers

Consider a variant of our model that lets only a fraction   (0, 1) of the households be hit by an
exogenous discount-rate shock. Think of them as "borrowers" responding to a credit crunch, and think
of the remaining households as "savers." Although we do not explicitly model this situation, we use
this interpretation to allude to how our theory differs from, but also complements, the New Keynesian
literature on liquidity constraints (e.g., Eggertsson and Krugman, 2012; Guerrieri and Lorenzoni, 2017).
       The AS side of the economy remains unaltered. What changes is the AD side. The two groups
are identical, except for their different exposure to the exogenous shock (the borrowers are directly
exposed, the savers are not).
       When both groups are fully informed, the group-level demands are given by


                                            cb             b
                                             t = -Rt + Et ct+1 - t

                                            cs             s
                                             t = -Rt + Et ct+1 ,


where the superscripts b and s stand for, respectively, borrowers and savers. It follows that, in equilib-
rium, a negative realization for t reduces cb                               s
                                            t , reduces Rt , and increases ct . As the borrowers cut down
their spending, savers pick up some of the slack.38
       When information is incomplete, the group-level demands are modified as follows:


                                      cb             b
                                       t = -Rt + Et ct+1 + Bt + Gt - t

                                      cs             s
                                       t = -Rt + Et ct+1 + Bt + Gt .

  38
    This is immediate to see when the AS curve is vertical (  0). In this case, aggregate output and consumption are
invariant to t , implying that cs          b
                                t = - 1- ct . More generally, aggregate output and consumption fall with t , but it remains
true ct moves in the opposite direction that cb
      s
                                              t.




                                                            28
The terms Bt and Gt are the same as in our baseline model and the informational friction is again
measured by   (0, 1].

Proposition 13 (Borrowers and Savers). Suppose that the informational friction is sufficiently large (
small enough) and/or that the AS curve is sufficiently flat ( large enough). Then, cs    b
                                                                                    t , ct , and yt comove.


      The logic is straightforward. With complete information, cs
                                                                t moves in the opposite direction of
cb
 t because of the GE adjustment in the real interest rate. With incomplete information, this effect
is attenuated and, on top of this, the reduction in aggregate income causes savers to misperceive a
reduction in their permanent income. To the extent that this effect is strong enough (which is the case
when the savers are sufficiently confused) and the adjustment in the real interest rate is small enough
(which is the case when the AS curve is sufficiently flat), savers cut down their spending in equilibrium,
moving in the same direction as the borrowers.
      The New Keynesian framework can obtain a similar comovement between savers and borrowers by
assuming a sufficiently irresponsive monetary policy, or by translating the credit crunch to a deflation-
ary spiral, as in the ZLB applications by Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni
(2017). But this circles back to our motivation of why we find it useful to obtain realistic demand-driven
business cycles outside the nexus of sticky prices and Phillips curves: here, we have offered a reason
for why comovement between constrained and unconstrained agents may emerge even if monetary
policy tracks the natural rate of interest, the output gap is zero, and inflation is stable.


6.4     Investment

As noted earlier, our baseline analysis allows for variable utilization of capital (or "land") but abstracts
from investment. If we add investment but let it be decided under complete information, we run into a
familiar problem: whenever consumers spend less, the cost of investment (the real interest rate) goes
down in equilibrium, causing investment to move in the opposite direction than consumption. We
now show how this negative comovement problem is resolved when our confidence multiplier extends
from consumption to investment.
      To this goal, we re-interpret land as capital and modify its law of motion as follows:


                                      ki,t+1 = 1 -  (ui,t ) +  i
                                                               t +
                                                                               k
                                                                               i,t   ki,t ,                              (50)


where ui,t is the utilization rate, i
                                    t is the investment rate per unit of capital,
                                                                                              k
                                                                                              i,t   is an idiosyncratic shock,
 (·) is an increasing and strictly convex function, and  (·) is an increasing and concave function. We
let investment choices be made by the households and under the same information as consumption.
And we accordingly rewrite the household's budget constraint as

                                                                -1 h
                                          pi,j,t ch                              h          h h     h
                                                  i,j,t djdi + Rh,t bt+1 = wh,t nt + eh,t - t kt + bt ,
                       i[0,1]   j [0,1]



                                                              29
where eh,t , earnings net of labor costs, now represent the returns to capital.
       The concavity of  captures adjustments costs to capital, as in standard Q theory. More specifically,
we let  ( ) =  ,  ( ) = 1, and  ( ) = -, where  denotes the steady-state aggregate investment
rate and  > 0 is a scalar that parameterizes how large the adjustment costs are. As anticipated, such
adjustment costs make sure that the supply-side logic of our baseline model extends to the present
model. In particular, we can show that the AS curve is positively sloped, or that aggregate employment
and output respond positively to t , for any  > 0 as long as the real wage is sufficiently acyclical.
Had we instead set  = 0, as in the classics by Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (1995), Greenwood,
Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988) and King and Rebelo (1999), it would have been impossible to get
aggregate employment and output to increase with t .39
       To make sure that investment also responds positively, we need the increase in the real interest
rate to be offset by an increase in "investor sentiment." By the latter we mean the analogue of Bt for
investment: in response to an intertemporal shift in aggregate spending, investors confuse an increase
in sales and profits today for good news about idiosyncratic firm returns in the future.
       The basic logic of how our mechanism gives rise to comovement is therefore similar to that in the
previous subsection: just replace borrowers and savers with, respectively, consumption and invest-
ment. But the math is considerably more complicated because of the infinite horizon, the transitional
dynamics in capital, and the multiple kinds of forward-looking decisions. To contain these compli-
cations, we shut down the wealth effect on labor supply, let the aggregate discount-rate shock t be
transitory (recall that this isolates the confidence multiplier) and the idiosyncratic demand shock i,t
to be a random walk. We then prove the sought-after result under the conditions stated below.

                                                                ¯ ,
Proposition 14 (Consumption-Investment Comovement). There exist , ¯ ,  > 0 such that  <      ¯
along with  < ,  ¯  >  and  >  suffice for both ct and t to increase in response to a positive
realization for t .

       Because of the aforementioned complications, this result only provides sufficiency in the neigh-
borhood of ,   0 and ,   . A sharper necessary and sufficient for comovement over the entire
parameter space is offered in Appendix B for a more manageable, two-period version of our model.
Both results yield the same lesson: comovement is possible as long as the informational friction is
sufficiently large (small ) and the AS curve is sufficiently flat (small , large  and  ). The first property
maps to large procyclical movements in misperceptions of investment returns, the second to small
countervailing movements in the real interest rate.
  39
       For the proof of these claims, see the section "Aggregate supply: the role of capital adjustment costs" in Appendix B.




                                                                30
6.5      Bounded Rationality

Our confidence multiplier originates from an informational friction in the tradition of Lucas (1972) and
Sims (2003). Empirical evidence in support of such a friction abounds.40 More tellingly for our pur-
poses, a recent paper by Andrade et al. (2020) provides evidence in favor of the confusion of industry-
specific and aggregate shocks, which is what our model assumes under the interpretation of an "is-
land" as an industry. But neither this interpretation nor rational confusion is strictly needed for our
multiplier to apply. A similar feedback loop obtains in a plausible "behavioral" variant in which agents
have a less sophisticated understanding of the world than that assumed in Rational Expectations.
       Suppose, in particular, that agents use a simple, random-walk model to extrapolate current income
to future income:
                                                     h
                                                    Et [yh,t+k ] = yh,t .                                               (51)

This resembles the form of simple, "extrapolative" beliefs found in Barberis et al. (2015) and Gennaioli,
Ma, and Shleifer (2016). It also proxies an optimally "sparse" representation of the individual income
process, in the spirit of Molavi (2019).41 Whenever current aggregate income goes up by one unit,
agents believe that their permanent income has gone up by 1/. But if the increase in current aggregate
income is triggered by an AD shock, their permanent income has not actually changed. It follows that
the relevant misperception term is given by

                                                             1   yt
                                                      Bt =          t .
                                                                 t

In our original model, this term was given by

                                                        (1- )(1-)    yt
                                                 Bt =     (1- )         t .
                                                                     t

Clearly, the two expressions coincide when  = 0 and  = 1 (maximal informational friction and
random-walk idiosyncratic shocks), illustrating how our confidence multiplier can be recast as the
product of bounded rationality. This in turn let us connect to Akerlof and Shiller (2010), who also talk
about feedbacks between economic outcomes and confidence, and have a behavioral interpretation
in mind, but do not spell out how exactly confidence maps to a departure from full information and/or
full rationality.
       A similar point applies to the discounting of the GE adjustment in real interest rates, or the Gt
wedge. Consider, in particular, the following scenario. While a fraction of                       (0, 1) of households
  40
      See, inter alia, Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015), Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Ropele (2019), Cavallo, Cruces,
and Perez-Truglia (2017), Angeletos and Sastry (2020), and the references there in.
   41
      Suppose that individual income is driven by both random-walk idiosyncratic shocks (like h,t in our model) and
transitory aggregate shocks (like t in our model). Suppose further that agents can only use a lower-dimension, one-factor,
statistical model to track current income and form expectations about future income, but can choose that model optimally,
as in Molavi (2019). A reasonable conjecture is that the optimal model converges to the statical process of the idiosyncratic
shock as this shock gets larger and larger relative to the aggregate one.



                                                             31
are both fully informed and fully rational, the remaining are "level-1 thinkers" in the sense of Farhi
and Werning (2019): although they themselves experience an urge to consume less, they do not expect
others to spend less in the future. These agents expect future aggregate demand, and hence also the
future real interest rate, to remain unchanged. It follows that the relevant term is given by

                                                          +
                                                                      Et [Rt+k ]
                                          Gt = (1 - )           k                t .
                                                                        t
                                                          k=1


By comparison, in our baseline model, this term satisfies

                                                          +
                                                                      Et [Rt+k ]
                                          Gt = (1 - )            k               t .
                                                                        t
                                                          k=1


Clearly, the two terms coincide when  = . In this sense, the lack of information can readily be recast
as a lack of sophistication ("some people do not understand GE consequences").42


7    Conclusion

We revisited the question of why shifts in consumer spending, or other kinds of aggregate demand
shocks, trigger business cycles. Unlike the Keynesian framework, our theory did not rely on nominal
rigidity or the failure of monetary policy to replicate flexible prices. Instead, it combined a neoclassical
margin for intertemporal substitution on the supply side with an informational friction, or bounded
rationality, on the demand side.
    The first element allowed the aggregate production of today's goods to be responsive to intertem-
poral preference shocks, or other shifts in aggregate demand. The second element amplified these
shifts and also helped investment and consumption to comove.
    The main mechanism behind this amplification and comovement was our confidence multiplier, a
positive feedback between loop between current economic activity, consumer perceptions of perma-
nent income, and investor expectations of returns. A secondary, complementary mechanism was the
underestimation, or discounting, of the GE adjustment in the real interest rate.
    The same mechanisms were shown to dampen the fluctuations caused by TFP shocks at the same
time that they amplified the fluctuations caused by shocks to consumer spending. And these prop-
erties were true without commensurate movements in inflation. Our theory was thus consistent not
only with the Keynesian view that the majority of business cycles are demand-driven but also with key
business-cycle facts.
    To illustrate, consider the empirical template that Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2020) provide for
the "main business cycle shock" in the data. This is a shock that accounts, by construction, for the
  42
     This example indicates more broadly the similarity of the bounded-rational approaches taken in Gabaix (2020) and Farhi
and Werning (2019) to the incomplete-information approach taken in Angeletos and Lian (2018).



                                                            32
            Unemployment                            Output                        Hours Worked                           Investment                        Consumption
 0.25                                1.0
                                                                        0.5                                  2                                   0.5
 0.00                                0.5

-0.25                                0.0                                0.0                                  0                                   0.0

-0.50                               -0.5                               -0.5                                                                     -0.5
        1   5       10    15   20          1   5      10     15   20          1   5       10   15    20          1   5      10        15   20          1   5    10    15    20

                Utilization                          TFP                              Labor Prod.                         Inflation                        Nom. Int. Rate
                                     0.5                                                                   0.2                                   0.2
    1                                                                   0.5

                                     0.0                                                                   0.0                                   0.0
    0                                                                   0.0

                                    -0.5                               -0.5                               -0.2                                  -0.2
        1   5       10    15   20          1   5      10     15   20          1   5       10   15    20          1   5      10        15   20          1   5    10    15    20
                                                                       MBC shock                    68% HPDI

                                                   Figure 2. The "Main Business Cycle Shock" in the Data


majority of the fluctuations in the key macroeconomic quantities over the business-cycle frequencies.
Figure 2 reports the IRFs of a few key variables to this shock.43
       The key observations for our purposes are the following. First, there is significant comovement
between unemployment, output, hours worked, investment, and consumption, without nearly no
comovement in either TFP or only mild comovement inflation. Second, there is significant pro-cyclical
movement in utilization, which in turn appears to account for the pro-cyclical movement in labor
productivity despite the absence of pro-cyclical movements in TFP. And third, there is significant pro-
cyclical movement in the nominal interest rate and, since inflation is relatively stable, there is nearly
equal pro-cyclical movement in the real interest rate.
       These properties are consistent with our theory. The first property is essentially the definition of
the kind of non-inflationary, demand-driven fluctuation in the data that our theory aspired to deliver.
The second provides tentative support for our theory's emphasis on utilization. The third supports
both the idea that the underlying shock is an aggregate demand shock that pushes up the real interest
rate and the idea that the monetary authority is tracking the natural rate.
       The DSGE literature offers a very different structural interpretation to these facts, allowing for a
significant difference between the actual and the natural rate and attributing the lack of significant
inflation comovement to sufficiently flat Phillips curves. But our theory seems equally consistent with
all the key stylized facts. And although we cannot claim that our theory is "better," we think this proves
its value as a viable alternative.
       Last but not least, it is worth noting that the response of utilization reverses sign after a few quarters.
This is in line with the supply side element of our theory, and in particular the idea that demand-driven
business cycles represent intertemporal reallocation of utilization and production.
       This is all good news for our theory. It also indicates the potential value of quantifying our theory, a
  43
    The particular version of this shock considered here is identified by running a VAR on the ten variables seen in the figure
(using quarterly data for 1954-2017) and by maximizing the shock's contribution to the fluctuations of unemployment at the
business-cycle frequencies. But as shown in Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2020), the picture is basically the same, both in
terms of IRFs and in terms of variance contributions, if the shock is identified by maximizing its contribution to the business-
cycle fluctuations of output, hours works, investment, consumption, or utilization. And it is robust to the inclusion of other
variables, such as stock prices and financial indicators.



                                                                                        33
task we leave for future work. What, however, the above facts do not directly speak to is the magnitude
of the confidence multiplier.
       Ultimately, the sign and size of the kind of misperceptions--rational or irrational--modeled in this
paper is an empirical question. We leave this question for future work. But by explaining both the
macroeconomic implications and the precise nature of the relevant misperceptions, we hope to have
provided useful guidance for what exactly future empirical work should explore.
       Let us expand on this last point by relating to the empirical findings of Rozsypal and Schlafmann
(2019), Greenwood and Shleifer (2014), and Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2016). These works are sup-
portive of our confidence mechanism in the sense that they point out in the direction of expectations
of income and returns being excessively optimistic in good times and excessively pessimistic at bad
times.44 They do not, however, distinguish on whether such good and bad times are driven by the kind
of aggregate demand shocks that are the focus of our paper or by other forces, such as TFP shocks. The
litmus test of our theory is therefore conditional evidence for how expectations of income and interest
rates respond to different kinds of shocks--and it is this specific kind of evidence we invite for future
work.




  44
    Rozsypal and Schlafmann (2019) use micro data on household income expectations, and find that consumers over-
extrapolate from their current income to expectations of future income, as they overestimate the persistence of their income
process. Households with currently high income turn out to be too optimistic about their future income, while households
with currently low income turn out to be too pessimistic about their future income. Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2016) turn
the focus to the firm side. They find that firm CFOs over-extrapolate from current earnings to expectations of future earnings.
Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) find that investors over-extrapolate from current stock returns to expectations of future stock
returns.


                                                              34
Appendix A: Monetary Extension

The starting point of our paper was the desire to accommodate the Keynesian narrative of demand-
driven fluctuations outside the nexus of sticky prices and Philips curves. As explained in the Intro-
duction (and revisited in the concluding section), this desire was grounded on both "philosophical"
predispositions and empirical considerations.
    But the mechanisms we have identified do not hinge on the absence of nominal rigidity. They nat-
urally extend to a New Keynesian context. Indeed, they influence the properties of both the underlying
natural rate of output and the output gap. We sketch the logic below.
    Consider our baseline model and add sticky prices. Because our supply block abstracts from in-
formational frictions, the standard deviation of the Philips curve remains valid: inflation can still be
expressed as a function of the output gap. What has changed, however, is the process for the natural
rate of output, relative to which this gap must be calculated. In the textbook New Keynesian model,
the natural rate is invariant to aggregate demand shocks. Here, it responds positively to them.
    Turning to the demand side, Proposition 2 remains valid. But now the belief wedges Bt and Gt
combine misperceptions about natural outcomes with misperceptions about output gaps, and they
therefore depend on the conduct of monetary policy. To illustrate this point more, we next bypass
any specific description of how monetary policy is conducted (e.g., a specific Taylor rule) and instead
represent monetary policy in terms of "wedges."45
    As well known (e.g., Correia, Nicolini, and Teles, 2008), introducing sticky prices is equivalent to
maintaining flexible prices but allowing for a time-varying tax on labor and utilization, which is effec-
tively under the control of monetary policy. Denoting this tax by t , we have the following modification
of Proposition 1 and 2.

Proposition 15 (AS and AD with sticky prices). Let t denote a tax, or wedge, on labor and utilization.
Aggregate supply is given by


                                  yt = (1 - ~ ) (ut + kt ) - t ,                                                             (52)
                                                          +
                                 ut =   ~ + Rt
                                                  -   ~ + ~      (t - Et [t+1 ]) +  Et [ut+1 ] ,                             (53)
                               kt+1 = kt - ut ,                                                                              (54)
   45
      There is one subtlety here. To the extent that monetary policy does not stabilize the aggregate price level, its fluctuations
may reveal the aggregate shock. To avoid perfect revelation, we can either assume that consumers are inattentive or
introduce random consumption baskets along the lines of Lorenzoni (2009) and an earlier version of our paper. Namely, we
could let each household be randomly matched to, consume the goods of, and observe the prices of, a non-representative
sample of the islands in each period. This guarantees that the household would not learn the aggregate shock from observing
the prices of the islands it visits even when these prices comove with that shock. With the exception of the very last paragraph,
in the remainder of this Appendix we ignore this subtlety and focus on how our mechanisms interact with monetary policy
holding  constant.




                                                               35
Aggregate demand is given by


                                 yt = - {Rt + t } + Et [yt+1 ] + (Bt + Gt ) ,                            (55)


where Bt and Gt are defined as (28) and (25).

   Under this representation, a "hawkish" monetary policy that stabilizes inflation maps to t = 0,
whereas an "accommodative" monetary policy that lets positive demand shocks trigger inflation and
positive output gaps maps to a counter-cyclical t : it is as if there is a subsidy on production whenever
monetary policy is expansionary relative to the benchmark of replicating prices.
   The textbook New Keynesian model, which abstracts from variable utilization, corresponds to ei-
ther ~ = 1 (utilization is unproductive) or    (variation in utilization is prohibitively costly).
Aggregate supply then reduces to yt = 0 - t , where 0 stands for the natural rate of output and t for the
wedge, or equivalently the output gap, induced by any monetary policy that does not replicate flexible
prices. Relative to this familiar case, the key supply-side novelty of our analysis is to let the natural rate
of output to be sensitive to the real interest rate, in the manner explained in Section 4.
   Let us now turn to aggregate demand, or equation (55) above. In the textbook version of the New
Keynesian, this equation holds with Bt = Gt = 0. Relative to this case, we see that the informational
friction continues to give rise to our two mechanisms, captured by the same terms Bt and Gt as in our
baseline analysis. However, because the GE adjustment in the real interest rate is now modulated by
monetary policy, the magnitude of Gt now depends on monetary policy.
   Similarly, and more crucially for our narrative about confidence, Bt here contains not only misper-
ceptions of the "natural" level of permanent income but also misperception of the output gaps induced
by monetary policy. In particular, Bt can be decomposed as follows:

                                                   natural    gap
                                             Bt = Bt       + Bt   ,


where
                                                    +
                                    natural    1-
                                   Bt                     k        h
                                                                  Et [h,t+k ] dh
                                                    k=0
                                       gap         ¯ t [Mt ]
                                      Bt      Mt - E
                                                          +
                                                 1-
                                       Mt  -                     k Et [t+k ]
                                                  
                                                          k=0

 natural is the value of B that obtains when monetary policy replicates flexible prices (equivalently,
Bt                        t

the value of Bt in our baseline analysis); Mt is a measure of how much monetary policy deviates
                          natural is the corresponding average misperception, or equivalently the
from that benchmark; and Bt
misperception of output gaps.


                                                      36
       To put more structure on the new term, let us assume that monetary policy is such that


                                                     t = t +  t-1 ,                                                        (56)


where   0 indexes the degree of policy accommodation, or the size of the associated output gaps,
and   [0, 1) indexes their persistence.46 We then have that the gap between the actual present
discounted value of the output gap and the average expectation of it is given by

                                      gap       ¯ t [Mt ] = -           
                                     Bt    Mt - E                         (1 - )t .                                        (57)
                                                                     1 - 

As long as  < 1 and  > 0, a positive aggregate demand shock therefore generates a negative value for
 gap                                                          natural .
Bt   at the same time that it generates a positive value for Bt
       What does this mean? As long as  > 0, monetary policy lets output expand beyond its natural rate
in response to a positive demand shock. This translates to an increase in true aggregate permanent
income, which is perfectly forecasted under complete information ( = 1) but imperfectly so under
incomplete information ( < 1). It follows that, as long as information is incomplete, consumers un-
derestimate the increase in aggregate permanent income sustained by an accommodative monetary
policy. And because the true increase in aggregate permanent income is larger when the output gaps
induced by monetary policy are themselves larger (higher ) or more persistent (higher  ), the size of
belief mistake is larger under the same circumstances.
       This effect is reminiscent of the one regarding aggregate technology shocks in Section 6.1. As in
that case, the underestimation of the variation in aggregate permanent income works in the opposite
direction of our confidence multiplier. But whereas in that context the strength of this countervailing
effect was pinned down by exogenous primitives, here its is regulated by monetary policy.
       In this sense, an accommodative monetary policy goes against our confidence multiplier. But such
a policy also complements our confidence multiplier by helping aggregate supply be more responsive
to aggregate demand under sticky prices than under flexible prices. To see what we mean by this, let
us shut down variable utilization. In this case, the flexible-price AS curve is vertical and the natural
rate of output is invariant to aggregated demand shocks. It follows that, as long as monetary policy
replicates flexible prices ( = 0), our confidence multiplier is switched off regardless of how large the
informational friction is. But as soon as monetary policy is accommodative ( > 0), our confidence
multiplier is on under sticky prices, even though it is off under flexible prices.
       Perhaps more interestingly, our confidence multiplier helps amplify the power of monetary policy
  46
     It is possible to translate these parameters in the language of Taylor rules and Philips curves: a higher  corresponds to
a flatter Taylor rule and/or a flatter Philips curve (because such flatness regulates the size of the output gaps), and a higher
 corresponds to a higher persistence in the underlying demand shock, a larger smoothness parameter in the Taylor rule,
or a larger backward-looking component in the Philips curve (because all these parameters regulate the persistence of the
output gaps). This translation may be useful for quantitative explorations (which are left outside the paper), but adds little
insight. At the end of the day, the critical question vis-a-vis the theory is whether and by how much monetary departs from
the benchmark of replicating flexible-price outcomes--and this is what we shall explain below.



                                                              37
itself. To see this, abstract from the exogenous shock to consumer spending and, instead, modify (56)
as follows:
                                                              MP
                                                   t =  t-1 - t  ,                                                     (58)

      M P represents a pure policy shock, independent of any other shock in the economy. Then,
where t
                                                                                                 natural .
while the informational friction dampens the effect of this shock via (57), it amplifies it via Bt
       We conclude with a comment on optimal monetary policy. In the textbook New Keynesian model, a
monetary policy that stabilizes the price level is optimal becomes it minimizes relative price distortions
(or other costs of inflation). But in our setting, a monetary policy that does the opposite could be
desirable because it could let the variation in commodity prices reveal more information about the
underlying state of the economy (and, thereby, increase  and arrest our amplification). This suggests
a novel policy trade-off, whose investigation we leave for future work.47


Appendix B: Proofs

Preliminary step: the steady state.

We first provide conditions for the existence of a deterministic steady state and characterize it. By a de-
terministic steady state we mean a situation in which there are no shocks and all variables (c, y, l, k, q, w, ,
R, and u) remain constant. Also, for this step we work with the original variables (not log-deviations).
       In a steady state, the optimal labor supply implies

                                                                         1
                                                   w (c )-1/ = (n )  ,


while the optimal labor demand implies

                                                                y
                                                     w =             .
                                                             1 + µ l

Using goods and labor market clearing y  = c and l = n , we have
                                                              
                                                             1+                -1
                                             l =                  (y  ) 1+          .
                                                     1+µ

Using it to replace labor in the production function, we have
                                                                      
                                             
                                         1- 1+
                                                    -1               1+
                                      (y )               =                   (u k  )1- ,
                                                             1+µ
  47
     Note, though, that the presence of such a trade-off is likely to hinge on the informational-based interpretation of our
setting. In the behavioral variants discussed in Section 6.5, there may or may not exist a relation between monetary policy
and .




                                                             38
which is equivalent to
                                                                                    1
                                                                                (
                                                                            (1-) 1+  )
                                              1+ 1 - 1- 1
                                                     (        )               1
                                                                                 (
                                                                           1+  - 1-  1
                                                                                      ).
                               y =                                (u k )
                                       1+µ
Optimal utilization implies
                                           1 -  y
                                                      =   (u ) .
                                           1 + µ u k 
The evolution of the shadow value of the land implies

                                               (1 - ) y 
                                = (R )-1                 + (1 -  (u ))  ,
                                                1 + µ k

Optimal consumption implies
                                               1 = (R )- .

Together, this means that the steady state value u must satisfy


                                      1 =   (u ) u + (1 -  (u )) .                                     (59)


Further notice that the evolution of capital in a steady state implies


                                                  (u ) = 0.                                            (60)


As discussed in the main text, for a steady state to exist, one needs the solution to (59) also satisfies
(60), which implies
                                                (u ) u     1-
                                                         =    .                                        (61)
                                               1 -  (u )    
   Note that the existence of such a steady state imposes a restriction on the economy's parameters.
When this restriction is violated, the economy exhibits a balance-growth path in which c, y, l, k, q, w,
and  grow at constant (although not necessarily equal) rates, while R and u remain constant. We have
verified that this possibility does not upset any of our results. But we ignore it here because it is an
artifact of the exclusion of an investment margin: once we add this margin (Section 6.4), a no-growth
steady state is guaranteed for any non-infinite adjustment cost to capital. The logic is the same as
in the textbook RBC model: diminishing returns to capital guarantee that gross investment exceeds
(respectively, falls short of) depreciation when k is below (respectively, above) its steady state value.


Proof of Proposition 1.

(19) and (21) directly follow from the main text. To derive (20), we first aggregate (16) and (17):


                          t =yt - (1 + ) ut - kt ,
                          t = - Rt + (1 -  ) Et [yt+1 - kt+1 - ut+1 ] +  Et [t+1 ] .


                                                         39
Combining we get


      yt - (1 + ) ut - kt = -Rt + (1 -  ) Et [yt+1 - kt+1 - ut+1 ] +  Et [yt+1 - (1 + ) ut+1 - kt+1 ] .


Using the aggregate production in (19), the evolution of aggregate capital in (21), and the fact  
 (u )u        1-
1- (u )   =        from (61), we arrive at (20).


Proof of Lemma 1.

Lemma 1 follows directly from household h's Euler equation,


                                               ch     h           h  h
                                                t = - t + Rh,t + Et ct+1 ,


and her log-linearized budget constraint,

                                                   +                      +
                                                          k ch      h
                                                             t+k = bt +          k yh,t+k .
                                                   k=0                    k=0


Note that the Euler condition holds despite the informational friction, because we are using the house-
hold's own expectation operator.


Proof of Proposition 2.

Proposition 2 follows directly from the derivation in the main text.


Proof of Proposition 3.

From the aggregate production in (19), we have

                                        +                                  +
                                               k
                                   Et          yt+k = (1 - ~ ) Et                 k (ut+k + kt+k ) .
                                        k=0                                k=0


Then use the evolution of aggregate capital in (21), we have

                        +                                      +                              +
                               k                                      k       1                      k+1
                   Et          (ut+k + kt+k ) = Et                    ut+k +    kt -                     ut+k .
                                                                             1-                     1-
                        k=0                                    k=0                            k=0

                                (u )u          1-
Finally, use the fact          1- (u )    =          from (61), we arrive at (31).


Proof of Lemma 2.

The expression for Bt follows directly from the derivation in the main text. Now we turn to the expres-
sion for Gt .

                                                                     40
   First notice that, as all past aggregate shocks and all past aggregate outcomes are common knowl-
edge, future Bt+k and Gt+k are only functions of the future aggregate shock t+k . They are henceforth
                                     h [B         h
unpredictable in period t. That is, Et   t+k ] = Et [Gt+k ] = 0 for all h, t, and all k  1. From Proposition

4, we then have, for all h, t, and all k  1,

                               h            h            h
                              Et  yt+k ] = Et
                                 [~           [Rt+k ] + Et  yt+k+1 ]
                                                           [~                                          (62)
                               h             h                  h
                              Et  yt+k ] = -Et
                                 [~            [Rt+k + t+k ] + Et  yt+k+1 ] ,
                                                                  [~                                   (63)


As a result, we have for all h, t, and all k  1,

                                         h               
                                        Et [Rt+k ] = -    E h [t+k ] .
                                                         + t

From the definition of Gt in (25), we then have

                                      +
                              2             ¯t [t+k ] - Et [t+k ]
                         Gt =             k E
                              +
                                    k=1
                                  2                ¯t [t ] =    2              ¯t [t ] .
                            =   - + 1-  
                                               t - E            + 1-       t - E


Proof of Proposition 4.

Proposition 4 follows directly from Proposition 1, Proposition 2, and the definition of y
                                                                                        ~t in (33). Finally,
the terminal condition follows from the transversality condition of the firm.


Proof of Proposition 5.

Proposition 5 follows directly from the derivation in the main text.


Proof of Proposition 6.

Proposition 6 follows directly from (33), (38), and (39).


Proof of Proposition 7.

First notice that, as all past aggregate shocks and all past aggregate outcomes are common knowledge,
future Bt+k and Gt+k are only functions of the future aggregate shock t+k . They are henceforth unpre-
dictable in period t. From Proposition 4, we then have, for all t and all k  1,


                                    yt+k ] =  Et [Rt+k ] +  Et [~
                                Et [~                           yt+k+1 ]
                                    yt+k ] = - Et [Rt+k + t+k ] +  Et [~
                                Et [~                                  yt+k+1 ] .




                                                        41
As a result, we have for all t and all k  1,

                                       k                            k
                       Et [Rt+k ] = -   t and Et [yt+k ] = -           t .
                                      +                       +  1 -  

Together with Lemma 2 and Proposition 4, we have that AS and AD can be re-expressed as follows:

                         
          ~t = Rt -
          y                  t ,                                                                        (64)
                    +  1 -  
                                    1-       ¯t [~                   2              ¯t [t ] - t .
          ~t = -Rt -
          y                    t +      ~t - E
                                        y        yt ] +              + 1-       t - E
                      +  1 -       1 - 

Together with Proposition 5, we have

                                   1-                 y
                                                      ~t                  
                      1 +  -1 -        (1 - )            =       1+        +    (1 - ) .
                                  1 -                 t    1 -  

It follows that
                                                           
                                   yt           1 + +    (1 - )
                                      =               1 - 
                                                                    ,
                                   t    1 -    +  -         (1 -  )
                                                     1-

which proves Proposition 7. Moreover, from (64), we have

                                      Rt             1 yt
                                         =  -1            -       > 0,                                  (65)
                                      t               t

with  is defined in Proposition 7.


Proof of Proposition 8.

Consider household h. From (12) - (14), we know

                                                 1           
                                       wh,t =       yh,t +        ch
                                                 +1         ( + 1) t

Together with the fact the household's total income is yh,t , we know that her knowledge of (wh,t , eh,t ) is
informationally equivalent to her knowledge of yt . In other words, (8) is equivalent to

                        h
                       It    h
                          = It     h
                               -1  t  yh,t , Rh,t , (pi,l,t )i[0,1],l[0,1]  t-1 .


                                                                                           h, y , R
   We then know that the household h has three sources of knowledge about the AD shock t , t   h,t h,t .

Since past aggregate shocks and outcomes are common knowledge, the household h's information
about t are given by following three independent signals about t :

                               Rt        R       yt                       ,h
                                  t +    h,t ,      t + h,t , and - t +   t .
                               t                 t



                                                      42
                                             yt
From Proposition 7 and (65), we know         t    = m(,  ,  ) and       Rt
                                                                        t      =  -1   -1 m (,  ,  ) -  > 0.
Based on the standard formula for combining multiple Gaussian signals, we have

                            -2   -2                                        2     -2
                               + R   -1   -1 m (,  ,  ) -                      +    {m (,  ,  )}2
       ¯t [t ] = t =
       E                                                                                            t ,
                        -2
                        AD + -2   -2
                                + R  { -1  [ -1 m (,  ,  ) -  ]}2 + -2
                                                                       {m (,  ,  )}2

which leads to (42).
   Then note the following three properties of (42). First, the LHS of (42) increases with  while the
RHS of (42) decreases with . Second, at  = 0, the LHS of (42) is smaller than the RHS of (42). Third,
at  = 1, the RHS of (42) is larger than the LHS of (42). As a result, there is a unique solution of (42) in
(0, 1) . This proves Proposition 8.


Proof of Proposition 9.

First, as the equilibrium  is a decreasing function of the ratio /AD for any   { , R ,  } and
m (,  ,  ) decreases in , we know m necessarily increases in the ratio /AD for any   { , R ,  }.
   Second, suppose that there exists  < ~ such that m at  is larger than m at ~ . First, we know
that the RHS (42) is larger at  that at ~ . Second, because m (,  ,  ) increases with  and decreases
in , a larger m means that the equilibrium value of  is smaller at  that at ~ . This means the LHS of
(42) is smaller at  that at ~ . This leads to a contradiction.
   Third, suppose that there exists  < ~ such that m at  is larger than m at ~ . First, we know
that the RHS (42) is larger at  than at ~ . Second, because m (,  ,  ) increases with  and decreases
in , a larger m means that the equilibrium value of  is smaller at  that at ~ . This means the LHS
of (42) is smaller at  that at ~ . This leads to a contradiction.


Proof of Proposition 10.

Optimal local labor demand and supply in (12) - (13) remain to be true, but the local production is
given by
                                      qi,t = (1 - )(At + ui,t + ki,t ) + li,t .

Imposing labor market clearing and aggregating, we arrive at (44).
   Now, note that the optimal utilization in (16) and the asset pricing equation in (17) remain to be
true. Aggregating and combine terms, we have


     yt - (1 + ) ut - kt = -Rt + (1 -  ) Et [yt+1 - kt+1 - ut+1 ] +  Et [yt+1 - (1 + ) ut+1 - kt+1 ] .


Similar to (20) but using the aggregate production in (44), we arrive at (45). The evolution of capital in
(46) is the same as (21).
   The derivation of the AD in (47) is exactly the same as the main analysis.


                                                         43
Proof of Proposition 11.

First, let us provide the formula for Bt and Gt with aggregate technology shocks. We first notice that,
with aggregate technology shocks, the intertemporal version of Hulten's theorem in (31) becomes

                                +                                    +
                                                          1-~
                                       t+k Et [yt+k ] =       kt +          t+k Et [At+k ] .
                                                          1-
                                t=0                                  t=0


As a result, Bt defined in (28) is now given by

                                        +
                              (1 -  )
                      Bt =                    k      h
                                                    Et [At+k + h,t+k ] - Et [At+k ] dh
                                 
                                        k=0
                                1-          ¯t [yt ] +   1-      ¯t [At ] - Et [At ] .
                          =            yt - E                    E
                               (1 -  )                  (1 - A )

For Gt , from (25), we have
                                                  +
                                      Gt  -               ¯t [Rt+k ] - Et [Rt+k ] .
                                                        k E
                                                  k=1

                                  1
                       ~t 
   We now again define y              (yt - (1 - ~ )kt ) , similar to (33). Similar to Proposition 4, the AS and AD
in Proposition 10 can be re-written as

                                             1 - A
                               ~t =  (1 - A ) +
                               y                      At + Rt +  Et [~  yt+1 ] ,                              (66)
                                                
                                           1-
                               ~t = - Rt +
                               y                        yt+1 ] + (Bt + Gt ) .
                                              At +  Et [~                                                     (67)
                                            

   From the above two equations, and similar to (62) and (63) in the proof of Lemma 2, we have, for
all h, t, and all k  1,

                 h                       1 - A    h              h            h
                Et  yt+k ] =  (1 - A ) +
                   [~                           Et  [At+k ] + Et   [Rt+k ] + Et  yt+k+1 ] ,
                                                                                [~
                                            
                 h             h           1- h               h
                Et  yt+k ] = -Et
                   [~            [Rt+k ] +    Et [At+k ] + Et    yt+k+1 ] .
                                                                [~
                                            

As a result, we have for all h, t, and all k  1,

                                       h             h        +1
                                      Et [Rt+k ] = -Et           (1 - A ) At+k .                              (68)
                                                             +

We can then rewrite Bt and Gt as

                                1-           ¯t [~          1-          ¯t [At ] - At
                          Bt =         ~t - E
                                       y         yt ] +                E                                      (69)
                               1 -                       (1 - A )
                                ( + 1) (1 - A ) A ¯
                          Gt =                          Et [At ] - At .                                       (70)
                                 +        1 - A



                                                             44
                                                 +1
Similar to (68), we have Et [Rt+k ] = -Et        +    (1 - A ) At+k for all t and k  1. From (66), we then have

                                        (1 - A )   1     ( + 1) (1 - A )
                                yt+1 ] =
                            Et [~                + -                      A At
                                        1 - A             +  1 - A
                                       1     ( - 1) (1 - A )
                                     =   +                   A A t .
                                              +  1 - A

We can then rewrite (66) as

                                                       ( - 1) A                 1
                            ~t =  (1 - A ) 1 +
                            y                                               +     At + Rt
                                                         +  1 - A               

or
                                                             ( - 1) A                  -1
                           Rt =  -1 y
                                    ~t - (1 - A ) 1 +                             +       At .
                                                               +  1 - A                
Substituting into (67), we have

                                            -1    1 - A                 1-
                     1 +  -1 y
                             ~t =              +                  +             At + (Bt + Gt ) ,             (71)
                                                 1 - A                 (1 - A )

and henceforth
                                                    (1-A )
                                 yt    y
                                       ~t     -1 + 1 -A    +                       1-
                                                                                  1-A
                                A
                               =    =     =                                              .
                                 tA    tA         1 +  -1

     Now we calculate mconf
                       A    (,  , A ) by using (69) and temporarily letting Gt = 0. We have

                        -1    1 - A              1-            1-                    1-
 1 +  -1 y
         ~t =              +               +             At +      ~t - E
                                                                   y    ¯t [~
                                                                            yt ] +           ¯t [At ] - At .
                                                                                             E
                             1 - A              (1 - A )      1 -                   (1 - A )

As a result,
                                                                                                          
                                           (1- )                                     1-
                                           1-      (1 - )                           1-A (1 - )
        mconf
         A    (,  , A ) = 1 +                      (1- )
                                                                     1 -                                  .
                                                                                       (1-A )
                                    1 +  -1 -      1-      (1 - )                -1 + 1 -A
                                                                                                  1-
                                                                                              + (1- A )


We then know that

                                                                 1     -1 (1 - A ) +  (1 - A ) + (1 -  )
      mconf
       A    (,  , A ) < 1 if and only if  < ¯ (A )                 -                                     ,
                                                                                (1 +  -1 )

                 1          + k
where ¯ (A ) <       (so    k=0  Et [i,t+k ]   always converges) and increasing in A .
     Now, we use (70) to replace Gt in (71) and have

                                                        ( +1) (1-A ) 2 A
                                                         +       1-A     (1 - )
                             mGE
                              A (, A ) = 1 -                                           < 1.
                                                                (1-A )
                                                        -1 + 1   -A
                                                                            1-
                                                                        + (1- A ) 




                                                            45
Proof of Proposition 12.

As mentioned in the main text, here, we shut down the wealth effect on labor supply. As a result, the
optimal labor supply in (13) becomes
                                                  ni
                                                   t = wi,t ,


and ~ in aggregate production in (15) becomes

                                                              1
                                                   (1 - ) 1 + 
                                          ~ =1-
                                                         1      .
                                                      1+   -

With this new ~ , the aggregate supply equations in Proposition 1 remains to be true.
   In terms of aggregate demand, the individual optimal consumption in (22) becomes

                              +                                          +
        ch          h
         t =(1 -  )bt -              k Et
                                        h          h
                                          Rh,t+k + t +k      + (1 -  )             h
                                                                                k Et yh,t+k - Tth
                                                                                                +k      ,
                              k=0                                        k=0


taking into consideration of the tax. Aggregating the above condition, using aggregate market clearing
yt = ct + Gt and the budget balance Gt = Tt , we have

                                      +                                           +
                                              k
             yt = - (Rt + t ) -            Et [Rt+k + t+k ] + (1 -  ) yt +               k Et [yt+k ]
                                      k=1                                         k=1
                                       +
               + Gt - (1 -  ) Gt +            k   Et [Gt+k ] dh   +  Bt +  Gt .
                                        k=1


where Bt and Gt are defined as (28) and (25). Rewriting this condition in recursive form and using (48),
we reach at (49) in the main text:


                            yt = -Rt + (1 - G ) Gt + Et [yt+1 ] + (Bt + Gt ) .


In a nutshell, (1 - G ) Gt replaces -t as the AD shock in Proposition 2. The third part of Proposition
12 then follows directly from Proposition 7.


Proof of Proposition 13.

The aggregate supply block of the economy in Proposition 1 is unchanged and our intertemporal ver-
sion of the Hulten's theorem in Proposition 3 is maintained. On the demand side, from the consumer




                                                      46
optimality in Lemma 1 and similar to (29), we have

                                   +                                                   +
   cb
    t   = - (Rt + t ) -                   k
                                          Et [Rt+k + t+k ] + (1 -  ) yt +                     k Et [yt+k ]        b
                                                                                                              +  Bt     b
                                                                                                                    +  Gt .         (72)
                                   k=1                                                 k=1
                          +                                      +
   cs
    t = -Rt -                   k Et [Rt+k ] + (1 -  ) yt +             k Et [yt+k ]        s
                                                                                        +  Bt     s
                                                                                              +  Gt .                               (73)
                         k=1                                     k=1


Together, the aggregate demand yt = cb            s
                                     t + (1 -  ) ct is given by

                                     +                                                       +
                                              k
    yt = - (Rt + t ) -                      Et [Rt+k + t+k ] + (1 -  ) yt +                         k Et [yt+k ]   +  B t +  Gt ,
                                     k=1                                                     k=1

                                                    1-           ¯t [yt ] and Gt = -               + k       ¯t [Rt+k ] - Et [Rt+k ] .
where, similar to (25) and (32), Bt =              (1- )
                                                            yt - E                                 k=1       E
   Together, this means that, the response of aggregate output to the AD shock is essentially the same
as our benchmark economy, with aggregate discount factor now given by t and  is still given by
Proposition 5:
                                           yt
                                              =  · mconf (,  ) · mGE (,  ) .
                                           t
We now turn to saver consumption. From (20), (73), Proposition 3, and Lemma 2, we have

                           cs         yt              1-               yt     2 
                            t
                              = - -1     +           1-      (1 - )       +  + 1-  (1 - ) .
                           t          t                                t

               cs
As a result,   t
                t
                    > 0 if and only if

                     1-                                                                      2     
                    1-    (1 - ) -  -1   · mconf (,  ) · mGE (,  ) +      
                                                                      + 1- (1 - ) > 0.                                              (74)


A sufficient condition for the above is

                                                     1-
                                                    1-     (1 - ) -  -1  > 0.                                                       (75)


That is, when the confusion of the savers is sufficiently large ( small enough) and/or that the AS curve
is sufficiently flat ( large enough), the saver's consumption also positively comoves with the AD shock.
   Similarly, for borrowers, from (20), (72), Proposition 3, and Lemma 2, we have

                        cb            yt                   1-               yt     2 
                         t
                           =  1 -  -1                 +   1-    (1 - )         +  + 1-  (1 - ) .
                        t             t                                     t

                                                                       cb
We then know that, if (74) or (75) is true, we also have               t
                                                                        t
                                                                            > 0. In sum, as long as (74) or (75) holds, cs
                                                                                                                         t,
cb
 t , and yt comove.




                                                                47
Aggregate supply: the role of capital adjustment costs.

Here we verify the claim that, even with complete information, the combination of variable utilization
and capital adjustment costs allows for an "upward-slopping AS curve," or for aggregate employment
and output to comove with aggregate consumption in response to discount-rate shocks. In particular,
we show that this is true for any  > 0, as long as the real wage is sufficiently acyclical, or equivalently
when the wealth effect on labor supply is small enough and the Frisch elasticity is large enough.
   Concretely, we consider the complete information version of the investment model in Proposition
14. We still assume away from wealth effect of labor supply, but allow a general AR(1) process for
the idiosyncratic demand shock and allow the AD shock to be persistent. The complete information
equilibrium can be solved based on a system of equations consisting of the aggregate production (15),
the aggregate, complete-information version of (79), (80), (81), and (83), the aggregate Euler equation,


                                      ct = - (Rt + t ) + Et [ct+1 ] ,


and the aggregate resource constraint,

                                            c          c
                                     yt =     ct + 1 -        (t + kt ) .
                                            y          y

   Using Mathematica, we can solve the equilibrium policy rules in closed form for arbitrary param-
eters. Consider in particular the policy rule for utilization, which is the object of interest. This can be
expressed as


                                            ut = uk kt - u t ,

for some scalars (uk , u ) that are complicated functions of the underlying parameters. Taking the
limit as labor supply becomes infinitely elastic, or wages become nearly acyclical, we obtain


                                                         c 
                                                         y  
   lim u =          c          c                            c                                      c   ,
   +            - 2 y    +  (( y  ( +  +  - 1) -  + 1) +  ( y  (1 -  ) + 1 -  )) +                 y  
                                                                                                      (76)
which is strictly positive for any  > 0 (and 0 for  = 0). We conclude that, as long as  > 0, a
large enough , or a sufficiently acyclical real wage, suffices for aggregate employment and output to
increase with t .
   On the other hand, had we instead set  = 0 (no adjustment cost), as in the classics by Burnside,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (1995), Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988) and King and Rebelo
(1999), u = 0 for any  because utilization ceases to be forward-looking. It then follows from the
intratemporal condition for labor, as in Barro and King (1984), that aggregate employment and output
necessarily move in the opposite direction than aggregate consumption.

                                                    48
Proof of Proposition 14.

We first characterize the deterministic steady state. In this steady state, we have


                                                       =  (u )  .


Optimal utilization implies
                                                  1 -  y
                                                          =   (u ) k  .
                                                  1 + µ u
The evolution of the shadow value of capital implies

                                                      (1 - ) y 
                                            =                   + (1 -  )  .
                                                       1 + µ k

Together, this means
                                               1 =   (u ) u + (1 -  ) .                                                              (77)

       Now, we turn to the analysis away from the steady state, in response to the aggregate demand shock.
As mentioned in the main text, we let investment choices be made by the households and under the
                                                                                          h = Ih 
same information as consumption. The household's information set in period t is given by It    t-1
 h  w , e , R , (p
 t   h,t h,t h,t   i,l,t )i[0,1],l[0,1] , kh,t+1  {t-1 } .

       As in the baseline model, we log-linearize the equilibrium conditions, re-interpret all the variables
as log-deviations from their steady-state counterparts.48 As mentioned in the main text, we shut down
the wealth effect on labor supply. We thus write labor supply (or the "wage equation") as


                                                         ni
                                                          t = wi,t .                                                                 (78)


As in our analysis of government spending, the aggregate production in (15) continues to hold, with ~
redefined as follows:
                                                                        1
                                                             (1 - ) 1 + 
                                                 ~ =1-
                                                                   1      .
                                                                1+   -
Similarly, the local firm's FOC for utilization is still given by (16), which is rewritten here:


                                              yi,t - ui,t - ki,t = i,t + ui,t .                                                      (79)
                                                                                 k
  48                                                         k                   i,t
    The only exception to this rule is that we let the new   i,t   be given by   k
                                                                                       . This takes care of the issue that the steady-state
value of k
         i,t is zero.




                                                                   49
The evolution of the shadow value of capital on island i is now given by49


                       i,t = -Ri,t + (1 -  (1 -  )) Et [yi,t+1 - ki,t+1 - ui,t+1 ] +  Et [i,t+1 ] .        (80)


Optimal investment by the representative household on island i is given by

                                                         i
                                                    0 = Et [i,t ] - i
                                                                    t.                                     (81)


Optimal consumption by the representative household on island i is given by

                                                     i           i
                                            ci,t = - t + Ri,t + Et [ci,t+1 ] .                             (82)


The evolution of local capital is given by

                                                         1-
                                      ki,t+1 = -  +                 ui,t + i
                                                                           t+
                                                                                k
                                                                                i,t   + ki,t ,             (83)
                                                          

where we use (77).
      To prove Proposition 14, we first take a detour and solve the complete-information policy rules
of two different cases of our economy. They will be useful in the characterization of the incomplete
information equilibrium later.
      First, we solve the local equilibrium when the interest rate is fixed at the steady state value and the
local demand is independent from the aggregate condition and is only given by the idiosyncratic shock


                                                          yi,t = i,t ,

                                                                               i [·] = E [·], we can
where i,t follows a random walk ( = 1). Using (79), (80), (81), and (83) with Et        t

solve the local shadow value of capital as a function of the local capital stock and the local demand:


                                                     i,t = lk ki,t + l i,t .                               (84)


Unfortunately, there are no simple closed-form formulas for lk and l . However, using Mathematica,
we are able first to obtain a complicated closed-form solution for arbitrary parameters and then to
obtain the following simpler formulas for the case of a vanishing curvature in the utilization costs:

                    2  2 +  (2 - 1) + 1               ( ( - 1) + 1)  2  2 +  (2 - 1) + 1
  lim lk = -                            and lim l =                                      .
  0              ( + 1)( ( - 1) +  +  )     0       ( + 1)( ( -  ) + 1)( ( - 1) +  +  )
 49
      (80) comes from the log-linearization of the following condition:

                            -1       (1 - )    yi,t+1
                     i,t = Ri,t Et                        ui,t+1 - i                       i
                                                                   t+1 + 1 -  (ui,t+1 ) +  t+1   i,t+1 .
                                      1 + µ ui,t+1 ki,t+1




                                                               50
       Now, we solve the complete-information policy rule of the aggregate economy without the ag-
gregate demand shock. In particular, we consider a system of equations consists of the aggregate
production (15), the aggregate, complete information, version of (79), (80), (81), and (83), the aggregate
Euler equation without the aggregate demand shock


                                                ct = -Rt + Et [ct+1 ] ,

                                                c              c
and the aggregate market clearing yt =          y  ct   + 1-   y   (t + kt ). We arrive at the following aggregate
policy rule:
                                            ut = uk kt and qt = qk kt .                                      (85)

Again, we use Mathematica to obtain uk and qk for arbitrary parameters and then take the limit as
  0 to get a somewhat more tractable solution.50
       Now, we turn to the incomplete information economy. To prove Proposition 14, we impose three
additional simplification restrictions: aggregate demand shock is i.i.d ( = 0) ; the idiosyncratic de-
mand shock is random walk ( = 1); and the information friction is large ( = 0). That is, the typical
household has no knowledge about the aggregate demand shock t and  in Proposition 5 is zero. To
                                                                                        ¯ ,  > 0 such
prove Proposition 14, we only need to prove that, with those restrictions, there exists ,
                      ¯ and  > , the equilibrium levels of employment, output, investment,
that whenever  > ,  < ,
and consumption positively comove in response to the aggregate demand shock.
       We want to characterize the equilibrium responses of the period-t outcomes to the concurrent AD
shock, t . But since in the log-linearized economy the equilibrium response is independent from t, it
suffices to characterize the equilibrium responses of the period-0 outcomes to 0 (recall that the initial
capital is fixed k0 = 0).
       From (79), (80), and (81), the household's optimal investment decision is given by:

                  1                                                        (1 -  (1 -  ))
          i,0 =       -Ri,0 + (1 -  (1 -  ))      Ei,0 [yi,1 - ki,1 ] +                   +  Ei,0 [i,1 ] .
                                               +1                              +1
  50
       As   0, uk and qk converge to, respectively,




  and




                                                          51
Now, because the typical household has no knowledge about the aggregate demand shock. In her
expectation, future local demand is as if given only by the idiosyncratic shock, e.g. Ei,0 [yi,1 ] = Ei,0 [i,1 ] .
Then because the current period shocks become common knowledge next period, in the typical house-
hold's expectation, future shadow value of land can be characterized by the complete information
policy rule in (84):
                                        Ei,0 [i,1 ] = Ei,0 [lk ki,1 + l i,1 ] .

We then have:

        1                                                              (1 -  (1 -  ))
i,0 =       -Ri,0 + (1 -  (1 -  ))      (Ei,0 [i,1 - ki,1 ]) +                        +  (Ei,0 [lk ki,1 + l i,1 ]) .
                                     +1                                    +1

Now, we aggregate the above and use the fact that i,0 is a random walk and the fact that the household
knows the local capital stock ki,1 at period 0. We have:

                      1                                  (1 -  (1 -  ))
                 0 =    
                         {-R0 + (1 -  (1 -  ))      +                    +  l  y0                              (86)
                                               +1             +1
                        (1 -  (1 -  ))                         
                    +                  +  lk - (1 -  (1 -  ))       k1 }
                            +1                                +1

   We now turn to optimal utilization. First, note that, as the aggregate shock is i.i.d., the rational
expectation of future utilization and future shadow value of capital are given by (85):


                                    E0 [u1 ] = uk k1 and E0 [1 ] = qk k1 .


From the aggregate production (15), the optimal utilization (79), and the evolution of shadow value in
(80), we have:
                            0 = -R0 + ( qk - ~ (1 -  (1 -  )) (uk + 1)) k1 .                                   (87)

   Using (86), (87), the evolution of capital in (83), and the production (19), we can solve (u0 , 0 , R0 , 0 )
as a function of y0 and k0 . In particular, we have


                                                    0 = y y0 ,


where, again with the help of Mathematica, we can show that

                                             3  3 +  2 (3 - 1) +  (3 - 1) + 1
                             lim     y =                                      > 0.                             (88)
                          +,0                ( 2  2 +  ( + 2) -  +  + 1)

                            ¯  > 0 such that: whenever  >  and  < 
It follows that there exist ,                                     ¯, investment and output comove
when the informational friction is large enough.
   To complete the argument, we must verify that consumption also comoves. Take the aggregate




                                                         52
resource constraint (or goods market clearing):

                                                     c          c
                                              y0 =     c0 + 1 -             (0 + k0 ) ,
                                                     y          y

Solving this for c0 and replacing our solution for investment, we have

                        y      y  - c                        y  y  - c         y  - c
                 c0 =     y0 -        (0 + k0 ) =              -       y
                                                                         y 0 -        (k + 1) k0 .
                        c         c                          c     c              c

From the above condition together with (88), we then conclude that, when ,  are small enough and
                                                        y       y  -c
 and  are large enough (so y > 0 and                    c   -     c y      > 0), output, investment, and consumption
all positively comove in response to the aggregate demand shock. Finally, the comovement of employ-
ment is immediate, since
                                                                 
                                                          n0 =      y0 .                                                         (89)
                                                                 +1

Two-period investment model.

Now, we provide a two-period version of the investment model in Section 6.4. This model can be solved
analytically (without the help of Mathematica) and allows us to obtain a sharp necessary and sufficient
condition for positive comovement between all key macroeconomic quantities (employment, output,
consumption, and investment) in response to the aggregate discount rate shock.
       In this two-period version of our model, at t = 1, households make investment, consumption, labor
supply decisions,51 and the firm makes utilization and labor demand decisions, as in Section 6.4. The
capital still evolves according to (50). At t = 2, there are only consumption and labor decisions, but no
investment and utilization. All capital depreciate completely after t = 2.
       We log-linearize the equilibrium conditions and re-interpret all the variables as log-deviations from
their counterparts in the deterministic equilibrium without aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks.52
       The labor supply, labor demand, and the aggregate production in both periods (with u2 = 0) are
still given respectively by (78), (12), and (15). The optimal utilization at t = 1 is still given by (16). The
shadow value of capital at the end of t = 1 is given by


                                                i,1 = -Ri,1 + Et [yi,2 - ki,2 ] .


The optimal investment at t = 1 is still given by (81). The evolution of local capital is given by

                                                (u     
                                                  1 ) u1                1         i
                                 ki,2 = -                  ui,1 +                1 + ki,1 .
                                            1 -  (u1 ) + 1        1 -  (u1 ) +  1
  51                                                    h      h
    The household's information at t = 1 is given by I1   = 1      wh,1 , eh,1 , Rh,1 , (pi,l,1 )i[0,1],l[0,1] , kh,2 .
  52                                                                                
    Here, in this deterministic equilibrium, we do not need to assume k1        = k2  . That is, we do not need to impose that
 (u1 ) = 1 . We only impose that, in this deterministic equilibrium, there is no adjustment cost. That is,  (
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                      1 ) = 1 ,  (1 ) =
             
1, and  (1 ) = -.



                                                                 53
                                                                         i [ ] =  E i [ ] =  y       i
Aggregating the above conditions and using Proposition 5, the fact that E1  i,2   1 i,1       i,1 - E1 [y1 ] ,

and that k1 = 0, we have

                                   1            ~
                            u1 =       R1 +         k2
                                 ~+           ~+
                                  1
                            1 =  ((1 - )  y1 - [1 -  (1 -        ~ )] k2 - R1 )
                                 1
                                       (u     
                                         1 ) u1              1
                            k2 = -                u1 +                  1 .
                                   1 -  (u1 ) + 1
                                                       1 -  (u1 ) + 1


Together, we have
                                                       (u    
                                                         1 )u1           ~ +
                                     (1 - )  +      1- (u           -    1- ~
                                                         1 )+1
                             1 =                                                y1 .
                                                     (1-)(1-   ~)
                                         1     1+    (1- (u      
                                                           1 ) + 1)


As a result, investment and output (and employment, similar to (89)) comove if and only if

                                                   (u     
                                                     1 ) u1              ~+
                                (1 - )  +                           >        .                         (90)
                                               1 -  (u      
                                                      1 ) + 1            1-~

                                                    c             
                                                               1 k1
Using the aggregate goods market clearing, y1 =       c1
                                                     1
                                                    y1     +   y1 1 ,   we have that consumption and output
comove if and only if

                                 (u     
                                   1 ) u1
                                                    
                                                   y1     (1 - ) (1 -   ~)                 ~+
               (1 - )  +                       -       1+                              <       .       (91)
                             1 -  (u      
                                    1 ) + 1
                                                    
                                                   k1              
                                                           (1 -  (u1 ) +  1)               1-~

(90) and (91) together are necessary and sufficient for comovement among employment, output, in-
vestment, and consumption.
   Finally, note that (90) is more easily satisfied when  is small, underscoring the role of mispercep-
tions in helping investment increase in response to t despite the increase in the real interest rate. On
the other hand, (91) is more easily satisfied when  is large, underscoring how capital adjustment costs
together with variable utilization allow aggregate employment and output to comove with aggregate
consumption.


Proof of Proposition 15.

Since here we work directly with time-varying wedge (t ), we can still work with real prices and wages
as in the main analysis, in the sense of denominated by the basket of all goods produced in the current
period.
   We define the production wedge as the as-if time varying tax on revenue reflected in the local firm's




                                                    54
labor demand and utilization decisions:


                                                                  li,t = yi,t - wi,t - ~i,t ,
                                    pi,t + qi,t - ui,t - ki,t - ~i,t = i,t + ui,t .                                      (92)


The local labor supply in (13) now becomes

                                                                       i
                                                    ni
                                                     t = wi,t -       c.
                                                                       t

Imposing labor market clearing, using the production function in (11), and aggregating, we have

                                                                         
                                          yt = (1 - ~ ) (ut + kt ) -       ~~t .
                                                                         +
                 
Defining t =      + ~~t .   We arrive at (52).
    The shadow value of land is given by53


                    i,t = -Ri,t + (1 -  ) Et [pi,t+1 + qi,t+1 - ki,t+1 - ui,t+1 ] +  Et [i,t+1 ] .                       (93)


Aggregating (92) and (93) and combining terms, we have


yt - (1 + ) ut - kt - ~t = -Rt + (1 -  ) Et [yt+1 - kt+1 - ut+1 ] +  Et [yt+1 - (1 + ) ut+1 - kt+1 - ~t+1 ] .


Similar to (20) but using the aggregate production in (52), we arrive at (53).
    The evolution of capital in (54) is the same as (21).
    The derivation of the AD in (55) is exactly the same as the main analysis.




  53
     Note that what matters for the shadow value of land is the actual marginal productivity of capital, which does not depend
on the wedge i,t directly.


                                                             55
References

Akerlof, George A and Robert J Shiller. 2010. Animal Spirits: How Human Psychology Drives the
  Economy, and Why it Matters for Global Capitalism. Princeton University Press.

Andrade, Philippe, Olivier Coibion, Erwan Gautier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2020. "No Firm is an
  Island? How Industry Conditions Shape Firms' Aggregate Expectations." NBER Working Paper No.
  27317 .

Angeletos, George-Marios, Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas. 2018.        "Quantifying Confidence."
  Econometrica 86 (5):1689­1726.

------. 2020. "Business Cycle Anatomy." American Economic Review forthcoming.

Angeletos, George-Marios and Zhen Huo. 2019. "Myopia and anchoring." NBER Working Paper No.
  24545 .

Angeletos, George-Marios, Zhen Huo, and Karthik Sastry. 2020.            "Imperfect Macroeconomic
  Expectations: Evidence and Theory." prepared for the 35th NBER Macroeconomics Annual .

Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La'O. 2013. "Sentiments." Econometrica 81 (2):739­779.

Angeletos, George-Marios and Chen Lian. 2017. "Dampening General Equilibrium: from Micro to
  Macro." NBER Working Paper No. 23379 .

------. 2018.   "Forward Guidance without Common Knowledge."              American Economic Review
  108 (9):2477­2512.

------. 2019. "Confidence and the Propagation of Demand Shocks." MIT mimeo .

Angeletos, George-Marios and Karthik Sastry. 2020. "Managing Expectations: Instruments vs. Targets."
  MIT mimeo .

           ¨
Bachmann, Rudiger, Ricardo J. Caballero, and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel. 2013. "Aggregate Implications
  of Lumpy Investment:      New Evidence and a DSGE Model."             American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 5 (4):29­67.

Bai, Yan, Jos´
             e-Victor Rios-Rull, and Kjetil Storesletten. 2019. "Demand Shocks as Productivity Shocks."
  University of Pennsylvania mimeo .

Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer. 2015.           "X-CAPM: An
  Extrapolative Capital Asset Pricing Model." Journal of Financial Economics 115 (1):1­24.

Barro, Robert J and Robert King. 1984. "Time-separable Preferences and Intertemporal-substitution
  Models of Business Cycles." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 99 (4):817­839.

                                                  56
Barsky, Robert B and Eric R Sims. 2011. "News Shocks and Business Cycles." Journal of Monetary
  Economics 58 (3):273­289.

Basu, Susanto, John Fernald, and Miles Kimball. 2006.               "Are Technology Improvements
  Contractionary?" American Economic Review 96 (5):1418­1448.

Basu, Susanto and Miles Kimball. 1997. "Cyclical Productivity with Unobserved Input Variation." NBER
  Working Paper No. 5915 .

Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier. 2013. "Understanding Noninflationary Demand-Driven Business
  Cycles." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2013, Volume 28. 69­130.

------. 2018. "Real Keynesian Models and Sticky Prices." NBER Working Paper No. 24223 .

Benhabib, Jess and Roger Farmer. 1994. "Indeterminacy and Increasing Returns." Journal of Economic
  Theory 63 (1):19­41.

Blanchard, Olivier and Danny Quah. 1989. "The Dynamic Effects Of Aggregate Demand And Supply
  Disturbances." American Economic Review 79 (4):655­673.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 1995. "Capital Utilization and Returns to
  Scale." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 10:67­110.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel. 1999. "Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S.
  Manufacturing: A Generalized (S, s) Approach." Econometrica 67 (4):783­826.

Carroll, Christopher, Edmund Crawley, Jiri Slacalek, Kiichi Tokuoka, and Matthew N. White. 2020.
  "Sticky Expectations and Consumption Dynamics." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
  forthcoming.

Cavallo, Alberto, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. 2017. "Inflation Expectations, Learning,
  and Supermarket Prices: Evidence from Survey Experiments."            American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 9 (3):1­35.

Chahrour, Ryan and Gaetano Gaballo. 2020. "Learning from House Prices: Amplification and Business
  Fluctuations." Boston College/HEC Paris mimeo .

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans. 2005. "Nominal Rigidities and the
  Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy." Journal of Political Economy 113 (1):1­45.

Christiano, Lawrence, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2014.           "Risk Shocks."    American
  Economic Review 104 (1):27­65.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012.         "What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about
  Information Rigidities?" Journal of Political Economy 120 (1):116­159.

                                                  57
------. 2015. "Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation Process: A Simple Framework and
  New Facts." American Economic Review 105 (8):2644­78.

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Tiziano Ropele. 2019. "Inflation Expectations and Firm
  Decisions: New Causal Evidence." The Quarterly Journal of Economics :165­219.

Cooper, Russell and Andrew John. 1988. "Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian Models."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics :441­463.

Correia, Isabel, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. 2008. "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy:
  Equivalence Results." Journal of Political Economy 116 (1):141­170.

Diamond, Peter. 1982. "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium." The Journal of
  Political Economy :881­894.

Eggertsson, Gauti B and Paul Krugman. 2012. "Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-
  Minsky-Koo Approach." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3):1469­1513.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Iv´
                      an Werning. 2019. "Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete
  Markets." American Economic Review 109 (11):3887­3928.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2014. "A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality." Quarterly Journal of Economics
  129 (4):1661­1710.

------. 2019.   "Behavioral inattention."    Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and
  Foundations 2:261­343.

------. 2020. "A behavioral New Keynesian model." American Economic Review 110 (8):2271­2327.

Gaballo, Gaetano. 2017. "Price Dispersion, Private Uncertainty, and Endogenous Nominal Rigidities."
  The Review of Economic Studies 85 (2):1070­1110.

Gali, Jordi. 1999. "Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain
  Aggregate Fluctuations?" American Economic Review 89 (1):249­271.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer. 2016. "Expectations and Investment." NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 30 (1):379­431.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory Huffman. 1988. "Investment, Capacity Utilization,
  and the Real Business Cycle." The American Economic Review :402­417.

Greenwood, Robin and Andrei Shleifer. 2014. "Expectations of Returns and Expected Returns." The
  Review of Financial Studies 27 (3):714­746.

Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni. 2017.        "Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the
  Liquidity Trap." Quarterly Journal of Economics .

                                                 58
Hulten, Charles. 1978. "Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs." Review of Economic Studies
  45 (3):511­518.

Huo, Zhen and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2020. "Demand Induced Fluctuations." Review of Economic
  Dynamics .

Ilut, Cosmin and Hikaru Saijo. 2020. "Learning, Confidence, and Business Cycles." Tech. rep.

Jaimovich, Nir and Sergio Rebelo. 2009. "Can News about the Future Drive the Business Cycle?"
  American Economic Review 99 (4):1097­1118.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2010.      "Investment Shocks and
  Business Cycles." Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (2):132­145.

King, Robert and Sergio Rebelo. 1999.        "Resuscitating Real Business Cycles."      Handbook of
  Macroeconomics 1:927­1007.

Kohlhas, Alexandre and Ansgar Walther. 2019. "Asymmetric Attention." IIES mim´
                                                                             eo .

Lorenzoni, Guido. 2009. "A Theory of Demand Shocks." American Economic Review 99 (5):2050­84.

Lucas, Robert. 1972. "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money." Journal of Economic Theory 4 (2):103­
  124.

------. 1973. "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs." American Economic
  Review 63 (3):326­334.

Mackowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt. 2009. "Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention."
  American Economic Review 99 (3):769­803.

Mankiw, Gregory and Ricardo Reis. 2002. "Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to
  Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve." Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4):1295­1328.

Mankiw, Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers. 2004. "Disagreement about Inflation Expectations."
  In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, Volume 18. The MIT Press, 209­270.

Mavroeidis, Sophocles, Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, and James H. Stock. 2014.        "Empirical Evidence
  on Inflation Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve." Journal of Economic Literature
  52 (1):124­88.

McLeay, Michael and Silvana Tenreyro. 2020. "Optimal Inflation and the Identification of the Phillips
  Curve." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 34 (1):199­255.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi. 2014. "What Explains the 2007­2009 Drop in Employment?" Econometrica
  82 (6):2197­2223.

                                                 59
Molavi, Pooya. 2019. "Macroeconomics with Learning and Misspecification: A General Theory and
  Applications." .

Nimark, Kristoffer. 2008. "Dynamic Pricing and Imperfect Common Knowledge." Journal of Monetary
  Economics 55 (2):365­382.

Rozsypal, Filip and Kathrin Schlafmann. 2019.        "Overpersistence Bias in Individual Income
  Expectations and its Aggregate Implications." IIES mimeo .

Sims, Christopher A. 2003. "Implications of Rational Inattention." Journal of Monetary Economics
  50 (3):665­690.

Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters. 2007. "Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE
  Approach." American Economic Review 97 (3):586­606.

Woodford, Michael. 2003.      "Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy."
  Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S.
  Phelps .

------. 2011. "Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier." American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (1):1­35.




                                                60
