                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHAT GOOD ARE TREATMENT EFFECTS WITHOUT TREATMENT? MENTAL
          HEALTH AND THE RELUCTANCE TO USE TALK THERAPY

                                    Christopher J. Cronin
                                    Matthew P. Forsstrom
                                   Nicholas W. Papageorge

                                      Working Paper 27711
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27711


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




First draft: October 31, 2016. Current draft: August 20, 2020. We gratefully acknowledge helpful
comments from: Daniel Avdic, Victoria Baranov, Sonia Bhalotra, Pietro Biroli, David Bradford,
Michael Dickstein, Fabrice Etile, Bill Evans, Richard Frank, Donna Gilleskie, Barton Hamilton,
Robert Moffitt, and Michael Richards, along with seminar participants at ASHEcon Philadelphia,
Southeastern HESG Richmond, H2D2 Ann Arbor, SOLE Raleigh, Essen Health and Labour
Conference, and EWEHE Prague. A previous version of this paper was circulated as "Mental
Health, Human Capital and Labor Outcomes." The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christopher J. Cronin, Matthew P. Forsstrom, and Nicholas W. Papageorge. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Good Are Treatment Effects without Treatment? Mental Health and the Reluctance
to Use Talk Therapy
Christopher J. Cronin, Matthew P. Forsstrom, and Nicholas W. Papageorge
NBER Working Paper No. 27711
August 2020
JEL No. I10,I12,J22,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

Mounting evidence across disciplines shows that psychotherapy is more curative than
antidepressants for mild-to-moderate depression and anxiety. Yet, few patients use it. This paper
develops and estimates a structural model of dynamic decision-making to analyze mental health
treatment choices in the context of depression and anxiety. The model incorporates myriad costs
suggested in previous work as critical impediments to psychotherapy use. We also integrate links
between mental health and labor outcomes to more fully capture the benefits of mental health
improvements and the costs of psychotherapy. Finally, the model addresses measurement error in
widely-used mental health variables. Using the estimated model, we find that mental health
improvements are valuable, both directly through increased utility and indirectly through
earnings. We also show that even though psychotherapy improves mental health, counterfactual
policy changes, e.g., lowering the price or removing other costs, do very little to increase uptake.
We highlight two conclusions. As patient reluctance to use psychotherapy is nearly impervious to
a host of a priori reasonable policies, we need to look elsewhere to understand it (e.g., biases in
beliefs about treatment effects, stigma, or other factors that are as yet unknown). More broadly,
large benefits of psychotherapy estimated in randomized trials tell only half the story. If patients
do not use the treatment outside of an experimental setting--and we fail to understand why or
how to get them to--estimated treatment effects cannot be leveraged to improve population
mental health or social welfare.

Christopher J. Cronin                            Nicholas W. Papageorge
University of Notre Dame                         Department of Economics
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Halls                       Johns Hopkins University
Notre Dame, IN 46556                             3400 N. Charles Street
ccronin1@nd.edu                                  Baltimore, MD 21218
                                                 and IZA
Matthew P. Forsstrom                             and also NBER
Wheaton College                                  papageorge@jhu.edu
319 Memorial Student Center
501 College Avenue, Wheaton, IL 60187
matthew.forsstrom@wheaton.edu
1      Introduction
Mental illness is widespread and costly. Roughly one in five adults in the US experiences men-
tal illness in a given year, the most common being mild-to-moderate depression or anxiety.1
Mental health problems are consistently associated with a host of costly outcomes, rang-
ing from low labor market productivity (Frank and Gertler, 1991) to problematic parenting
(Ronda, 2019). Yet, how patients choose to treat mental illness remains poorly understood.
For example, below we describe a broad, cross-disciplinary literature which suggests that
psychotherapy is more curative than antidepressants for mild-to-moderate depression and
anxiety, yet the vast majority of individuals treating these conditions opt for the latter. In
the last two decades, antidepressant use has soared. In a survey running from 2011 to 2014,
about 13% of Americans over age 12 reported using an antidepressant in the past month
(Pratt, Brody, and Gu, 2017). For comparison, as of 2011, just over 3% of Americans over
the age of 12 reported using psychotherapy during the past year (see Figure 1). Failing to un-
derstand patient mental health treatment decisions impedes the development and evaluation
of policies to address mental health problems.
    This paper develops a structural model of dynamic decision-making to analyze mental
health treatment choices in the context of depression and anxiety. The aim is to shed light on
patient decisions--in particular, reluctance to use psychotherapy versus antidepressants--
and to evaluate policies that could affect these choices.2 To that end, the model incorporates
several benefits of antidepressants and psychotherapy (sometimes known as talk therapy or
colloquially as "therapy"). Both treatment options improve mental health, albeit to differ-
ent degrees, which increases utility directly and also indirectly through higher earnings. The
model also includes a host of costs that could help to explain reluctance to use psychother-
apy, including out-of-pocket payments (which are a function of insurance), time costs, and
disutility of psychotherapy. Moreover, the model accounts for a unique feature of the con-
text: just under 50% of people go to two or fewer psychotherapy appointments even though

   1. According to the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI). Moreover, as of 2014, there were more
than 222 million annual prescriptions filled for antidepressants, generating over $14 billion in revenues (Green-
blatt, Harmatz, and Shader, 2018).
   2. In what follows, the term "depression" is meant to include a narrow set of psychological disorders that
share a common set of symptoms and treatments (e.g., major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disor-
der, acute reaction to stress, etc.). Moreover, the term "antidepressants" is meant to include all prescription
drugs used in the treatment of these conditions (e.g., SSRIs, SNRIs, Benzodiazapines, etc.). In Section
3.2, we show that these conditions and treatments describe the overwhelming majority of mental conditions
experienced and drug treatments used by our population of study (26-55 year old Americans). Thus, while
our empirical analysis allows for a broader range of conditions and treatments, it is most appropriate to
interpret our findings as relating to the class of depressive conditions and treatments.




                                                       1
a typical course is 8-12 sessions.3 The reason is that patients may try psychotherapy, learn
they dislike either their therapist or perhaps psychotherapy in general (e.g., speaking about
private matters to a stranger), and stop going after the first or second appointment.4 We
model this behavior as a post-decision "shock" that ends the course of treatment and does
not improve mental health. This captures the idea that patients cannot predict an early end
to psychotherapy with certainty, but are aware it is a possibility when deciding whether to
incur the upfront costs of seeking psychotherapy, which could contribute to their reluctance
to do so. The addition of this feature is important. As we will show, reducing the possibility
of premature discontinuation is one of the few ways to increase psychotherapy usage.
    The structural model also addresses problems associated with the measurement of mental
health. In rich, longitudinal datasets such as the one we use, mental health is often indexed
using a series of targeted questions (e.g., the Kessler 6 or SF-12) or proxied using a coarse,
self-reported scale, of "excellent," "very good," "good," "fair," or "poor." While a worse
report of such mental health variables is associated with a higher probability of depression
diagnosis, two individuals with similar reports in a given period could have vastly different
underlying mental health problems. For example, one could be having a bad day and the
other could be clinically depressed.5 One way to address this issue is to focus attention
on individuals who are diagnosed as depressed, but there is selection into diagnosis.6 An
alternative is to observe individuals over time and categorize them as depressed only if they
report low levels of mental health repeatedly. Our approach is related, but does not require us
to make arbitrary assumptions about how to categorize individuals. In particular, we permit
unobserved heterogeneity in the form of latent types that can differ in average mental health
along with disutility of treatment and of work. This approach exploits repeated observations
over time to identify persistent differences in mental health, which delivers a better proxy

    3. Similarly high psychotherapy drop-out rates are well documented in the psychology literature
(Wierzbicki and Pekarik, 1993; Swift and Greenberg, 2012).
    4. An alternative explanation is that people go to a therapist once or twice in order to obtain medication.
This is unlikely to explain the pattern as our data set explicitly asks whether or not the reason for a visit
was to obtain psychotherapy.
    5. The Kessler 6 or other more formal measures are not available in our data for all periods, which is why
we rely on self-reported scales. While the more formal measures would be preferable, they are still obtained
by asking people questions about how they feel and are thus prone to measurement error. For example, see
Prochaska et al. (2012) for an analysis of the sensitivity and specificity of the Kessler 6 scale for identifying
moderate mental distress.
    6. Individuals must see a licensed health professional in order to be diagnosed with a disorder, particularly
if they wish to receive treatment; thus, there is selection into diagnosis, as those willing and able to seek a
diagnosis and/or treatment are more likely to be measured as ill. Using representative household surveys
and interviewers trained to diagnose depression, Thornicroft et al. (2017) report that among those in the
United States with depression during the past year, 74 percent "recognised that they needed treatment and
77 percent of these individuals made at least one visit to a service provider; thus, only 57 percent of those
depressed during the prior year saw a provider.


                                                       2
of mental health, as it is less prone to measurement error arising from intermittent drops in
reported mental health that are unlikely to reflect clinical depression.7
    We estimate parameters of the dynamic choice model using moments from several data
sources. First, we use the 1996-2011 cohorts of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey
(MEPS) data, which apart from mental health treatments and conditions, also contain rich
data on labor supply and earnings. One unique feature of this data set is that it includes
mental health information for individuals who are unemployed, which allows us to explore
links between mental health conditions, employment decisions, and related outcomes. In
principle, we should be able to estimate the impact of treatment on mental health using
these data. However, selection problems (in part due to the coarse mental health measure
discussed previously) and a lack of credible instruments make doing so difficult. Thus, our
preferred estimates rely on findings from a collection of randomized controlled trials (RCT)
summarized in the medical and psychology literatures. This means we can focus attention
on patient dynamic decision-making in light of treatment benefits credibly estimated from
more suitable data.8
    Model estimates reveal substantial heterogeneity among observably similar individuals.
In particular, there are four distinct latent types. Type 1 individuals comprise roughly 5%
of the population and have perpetually poor mental health (i.e., 1.6 standard deviations
below the sample mean on average). Type 2 individuals comprise roughly 16% of the pop-
ulation and have what might be considered moderate mental health (i.e., just 0.1 standard
deviation below the sample mean on average). Types 3 and 4 comprise the remaining 79%
of the population and have very good mental health. This heterogeneity is crucial in in-
terpreting cross-sectional patterns in the data, which show higher rates of low-to-moderate
mental health arising from intermittent reports of poor mental health. Indeed, if we take
all reports of low-to-moderate mental health at face value (i.e., if we do not allow for un-
observed heterogeneity), we over-estimate the number of individuals who could benefit from
treatment and do not use it, which inflates forgone benefits, leading us to under-estimate
the marginal benefit of good mental health. Regarding psychotherapy, the estimated la-
tent type probabilities suggest that the proportion of the population that could benefit

   7. A simple exercise we perform is to verify that individuals who report low subjective mental health multi-
ple times are indeed more likely (measured as a posterior probability) to belong to latent types characterized
by persistently low subjective mental health.
   8. In Appendix A.III, we merge two sources of county-level data into the MEPS in order to construct
instruments that allow us to estimate the impact of treatment. The instrumental variables strategy produces
effect sizes that are larger than those found in most clinical or field-experimental settings. Thus, we prefer
to use estimates from well-identified settings. If we instead rely on our estimates, results are qualitatively
similar to the main results; however, doing so deflates the estimated disutility of poor mental health, as the
model struggles to explain the underutilization of highly effective treatments.


                                                      3
from psychotherapy is somewhat smaller than cross-sectional reports of poor mental health
would suggest. Never-the-less, type probabilities identified from persistent reports of low-
to-moderate mental health mean that roughly 21% of the population could benefit from
psychotherapy--and the vast majority do not use it.
    Model estimates also show that individuals derive substantial utility from mental health.
These effects are identified by relatively high antidepressants use along with higher treatment
uptake at lower levels of mental health. We illustrate the value of mental health improve-
ments with a simple counterfactual that supposes mental health in the population cannot
fall below the sample mean. Applied to the US population as a whole, we find that citizens
would value such a technology at roughly $150 billion dollars per year (in 2018 dollars), with
the largest benefits accruing to Types 1 and 2. About 15 percent of this value is attributable
to recouping lost earnings from poor mental health. Importantly, finding large utility gains
from mental health rules out a potential explanation of low psychotherapy use: that people
simply do not value mental health very much. Our findings show that mental health is val-
ued, but that people choose not to use the most effective treatment available. Our remaining
counterfactuals are designed to shed light on this puzzle.
    In particular, our second set of counterfactuals assesses the impact of assignment to
psychotherapy (assuming perfect compliance) in one 6-month period, then tracks behavior
and outcomes over the following year and a half. As expected, the roughly 80% of individuals
with high baseline levels of mental health (i.e., Types 3 and 4) experience little change to
their mental health. Consistent with earlier work exploiting random assignment (Baranov
et al., 2019), the remaining 20% (i.e., Types 1 and 2) experience increases in mental health
in both the short and the long run, both of which are largest for the sickest individuals. This
improvement in mental health is driven in part by greater antidepressant use, suggesting
complementarities between the two treatments. Persistent effects are also driven by an
increased willingness to go to psychotherapy once individuals have gained experience with
the treatment. We do not find positive employment or wage effects. This finding runs
counter to narratives suggesting that policy aimed at bettering mental health could "pay for
itself" through increased employment or worker productivity (Laynard et al., 2007). It is
driven by the fact that among individuals with the most to gain from psychotherapy, labor
supply and wages are not very elastic to mental health.9 These discouraging results echo

   9. Both Butikofer, Cronin, and Skira (2020) and Shapiro (2020) find instances where observed increases in
antidepressant use yield greater labor supply. The contrast in our findings may suggest important differences
in the elasticity of labor supply with respect to mental health for marginal psychotherapy and antidepressant
users or employment-specific costs associated with psychotherapy. For example, our findings suggest that the
non-trivial time cost of psychotherapy makes employment difficult, which negates some of the employment-
enhancing effects of improved mental health that comes with psychotherapy use.


                                                     4
findings in Baranov et al. (2019), who show that women suffering postpartum depression who
are randomly assigned to psychotherapy exhibit substantial mental health improvements
compared to women in the control group--in both the short and long run. While these
mental health improvements are found to impact some choices, such as time and monetary
parental investments, they do not spill over to children's outcomes or lead to statistically
significant increases in employment.10
    While random assignment to psychotherapy, either in an experimental setting or as a
counterfactual policy, can shed light on the impact of psychotherapy, the population-level
benefits of estimated treatment effects accrue only if people actually use psychotherapy,
which they rarely do. This leads us to explore policies that focus on individual choices
versus random assignment. In particular, in our third set of counterfactuals we assess re-
sponsiveness to several commonly-suggested policies that would presumably lower barriers
to psychotherapy and thus increase usage, including monetary and time costs. Individuals
hardly respond to lower psychotherapy prices or a reduction in time costs. A notable ex-
ception is that, among the 5% of individuals in persistently "fair" or "poor" mental health
(i.e., Type 1 individuals), we see a 120 to 160 percent increase in psychotherapy use when
we remove the post-decision preference shock that leads to discontinuation, which yields
economically meaningful improvements in mental health.11
    These counterfactuals are somewhat bleak. Factors widely viewed as critical barriers to
psychotherapy use (e.g., time and monetary costs) explain little patient reluctance to use the
treatment. The only exception is a notable rise in uptake in the 5% of individuals with more
severe depression or anxiety when shocks leading to early discontinuation of psychotherapy
are removed. While this does not translate to higher employment for this group, it does
appreciably improve mental health and thus merits further exploration. Type 2 individuals,
who represent the 16% of Americans suffering from more mild mental health issues (but who
would still benefit substantially from mental health improvements), are nearly impervious to
the policies we consider, even when the cost reductions are dramatic. The effort to produce
meaningful improvements in population mental health thus requires that we look elsewhere.
    Our estimates suggest that simple disutility from psychotherapy is the primary disincen-
tive for use. It is entirely possible that this is correct, e.g., maybe people simply do not

  10. It should be noted that baseline labor supply outside the home is low for the sample in Baranov et
al. (2019), similar to Type 1 and 2 individuals in our sample, so there is little scope to detect any effects on
employment. Moreover, they do report increases in financial empowerment and time spent with children.
Unfortunately, we do not observe whether this is reflected in our results as neither is measured in the MEPS.
  11. The other three types each experience a 70 percent increase in psychotherapy when all impediments are
removed. The baseline is low, so the absolute rise is modest and has no measurable impact on population
mental health. E.g., Type 3 individuals' use of psychotherapy rises from 1.4% of periods to 2.3% of periods.



                                                       5
want to share private issues with a stranger. In that case, policy designed to increase psy-
chotherapy use would need to change the way psychotherapy occurs or is perceived, which
is challenging. Another interpretation consistent with this finding is that low psychotherapy
use is driven by stigma. An extensive literature has discussed stigma in the context of men-
tal health treatment (see, for example, Corrigan, 2004; Bharadwaj, Pai, and Suziedelyte,
2017), and there is evidence that stigma plays an important role in various other contexts,
such as social welfare programs (Moffitt, 1983) and HIV testing (Yu, 2019). Alternatively,
substantial treatment disutility may proxy for mechanisms outside the scope of the model,
such as heterogeneity in beliefs. For example, some individuals may not see psychotherapy
as particularly helpful. These beliefs may be correct if treatment effects are heterogeneous
or if outcome expectations influence treatment success, of which there is some evidence
(Greenberg, Constantino, and Bruce, 2006; Sotsky et al., 2006; Constantino et al., 2011).
Yet, well-designed, randomized trials with low rates of attrition have established large and
positive average treatment effects (see subsection 3.4.3), so this is unlikely to be the full
story. Instead, it is possible that beliefs are simply biased, i.e., that individuals incorrectly
assume that psychotherapy is not effective. Given that commonly suggested impediments to
psychotherapy do not appear to be binding constraints, data collection efforts should shift
towards factors that could shed light on the roles that heterogeneity in treatment effects,
biases in beliefs, and stigma play in deterring people from psychotherapy. We return to this
point in the conclusion.
   The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses related research. Section 3 introduces
the data used in this project and highlights several key empirical patterns that motivate
our analysis. Section 4 introduces the dynamic choice model. Section 5 discusses estimation
and identification. Section 6 presents parameter estimates, model fit, and the results from
counterfactual policy simulations, which use the estimated dynamic choice model. Section 7
concludes.


2     Literature
In studying mental health treatment choices, we contribute to a large literature engendered
by Grossman (1972) that views medical treatment decisions as rational, dynamic decisions
made under uncertainty. Within this framework, medical treatment is seen as a costly invest-
ment. Rational, forward-looking patients make medical decisions by weighing both current
and future costs and benefits of different treatment options. The Grossman framework has
been applied to a number of health contexts, such as chronic illness (Cronin, 2019) and


                                               6
infectious disease (Chan, Hamilton, and Papageorge, 2015) and extended to incorporate ad-
ditional features of healthcare decisions, such as learning and uncertainty about treatment
quality (Crawford and Shum, 2005; Chan and Hamilton, 2006), drug side effects (Papageorge,
2016), risky behaviors that affect illness (Arcidiacono, Sieg, and Sloan, 2007; Darden, 2017),
and links between health and the labor market (Gilleskie, 1998).
    A smaller, growing literature in economics also studies mental health. Generally, this
literature documents that mental health is valuable and corroborates the medical literature
showing that psychotherapy improves mental health. An early contribution is Ettner, Frank,
and Kessler (1997) who provide evidence that psychiatric disorders significantly reduce em-
ployment, hours worked, and income. In a more recent and groundbreaking study, Baranov
et al. (2019) find that random assignment to psychotherapy for women with postpartum de-
pression yields substantial mental health benefits that extend over many years. In another
recent study, Jolivet and Postel-Vinay (2020) estimate a job search model where mental
health and job stress play a role in selection into employment and across types of jobs. A
key finding is that negative mental health shocks are very costly, equating to roughly one-
third of the cost of losing a job for an average worker. While our findings are in line with
these papers, their key findings create a puzzle. If psychotherapy is highly effective, and peo-
ple value mental health, then why is psychotherapy rarely used? The unique contribution
of this paper is to shed light on this puzzle, which we do by incorporating various costs and
benefits of different mental health treatments into a unified framework to assess treatment
choices, in particular, reluctance to use psychotherapy. Doing so is an important complement
to previous work on the value of mental health and the benefits of psychotherapy, which can
only be harnessed if people opt for psychotherapy outside of experimental settings.
    To our knowledge, we are the first to apply the Grossman framework in the form of a
structural dynamic model of treatment choices and employment decisions to understand how
forward-looking individuals manage their mental health.12 This gap in the literature is itself
puzzling. It likely arises from some of the econometric issues we encounter in this study,
including difficulties measuring mental health and the impact of treatment due to coarse
subjective mental health measures; nonrandom selection into diagnosis and into treatment; as
well as limited data available to relate mental health, treatment decisions, and labor market
outcomes. Another unfortunate reason for this gap in the literature is that mental health
problems--perhaps due to widespread stigma or ignorance--may be seen as fundamentally
different from physical health problems. The implicit suggestion is that rational choice,

  12. Davis and Foster (2005) use the Grossman framework to study a parent's choice to seek mental health
treatment for their children. Yet, as Currie and Stabile (2006) mention, the Grossman framework has
generally not been applied to mental health investments.


                                                   7
applied in a wide variety of medical contexts, is somehow inappropriate for an analysis of
mental healthcare. This position ignores the fact that the vast majority of mentally ill
individuals manage relatively mild illnesses. Indeed, it seems especially inappropriate to
begin with an assumption of irrationality for Type 2 individuals, who make up the vast
majority of people who could benefit from psychotherapy, are least likely to use it and are
most impervious to policy changes; and yet, most are educated, married, and a nontrivial
fraction are employed.13 Moreover, it impedes progress on the fundamentally important
question of why people do not use a beneficial treatment despite widespread evidence of its
effectiveness, which is the focus of this paper.
     Finally, we contribute to a massive and well-developed medical and public health lit-
erature on the determinants and consequences of mental health issues, the effectiveness of
mental health treatment, and predictors of mental health treatment choices. Our approach
is motivated by earlier work on the substitutability of mental health treatments (Elkin et al.,
1989; Berndt, Frank, and McGuire, 1997) and patient price sensitivity (Ellis, 1986; Frank and
McGuire, 1986; Keeler, Manning, and Wells, 1988). In addition, we contribute to research
examining how mental health, treatment, education, and the labor market interact for both
adolescents (Currie and Stabile, 2006; Fletcher and Wolfe, 2008; Fletcher, 2008, 2014) and
for adults (Frank and Gertler, 1991; Ettner, Frank, and Kessler, 1997; Stewart et al., 2003;
Greenberg et al., 2003; Butikofer, Cronin, and Skira, 2020; Shapiro, 2020). Much of this lit-
erature focuses on more severe mental health problems, whereas we consider a representative
sample, which includes individuals suffering from moderate, mild, or no mental illness at all.
We are thus able to place focus on the relatively large set of individuals who are not severely
ill, but who could benefit from psychotherapy and yet choose not to, even when the costs
of doing so are drastically reduced. Finally, we relate to medical and psychological litera-
ture studying barriers to access and stigma as possible reasons why psychotherapy uptake is
low (Corrigan, 2004). This paper marks an initial attempt to incorporate various costs and
benefits of psychotherapy into a unified choice framework to understand reluctance to use a
valuable treatment and assess which types of policies are worth pursuing to increase usage.

  13. According to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, in 2015 18% of U.S. adults reported mental
illness in the past year, while only 4% report a serious mental illness. According to the National Institute
of Mental Health (NIMH), serious mental illnesses are defined as those, "resulting in serious functional
impairment, which substantially interferes with or limits one or more major life activities." Even among
these individuals, inpatient treatment, much less institutionalization, is rare. In 2008, only 7.5% (NIMH) of
individuals reporting a serious mental illness sought inpatient treatment.




                                                     8
3     Data

3.1     Data Set
Our empirical analysis uses data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), which
has been collected annually since 1996 by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(AHRQ). Each year, a nationally representative sample of new participants is added to the
MEPS, drawn randomly from the previous year's National Health Interview Survey (NHIS)
sample. Each cohort is interviewed five times over the two years that follow January 1st of
the cohort year.
    Several characteristics of the MEPS make it well suited for our purposes. The MEPS
contains individual-level panel data on mental health, treatment, and employment, all of
which are needed to estimate our dynamic model.14 To our knowledge, no other publicly
available data set offers this unique set of features.15 Moreover, the MEPS offers several
clear advantages over the large, administrative claims data that have become popular in
the literature. For example, the MEPS consistently reports a mental health measure that
does not require diagnosis. Such a measure is needed if one hopes to model dynamic mental
health transitions as a motivation for treatment decisions. Claims data only offer treatment
decisions and, possibly, mental illness diagnosis, which can only be observed if a patient
endogenously chooses to visit a physician. Moreover, researchers typically acquire claims
data from large, self-insuring employers; thus, all individuals are employed and insured.
Critical to our study is the relationship between mental health and employment, which may
be influenced by insurance status; thus, observing variation in all three measures is required.
    Despite these advantages, the MEPS data have several drawbacks. First, the panel is
short and individuals enter at various points in the lifecycle; thus, we need to address endoge-
nous initial conditions with our econometric specification. Second, an important relationship
we want to estimate--the impact of medical treatments on mental health transitions--is sub-
ject to selection bias and the data offer few credible instruments to help in identification.
We discuss these challenges in further detail in Appendix Section A.III.1. Third, survey
data are likely to contain measurement error in key variables, such as wages, medical care
prices, and medical care treatment, as the data rely on accurate self-reports of events that

  14. Eckstien et al. (2019) explain how dynamic models can be estimated using cross-sectional data as
long as endogenous state variables are observed. However, panel data is required if one is to capture
permanent unobserved heterogeneity in choice and transition probabilities. As explained in Section 6.1, such
heterogeneity is critical to our findings.
  15. An exception is the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS)--Medicare link, which focuses on the elderly
making it less than ideal for a study of mental health and employment.



                                                     9
may occur several months in the past. When administrative data sets report these variables,
they are likely subject to less measurement error; however, many such data sets used in this
literature exclude variables such as wages and the price of specific medical treatments due
to individual privacy and corporate proprietary concerns (e.g., Kowalski, 2015).
    Our estimation sample is comprised of individuals 26-55 years old from the 1996-2011
MEPS cohorts. We exclude the first interview period because lags of several variables are
important in our analysis. We exclude individuals who miss one or more interviews. We also
exclude individuals who have an interview period that is less than three and a half months or
greater than seven months. The resulting analytic sample consists of 54,989 individuals and
208,113 individual-period dyads. In Section A.I.1 of the appendix, we discuss these sample
restrictions and their impact on the generalizability of our results.


3.2     Mental Health and Treatment in the MEPS
The MEPS offers several ways to measure an individual's mental health and associated
treatment decisions. As we are interested in mental health broadly, the primary measure
that we employ is self-reported. Specifically, survey participants are asked, "In general,
would you say that your mental health is excellent (5), very good (4), good (3), fair (2), or
poor (1)?" Additionally, participants are asked to report all "health problems (experienced
during the current interview period) including physical conditions, accidents, or injuries that
affect any part of the body as well as mental or emotional health conditions, such as feeling
sad, blue, or anxious about something." The description of the illness is recorded as verbatim
text, which is later coded to 5-digit ICD9-CM codes by professional coders.16 While these
condition codes can help us to understand the specific illnesses afflicting our population of
interest, they are troublesome empirically, as they are prone to selection. Individuals who
have been formally diagnosed with depressive disorder, for example, and/or use treatments
for depression are more likely to report the disorder. This selection creates a form of non-
classical measurement error in the illness reports, as those willing and able to seek a diagnosis
and/or treatment are more likely to be coded as ill. This selection problem does not exist
with self-reported mental health.
    While variation in self-reported mental health could be generated by changes in any
particular mental condition, we argue that in our sample it should be interpreted as largely
relating to a narrow set of psychological disorders that share a common set of symptoms
and treatments; namely, Depressive Disorders (ICD9 Codes 296 and 311), Anxiety Disorders

 16. Only 3-digit codes are available in the public use files that we use in our analysis.



                                                     10
(ICD9 Code 300), and Stress Induced Disorders (ICD9 Codes 308 and 309). These "DAS"
disorders represent an overwhelming share of all mental health conditions reported in our
sample. Specifically, among all interview rounds in which a mental illness (i.e., ICD9 Codes
290-319) is reported, 93 percent contain a DAS report, while only 12 percent contain a non-
DAS report.17 Furthermore, in the section that follows, we show that self-reported mental
health is highly correlated with reports of these DAS disorders.
    Medical treatments are reported by the survey respondent. After reporting each medical
treatment, individuals are asked about the condition being treated, which is then coded as
an ICD9 code.18 For prescription drugs, individuals also report the corresponding condition
being treated, as well as the name, dose, refill information, and price of the drug.19 Because
self-reported mental health is not condition specific, the medical treatments that we model
can be related to any mental health condition. Specifically, an individual is coded as using
psychotherapy during an interview round if he or she (i) visited a medical office in person,
(ii) the visit relates to a mental health condition (i.e., ICD9 code  [290,319]), and (iii)
they received psychotherapy/counseling. An individual is coded as using prescription drugs
during an interview round if he or she filled a prescription for the treatment of a mental
health condition. Note that our choice to code prescription drug use in this way has two im-
plications. First, off-label drug use, which represents as much as 30 percent of antidepressant
use (Wong et al., 2016), is intentionally ignored in our analysis, as these treatment regimens
should have no impact on mental health.20 Second, this coding implies that we measure
the use of some drugs outside the class of antidepressants (e.g., SSRIs, SNRIs, TCAs, etc.)
and benzodiazepines (e.g., alprazolam, diazepam, etc.) that are commonly used to treat
DAS disorders. However, given the prevalence of DAS disorders reported above, it should
come as no surprise that the overwhelming majority of psychotherapeutic drug use observed
in our sample relates to these conditions. Specifically, among all interview rounds where
individuals report using a drug to treat a mental health condition, 91 percent take a drug to

  17. Examples of other mental illnesses would include substance abuse disorders, dementia, schizophrenia,
psychosis, ADHD, Autism, physical brain injuries/deformities, and mental retardation.
  18. Note that if the condition was not initially reported, an expanded set of questions is asked, so that the
illness is fully documented in the MEPS Condition files. This process of "back-coding" illnesses virtually
guarantees that illness reports suffer from the non-classical measurement error referenced above. Moreover,
the process ensures that illness reports provide a poor measure of one's current mental health, as someone
who is successfully managing their depressive symptoms with treatment (i.e., their mental health is improved
because of treatment) will still be coded as "depressed", due to the use of treatment.
  19. AHRQ attempts to verify the information provided by participants with the (medical) providers of
the treatment, via telephone interviews and mailed survey materials. For prescriptions, AHRQ attempts to
contact pharmacies regarding each fill/refill reported by the participant. Physicians are also contacted for
reported office-based visits, but may be subsampled at various rates in certain years.
  20. According to (Wong et al., 2016), antidepressants are commonly used to treat migraines, insomnia,
pain, menopause, etc.


                                                      11
treat a DAS disorder (i.e., ICD9 Codes 296, 300, 308, 309, or 311). In light of this fact, and
to simplify our language, in what follows we refer to this "prescription drug use for mental
health conditions" as "antidepressant use."


3.3     Descriptive Statistics
The third column of Table A.I presents descriptive statistics for the analytic sample. (The
first two columns report statistics for larger samples, which includes individuals with missing
data). For the analytic sample, 17 percent of people report a DAS disorder at some point
during their two years in the sample. Average subjective mental health is 3.9. Antidepres-
sants are used much more frequently than psychotherapy. Only 4 percent of people ever use
psychotherapy over the two year sample period, while 12 percent use antidepressants.
    Tables 1, 2, and 3 further detail the relationship between demographics, mental health,
and treatment choices. Table 1 shows how subjective mental health and treatment decisions
differ by age. The first two columns highlight that as people age, subjective mental health
worsens and the likelihood of reporting a DAS condition increases. For example, 6.0 percent
of 26-30 year-olds report a DAS condition, while the same is true of 13.5 percent of individuals
between 51 and 55. Similarity in these age patterns is one piece of evidence that both
subjective mental health and the diagnosis of a condition capture variation in latent mental
health. The correlation between these and two other measures of mental health is further
discussed in Appendix Section A.I.3.
    Columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 show antidepressant and psychotherapy usage, respectively,
by age group. Three patterns emerge. One, use of mental health treatment rises with
age. Two, an individual is about three-to-five times more likely to use antidepressants than
psychotherapy in an interview period. Three, the relative popularity of antidepressants holds
across age groups, and psychotherapy becomes even less popular (relative to antidepressants)
as individuals age.
   Table 2 presents sample means for demographic and labor market variables by treatment
choice. The statistics indicate that those individuals who use psychotherapy (columns 2 and
3) are younger, less likely to be married, more likely to live in a metropolitan statistical
area (MSA), and are more highly educated than those who use antidepressants alone.21
Individuals in treatment have worse subjective mental health than those not in treatment,
and those using both types of treatment have the worst subjective mental health, all of which
suggests selection into treatment.

 21. Note that here, and throughout the paper, dollar values are reported in 2018 dollars unless stated
otherwise


                                                  12
   Table 3 presents sample means by level of subjective mental health. The following are
associated with worse subjective mental health: being female, older ages, living outside an
MSA, being unmarried, living in the South, and being a part of a racial or ethnic minority
group. Moreover, unemployment rises as mental health declines. Across levels of subjective
mental health, individuals are more likely to choose antidepressants than psychotherapy.
For example, individuals in the lowest subjective mental health category remain more than
twice as likely to use antidepressants as they are to use psychotherapy and those in the
second-to-lowest subjective mental health category are almost three times as likely to use
antidepressants.
   Table 3 again reveals a close relationship between mental health and reporting a condition;
however, even at low levels of subjective mental health, a large proportion of individuals do
not report a condition. The fact that those with very low subjective mental health do not
always report a condition could result from either undiagnosed conditions or from subjective
mental health being an imperfect measurement of latent mental health.
    In Table 4, we group individuals by the lowest subjective mental health that they report
over the course of the survey. Within these groups, we show the proportion that ever report
a DAS disorder and the corresponding proportion using treatment. This decomposition
again emphasizes that (i) subjective mental health is strongly correlated with diagnosed
disorders and (ii) a large share of those who report poor or fair mental health never report a
disorder. Moreover, among those who report poor or fair subjective mental health, treatment
probabilities are much lower for those who do not report a disorder. For example, of those
who report poor mental health at least once and also report a DAS disorder at least once, 43
percent use psychotherapy and 78 percent use antidepressants, but among those not reporting
a disorder only 7 percent use psychotherapy and 9 percent use antidepressants. This is further
evidence of either (i) undiagnosed and untreated disorders or (ii) subjective mental health
being an imperfect measure of latent mental health.22 That the average subjective mental
health across all interviews is consistently higher for those who never report a DAS condition
than for those who do, even when holding fixed the lowest level of subjective mental health,
suggests that poor subjective mental health sometimes reflects a temporary dip in emotional
health rather than the existence of a condition.
  22. We have also calculated the statistics in Table 4 across insurance statuses and find that, regardless
of insurance status, reporting a disorder is more predictive of treatment use than reporting low levels of
subjective mental health.




                                                    13
3.4     Key Empirical Patterns
3.4.1   Treatment Usage

As shown in Tables 3 and 4, individuals are unlikely to use psychotherapy and are far more
likely to use antidepressants than psychotherapy regardless of subjective mental health or
reporting of a DAS disorder. Table 5 presents estimates from a multinomial logit model,
where the outcome categories are no treatment, antidepressants only, psychotherapy only,
and both antidepressants and psychotherapy. This exercise highlights heterogeneity in treat-
ment use across demographics, which provides some insight into why individuals are unlikely
to use psychotherapy despite its significant benefits. For example, that insured individuals
are the most likely to use treatment suggests that financial costs are a barrier to receiving
care. The fact that the most likely subgroup to use psychotherapy is college-educated, white
women, living in a northeastern MSA suggests that stigma and access to care could be im-
portant determinants of psychotherapy use. However, even for this group, psychotherapy is
unpopular relative to antidepressants--the average predicted probability of using any psy-
chotherapy is 0.059, whereas the predicted probability of using antidepressants alone is 0.084
and the probability of using any antidepressants is 0.126. The highly-persistent unpopularity
of psychotherapy across delineated demographic groups and mental health categories sug-
gests that a more robust choice model is needed to understand how patients choose mental
health treatments.


3.4.2   Costs of Treatment

That individuals rarely use psychotherapy could be a reflection of the high cost of attending
psychotherapy. The most obvious treatment cost to consider is the monetary cost. In
Appendix Table A.II, we provide summary statistics for the monetary cost associated with
a single psychotherapy visit and a single antidepressant prescription fill, both across time
and insurance status. Note that across all insurance types, a large fraction of psychotherapy
requires no out-of-pocket payment. For the insured, this is due to cost-sharing. For the
uninsured, this is likely due to charity care and public mental health clinics. Prescription
drugs are the most expensive for the uninsured, followed by publicly insured individuals. The
inflation-adjusted total price of both treatments has increased over time, while the share paid
out of pocket has decreased.
   Another cost relates to uncertainty. One striking feature of the data is that a large
proportion of the individuals who attend psychotherapy do so only once or twice before
stopping treatment. To show this, we define a psychotherapy treatment episode as a con-


                                              14
secutive sequence of psychotherapy sessions occurring without a two-month gap in visits.
Figure 3 contains a histogram of the number of psychotherapy visits within each treat-
ment episode. Notice that roughly 50% of these treatment episodes contain only one or
two visits, meaning one or two psychotherapy sessions are attended without any sessions
attended in the two months preceding or following these visits. It is highly unlikely that
such a course of treatment would be prescribed; rather, such behavior reflects what is called
"drop-out" or "discontinuation" in the psychology literature, where similarly high rates are
reported (Wierzbicki and Pekarik, 1993; Swift and Greenberg, 2012). Many of those who
consume psychotherapy at some point during the two-year survey period (1,847 individuals)
are observed to only consume these very short treatment episodes (583 individuals or 31.5
percent). Relative to other psychotherapy users, those who consume these short psychother-
apy episodes are more likely to be from the South, are less educated, are less likely to live
in an MSA, and have better subjective mental health.
     We assume that treatment episodes containing only one or two visits represent a discon-
tinuation of psychotherapy, which could either mean (i) that the individual is an inexperi-
enced psychotherapy user and, upon their initial visit, learns that they dislike this type of
treatment and quits or (ii) that the individual, experienced or inexperienced, visits a new
therapist that happens to be a bad match, leading them to quit treatment.23 Unfortunately,
we are not able to see the identity of the therapist that an individual visits and we have lim-
ited information on an individual's history of psychotherapy use; thus, distinguishing type
(i) and type (ii) individuals from those who consciously visit a therapist every 3-4 months is
difficult with our data. In our main analyses, we will view such episodes as an unanticipated
discontinuation of psychotherapy, which means some costs, but no benefits, of treatment are
incurred.24
   Finally, psychotherapy carries a significant time cost, as individuals must travel to and
participate in individual psychotherapy sessions, which average 50-55 minutes in length.

  23. The psychology literature refers to the relationship between therapist and patient as "therapeutic
alliance" (Ardito and Rabellino, 2011).
  24. Clinical psychologists have struggled to determine whether patients discontinuing treatment experience
an improvement in mental health, as discontinuation cannot be randomized and patient outcomes are not
visible once they stop attending psychotherapy sessions. Cahill et al. (2003) explores the phenomenon by
having patients complete the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) prior to each psychotherapy session, allowing
them to compare last session BDI scores for those completing and not completing an agreed upon number
of sessions. (There was no control group not receiving psychotherapy to which non-completers could be
compared.) They find that 71 percent of completers reached a clinically significant improvement in their
depression symptoms, while only 13 percent of non-completers did. Hansen, Lambert, and Forman (2002)
take an alternative approach, conducting meta-analyses of studies using both clinical and naturalistic data.
They find that average treatment effects are roughly 2-3 times larger in a clinical setting, where the average
number of visits is 2-3 times more, due to discontinuation in the naturalistic setting.



                                                     15
While neither of these time costs are observable in the data, we do observe and model
employment, which has a substantial effect on the available time an individual has for psy-
chotherapy. One way to capture this cost in the structural model would be to explicitly
model preferences for leisure, which could be decreasing in work hours and some fixed psy-
chotherapy time cost (e.g., 2 hours, which would include a 50 minute session and 70 minutes
of round-trip travel time). To provide some evidence that time costs are relevant in decision
making, we reestimate the multinomial logit model discussed above, controlling for part-
and full-time employment.25 Consistent with these treatments having relevant time costs,
we find that full-time workers are less likely than part-time workers, who are less likely than
the unemployed, to use all types of treatment. Moreover, this relationship is strongest for
individuals consuming both types of treatment. With that said, we do find that antidepres-
sant use is also decreasing in employment, possibly suggesting that in addition to time costs,
the well documented side-effects commonly associated with these drugs impair an individ-
uals ability to work (Cascade, Kalali, and Kennedy, 2009). In light of these findings, we
decided not to measure leisure directly in the structural model; rather, we allow preferences
for treatment to vary with employment. The latter approach is more flexible in the sense
that it captures time costs, but also any other employment-related motivations for not using
treatment.


3.4.3    Benefits of Treatment

It is possible that psychotherapy is rarely used because it has limited benefits relative to
antidepressants. To consider the benefits of treatment, we turn to the medical literature that
has estimated the effects of these treatments on mental health using randomized controlled
trials. Effect sizes in the medical literature are typically standardized, i.e., the mean effect is
divided by the standard deviation of the outcome, making for a relatively easy comparison of
the magnitude of the effects of psychotherapy and antidepressants across research studies.26
In what follows, we focus on effect sizes estimated for depression and anxiety scales, such as
the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale and Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale.
   With respect to the effect of antidepressants on depression, results are consistent across
the most highly cited medical research. Turner et al. (2008) performed a meta-analyses of
both published and unpublished studies submitted to the Food and Drug Administration for

  25. Clearly, employment is endogenous in this simple model, as treatment could also impact the decision
to work. As such, this exercise is only meant to be suggestive. These results are available upon request.
  26. Different research articles use different measures of the standard deviation based on the type of analysis
or meta-analysis being performed. For example, while some report a simple standardized mean difference
(SMD), many meta-analyses use either Cohen's d statistic, where a pooled standard deviation is used in the
denominator, or Hedges' h statistic, where a pooled, weighted standard deviation is used in the denominator.

                                                      16
review. Among published studies, they report a standardized effect size of 0.37 with a 95
percent confidence interval from 0.33 to 0.41. Among unpublished studies, they report an
effect size of 0.15 with a 95 percent confidence interval from 0.08 to 0.22. Kirsch et al. (2008)
also perform a meta-analysis and report an effect size of 0.32 with a confidence interval from
0.25 to 0.40. A more recent study by Cipriani et al. (2018) found a similar effect size at 0.3
with a 95 percent confidence interval from 0.26 to 0.34. Regarding the effects of medication
on anxiety, Mitte et al. (2005) perform a meta-analysis and document that benzodiazepines
and azapirones have effect sizes of 0.32 and 0.30, respectively.
    For psychotherapy, in the most highly cited papers, there is a broader range of effect
size estimates, but the effect sizes are consistently higher than for antidepressants.27 Figure
2 shows effect sizes and confidence intervals for psychotherapy from the medical literature.
Gloaguen et al. (1998) directly compare the effects of psychotherapy on depression with the
effects of antidepressants. They find an effect size of 0.82 for cognitive psychotherapy relative
to placebo and an effect size of 0.38 for cognitive psychotherapy relative to antidepressants.
Ekers, Richards, and Gilbody (2008) report an effect size for behavioral psychotherapy rel-
ative to placebo of 0.70 with a 95 percent confidence interval from 0.39 to 1.00.28 Gould
et al. (1997) consider studies that estimate the effects of psychotherapy on generalized anx-
iety disorder and report a mean effect size of 0.7 with a 95% confidence interval from 0.57
to 0.83. Smits and Hofmann (2009) also focus on those with generalized anxiety disorders
and find an effect size of 0.73 for anxiety measures and an effect size of 0.45 for depression
measures (among those with anxiety). Hofmann et al. (2012) review the literature on the
effects of cognitive behavioral psychotherapy (CBT) and report that papers tend to find that
CBT has "small to moderate" effect sizes for depression and "moderate to large" effect sizes
for anxiety.29 A potential concern with each of these randomized controlled trials is that
the treatment environment and patient characteristics may not reflect the typical patient
experience. Stewart and Chambless (2009) conduct a meta-analysis of those studies that
have estimated effects of psychotherapy on anxiety in clinical settings and find effect sizes

  27. Fortunately, the hypothesis that different forms of psychotherapy all have the same effect size, commonly
referred to as the Dodo Bird Conjecture, is typically not rejected (Wampold et al., 1997). Therefore, our
literature search was focused on finding highly cited papers in the medical literature rather than focusing on
specific forms of psychotherapy.
  28. Cuijpers et al. (2010) argue that studies estimating the effects of psychotherapy on depression are
flawed and that a focus on what they deem "high-quality" studies yields a much lower effect size than those
reported by earlier meta-analyses such as Churchill et al. (2002) and Wampold et al. (2002), who report
effect sizes above 0.5. However, a simple mean of the effect sizes for the "high-quality" studies reported
in Cuijpers et al. (2010) that focus on a general adult population (Elkin et al., 1989; Jarrett et al., 1999;
DeRubeis et al., 2005; Dimidjian et al., 2006) gives an average effect size above 0.4.
  29. In this literature small effect sizes refer to ones from 0.2 to 0.5, moderate effect sizes refer to ones from
0.5 to 0.8, and large effect sizes are those over 0.8.



                                                        17
above 0.8 for almost all forms of anxiety considered.
    If we simply average the estimated effect sizes across these literatures, we get an effect size
near 0.6 for psychotherapy, which is within the 95 percent confidence interval of all studies
(except one) reporting a confidence interval shown in Figure 2. For antidepressants, we get
an effect size near 0.3. As discussed below, we use these figures as our baseline effect sizes
for any antidepressant use and a complete (i.e., no discontinuation) series of psychotherapy
sessions in the structural model.30 We then discuss deviations from this effect size, as well
as heterogeneity in this effect size by mental health status, in Section 6.3.31
    Treatment improves mental health, which individuals presumably value. Moreover, it
is likely that improved mental health affects labor market outcomes in a beneficial way,
meaning treatment has important indirect benefits (see, e.g., Butikofer, Cronin, and Skira,
2020; Shapiro, 2020). Table 6 shows the results from ordinary least squares regressions of
labor market outcomes on mental health, controlling for gender, age, race, marital status,
whether or not one lives in an MSA, region, and education. The results indicate that better
mental health is associated with significantly higher amounts of labor supply on both the
extensive and intensive margins, and also higher hourly wages. Mental health is clearly
endogenous in these regressions, which is addressed by the structural model that follows.


4     Dynamic Model

4.1     Overview
Consider an individual, i = 1, ..., N , who seeks to maximize expected lifetime utility in time
period t = 1, .., T . Each period, the individual receives utility, Uit , from consumption of
a numeraire good, Cit ; his or her mental health health status, Mit ; and employment and
treatment decisions, drce
                       it ; where e = 0, 1, 2 denotes no employment, part-time employment,
or full-time employment, respectively; c = 0, 1 denotes psychotherapy (i.e., "couch") use;
and r = 0, 1 denotes psychiatric prescription drug (i.e., "Rx") use.32 The model is designed

  30. According to Kazdin (1999), those discontinuing treatment in RCTs of psychotherapy are generally
replaced or excluded from the study; thus, applying these effect sizes to complete treatment episodes only
seems appropriate.
  31. Again, we also estimate the impact of treatment within the observational MEPS data using an instru-
mental variables approach. These findings are reported in Appendix A.III.
  32. We acknowledge the role that physicians play as advisors, and potential gatekeepers, in treatment
choices. Unfortunately, unlike Dickstein (2014) our data do not allow us to separately identify the incentives
faced and choices made by patients and physicians. Thus, while we describe in this section an optimization
problem solved by an individual, the true data generating process is determined by a joint patient-physician
optimization problem, and our estimates for treatment preferences will reflect this.


                                                     18
to capture the key contemporaneous and dynamic tradeoffs associated with treatment and
                                                                                               e
employment alternatives. Regarding employment, key benefits are the receipt of wages, wit        ,
which allows for greater contemporaneous consumption, and the accumulation of experience,
Kit , which may increase future wages. The primary cost of employment is reduced utility
from lost leisure. Regarding treatment, the key benefit is improved future mental health,
which may impact future utility through several labor and non-labor channels. Treatment
is costly in that it reduces contemporaneous consumption via treatment prices, px   it , requires
a time investment, and may have direct negative effects on utility (e.g., physical discomfort,
psychological discomfort due to stigma, etc.). Psychotherapy is distinct in that it may
result in a discontinuation, Dit , which impacts future mental health differently than non-
discontinued visits. The model also allows for search costs in both treatment and employment
transitions.33


4.2     Model Specification
4.2.1    Preferences

Let vector dt be comprised of drce
                                t   r, c, and e, where dr
                                                        t
                                                          ce
                                                             = 1 when alternative (r , c , e )
is chosen and zero otherwise. Flow utility from any decision drce
                                                              t   can then be expressed as

                            Ct1-0 - 1
                  Utrce   =           + U (drce                           rce
                                            t , dt-1 , Mt , Xt ; ) + µk (dt ) +
                                                                                      rce
                                                                                      t                (1)
                              1 - 0
where Ct measures numeraire good consumption and Xt measures a variety of exogenous
individual-specific observables. We abuse notation in using Xt as a generic vector of control
variables that may include different sets of controls in different equations. The function
U (·) is linear in parameters  and includes interactions. The function µk (drcet ) captures
permanent, unobserved preferences for alternative (r, c, e) among type k individuals, while
 rce
 t   captures any remaining unobserved, idiosyncratic preferences.34


4.2.2    Budget Constraint

Total gross household income, GYt , in period t can be written as

  33. The individual i subscript will be suppressed moving forward for notational simplicity. All variables
are individual-specific unless otherwise stated.
  34. We assume each individual has a permanent, unobserved type, k , which allows for correlation between
the unobserved determinants of choices and outcomes in the model. The estimation and identification of
these types is discussed in detail in Section 5.2 and 5.3.




                                                    19
                                             2
                                   GYt =         [drce e   e
                                                   t  wt  ht ] + It                                  (2)
                                           e=1

                                                                e
The first term measures the individual's labor income, where wt   is wages from employment
              e
type e and ht is the corresponding hours worked in period t, the latter of which is held fixed
across all individuals of employment type e. It measures all other household income sources
and is assumed to evolve exogenously.
   Numeraire consumption, Ct , is calculated as disposable income minus treatment expenses

                           Ct = D(GYt , Xt ) - pr   1ce  c         r1e
                                                t  dt - pt (Dt )  dt .                               (3)

The disposable income function D(·) adjusts gross household income for approximate total
tax liability and housing expenses, as well as family size.35 Note that the price of psychother-
apy is allowed to vary by whether discontinuation occurs; thus, contemporaneous utility is
affected by the discontinuation draw. We assume that the individual consumes all income in
each period due to data constraints; however, the model could easily accommodate a savings
decision.
    Wages and prices are stochastic and vary over time. Wages in period t for part-time and
full-time employment are expressed as

                                  e
                            log (wt ) = F (Mt , Kt , Xt ;  e ) + µw,e
                                                                  k +
                                                                         w,e
                                                                         t                           (4)

where F (·) is linear in parameters  e and includes interactions (here and elsewhere), µw,e
                                                                                        k
                                                                                  w,e
captures the permanent unobserved wage effects for individuals of type k , and t is an
idiosyncratic error.
   Out-of-pocket treatment prices are somewhat complicated by the fact that insured indi-
viduals often face no out-of-pocket payments for medical care (e.g., see Appendix Section
A.I.2). As such, out-of-pocket treatment prices for psychiatric prescription drugs (x = r)
and psychotherapy (x = c) are written using the following latent variable structure

                                   ftx = Xt  x + µf,x
                                                  k +
                                                            f,x
                                                            t
                                                   p,x            p,x
                                                                                                     (5)
                                   p x         x
                                    t = exp(Xt  + µk +            t )


  35. Because Equation 1 is non-linear in Ct , the marginal utility of treatment varies across the income
distribution. We include adjustments for average housing costs and family size in D(·) to account for the
fact that both reduce disposable income and, therefore, impact the marginal utility of treatment. The
function D(·) is discussed in detail in Appendix Section A.II.1.



                                                   20
   where

                                               pt
                                                  x
                                                       if ftx > 0
                                       px
                                        t =                                                           (6)
                                               0       if ftx  0

    In other words, latent variable ftx greater than zero indicates that the out-of-pocket
                                                      f,x  p,x       f,x p,x
treatment price px
                 t is greater than zero. As before, (µk , µk ) and ( t , t ) capture perma-
nent and idiosyncratic unobserved heterogeneity, respectively.36


4.2.3    State Transitions

Work experience, psychotherapy discontinuation, and mental health evolve over time as a
function of individual employment and treatment decisions. Work experience, Kt+1 , updates
deterministically, beginning with an initial value of zero and increasing by one (one-half) each
period that the individual decides to be employed full (part) time.
   The probability of discontinuation, Dt , upon visiting a psychotherapist is determined by


                               Dt = F (dt-1 , Dt-1 , Xt ;  ) + µD
                                                                k +
                                                                        D
                                                                        t                             (7)

    We model discontinuation as an unforeseen shock at the time the psychotherapy decision
is made. A more elaborate model would incorporate the idea that agents choose prior to
each session whether or not to continue their course of psychotherapy. We abstract from
intra-period decision-making since the critical consideration in modeling discontinuation is
that it is unforeseen, but its probability enters agents' expectations. Therefore, it lowers the
ex ante probability that a course of psychotherapy is completed and benefits accrue to the
patient, which in turn may help to explain patient reluctance to use psychotherapy.
    Self-reported mental health, Mt+1 , takes discrete, integer values from 1 (i.e., poor) to 5
(i.e., excellent). Define Mt+1 as a latent, continuous measure of mental health that can be
expressed as

  36. A more restrictive Tobit framework could be used to capture the occurrence of zero prices in the
data; however, our preliminary analysis suggested that the two-part model was more appropriate, as some
covariates decrease (increase) the probability of a positive price while increasing (decreasing) the price
conditional on it being non-zero.




                                                      21
                           Mt              rce                 M
                             +1 = F (Mt , dt , Dt , Xt ;  ) + µk +
                                                                          M
                                                                          t+1

                                        
                                         5             if 3 < Mt
                                        
                                         4             if 2 < Mt  3
                                                                                                (8)
                              where Mt = 3             if 1 < Mt  2
                                        
                                                       if 0 < Mt  1
                                        
                                         2
                                        
                                                       if Mt  0.
                                        1


4.2.4   Model Timing

With the above described choices, transitions, and payoffs, the timing of the model is as fol-
lows: an individual enters period t knowing their state vector t = (Mt , Kt , Xt , Dt-1 , dt-1 , k ).
Upon entry, he or she receives wage ( w,e            f,x p,x                   rce
                                        t ), price ( t , t ), and preference ( t ) draws. With
this information, the individual makes treatment and employment decisions, drce     t , to maxi-
mize expected lifetime utility. If the individual decides to visit a therapist (i.e., drt
                                                                                          1e
                                                                                             = 1),
then he or she receives a discontinuation draw, t , after which contemporaneous utility, Utrce ,
                                                   D

is fully determined. Following this, experience, Kt+1 , is updated and the individual receives
a mental health shock, M   t+1 . At this time, all elements of t+1 are known upon entering
period t + 1. Figure 1 summarizes the timing of the model.



                                        Figure 1: Timing

                     Receive                 If dr
                                                 t
                                                   1e
                                                      = 1,           Kt+1 updates,
                 w,e f,x p,x   rce                      D                       M
                 t , t , t ,   t             receive    t             Receive   t+1




           t                                                                        t+1
        Know t                                                                    Know t+1

                               Choose drce
                                       t                    Utrce known




                                                  22
4.2.5     Dynamic Programming Problem

An individual selects alternative (r, c, e) to maximize his or her expected lifetime utility,
V rce , which can be written recursively as the sum of contemporaneous utility and expected,
discounted future utility (Bellman, 1966). To ease interpretation, we first specify the Bellman
equation when psychotherapy is not selected (i.e., dr t
                                                        0e
                                                           = 1) as



        V r0e (t , wt
                    e x
                      , pt ,   r0e
                               t )
                                                     e x
                                       = Utr0e (t , wt , pt ,   r0e
                                                                t )
                                               5
                                       +            P (Mt+1 = m|t , dr 0e
                                                                     t )
                                             m=1
                                                                                                             (9)

                                                    EV (t+1 , wt+1 , pt+1 )g (wt+1 )h(pt+1 )dwt+1 dpt+1 .
                                                6
                                               R+


where  represents an exponential discount factor, P (Mt+1 = m) is the probability that
the individual transitions to mental health state m, and g (·) and h(·) represent wage and
price probability density functions. Superscripts e and x have been suppressed on future
wages and prices for notational simplicity; however, note that in order to calculate EV (·),
which is the expected future value of period t alternative (r, 0, e) assuming optimal future
behavior (i.e., the "Emax" function), the individual must integrate over a total of six future
shocks, ( w, 1 w,2 f,r      f,c   p,r   p,c
          t+1 , t+1 , t+1 , t+1 , t+1 , t+1 ), which fully determine future wages and prices. Upon
integrating over future wage and price shocks, the future value of an alternative is known
only in expectation, as future preference shocks, rce      t+1 , are still unknown in period t. Thus,
the Emax function is written as

                      EV (t+1 , wt+1 , pt+1 ) = Et [max V rce (t+1 , wt+1 , pt+1 ,       rce
                                                                                         t+1 )]             (10)
                                                             rce


   The decision to visit a psychotherapist (i.e., dr
                                                   t
                                                     1e
                                                        = 1) complicates the value function be-
cause the visit may result in discontinuation. The corresponding value function is expressed
as
                                         1
        r1e         e x r1e
    V         (t , wt , pt , t )   =           P (Dt = mm|t ) Utr1e (t , wt
                                                                          e x
                                                                            , pt ,    r1e
                                                                                      t , mm)
                                       mm=0
                                         5
                                   +           P (Mt+1 = m|t , dr 1e
                                                                t , mm)                                     (11)
                                         m=1


                                               EV (t+1 , wt+1 , pt+1 )g (wt+1 )h(pt+1 )dwt+1 dpt+1    .
                                           6
                                          R+


                                                             23
This structure reflects the fact that discontinuation impacts each piece of the value function;
namely, discontinuation affects (i) contemporaneous utility through the psychotherapy price,
(ii) mental health transitions through the marginal product of a psychotherapy visit, and
(iii) the expected future value of an alternative, via t+1 .
   Solving individual i's dynamic programming (DP) problem thus begins in the terminal
period T , where we assume that the integrated Emax function can be approximated by a non-
stochastic, linear in parameters function T (MT +1 , KT +1 , drce T , ageT +1 ; ). Using Equations
                                        rce
9 and 11, one can then calculate V (T ) for every combination (r, c, e). This process is
repeated backwards from period T , until V rce (t ) has been determined for every individual
i = 1, ..., N , in every time period t = 1, ..., T , and for every combination (r, c, e).


5     Estimation and Identification
The structural parameters of the dynamic model specified in Section 4 are estimated using
the data described in Section 3 and a nested fixed-point algorithm (Rust, 1987). In the inner
algorithm, the DP problem described in Section 4.2.5 is solved for a given set of parameters.
The outer algorithm uses the solution to calculate a likelihood function value and updates
the parameter vector using the Berndt, Hall, Hall, and Hausman (1974) algorithm. In this
section, we describe (i) several modeling assumptions made necessary given the features of
our data, (ii) permanent unobserved heterogeneity, (iii) parameter identification, and (iv)
distributional assumptions that allow us to specify a likelihood function.


5.1     Taking the Model to the Data
We describe the estimation sample in Section 3.3. Within this sample, the average interview
period length is 5.4 months; thus, for simplicity, we assume that all decision periods in the
model are six months in length, meaning our data allow us to model decisions over four six-
month periods. The 6-month period length has several implications for estimation. First,
employment-specific hours in Equation 2 are set to 1,100 for full-time workers and 650 for
part-time workers, which reflects 25 weeks of 44 and 26 hours worked, respectively.37 Second,
treatment choices reflect the decision to consume any treatment during the six-month time
period and prices reflect expenditure levels, the latter of which are calculated by summing
over all observed out-of-pocket payments within the period. Discontinuation complicates

 37. Anyone in the data working over 37.5 hours per week is categorized as full-time. Among these individ-
uals, the average number of hours is 44, while the average for those working under 37.5 hours per week is
26.


                                                   24
this process for psychotherapy visits; thus, adjustments are made so that pc   t is interpreted
as the price of a successful (i.e., non-discontinuation) period of psychotherapy visits and the
expenditure required upon discontinuing is a fraction of pc  t.
                                                                38


    The fact that individuals enter the data at various ages also has implications for the
model. Most notably, we do not observe experience over the entire career, which is a key
determinant of wages. As such, we condition the wage distributions on the observed wage
in the first period of the data and measure experience, Kt , earned since the first period.
Initial wage, w0 , can then be added to a long list of endogeneous initial conditions, which
are discussed in Section 5.2.
    The explicit set of exogenous, non-stochastic control variables that comprise Xt are as
follows: initial wage, gender, age, calendar year, lives in an MSA, has public insurance, has
private insurance, high school education, college education, nonwhite (race), married, family
size, problem child, and household income.
   To reduce the computational burden, we estimate our model using a 20% random sub-
sample of the estimation sample.


5.2     Permanent Unobserved Heterogeneity
We assume in estimation that each individual has a permanent, unobserved type, which
allows for correlation between the unobserved determinants of choices, outcomes, and tran-
sitions in the model. The strategy decomposes all model unobservables into two additively
separable components: an i.i.d. serially-uncorrelated random component, t , and a persistent
component, µk , that varies across individuals of k = 1, . . . , K different types. We assume
that the distribution of persistent unobserved heterogeneity can be approximated by a dis-
crete function, which is sometimes referred to as a discrete factor model (DFM) (Heckman
and Singer, 1984; Mroz, 1999). Thus, the estimation procedure seeks to determine (i) the
number of unobserved types in the population, K ; (ii) the share of the population that is de-
scribed by each type, k for k = 1, . . . , K where Kk=1 k = 1; and (iii) the impact that each
unobserved type k has on all model choices, outcomes, and transitions, µk for k = 1, . . . , K .
    The DFM offers two advantages over a popular alternative, which is to assume a joint

  38. To code discontinuation periods, each individual psychotherapy session is grouped into a psychother-
apy episode, which is then categorized as successful or discontinuation according to the rule described in
Section 3.4. If a period contains both successful and discontinuation visits, the period is coded as successful.
Regarding expenditure pc  t , the average number of visits in a successful visit episode is 8.2, while the average
number of visits in a discontinuation episode is 1.4; therefore, in order to interpret pct as the required expen-
diture for a successful psychotherapy episode, we scale observed discontinuation expenditure by (8.2/1.4) in
estimation. Then, upon experiencing a discontinuation in the model, the expenditure faced in the budget
constraint (i.e., equation 3) is just pc
                                       t /(8.2/1.4).


                                                       25
parametric distribution (e.g., multivariate normal) over the model's error terms. First, the
DFM is more flexible. Mroz (1999), and more recently Guilkey and Lance (2014), uses
Monte Carlo simulation in a two-equation, joint MLE setting to show that when the true
error distribution is joint normal, DFM estimates are comparable to those derived using
the correct distribution. However, when the true error distribution is not normal, the DFM
outperforms all other tested estimation methods. Second, the DFM is almost certainly faster
than assuming a joint parametric distribution, which typically requires the use of maximum
simulated likelihood estimation.
     In the following section, we discuss how allowing for permanent unobserved heterogeneity
resolves several identification and measurement error challenges in estimation. One such
challenge is the endogeneity of initial conditions. Recall, as individuals enter the data at
various points in their career, it is unlikely that all initial state variables are exogenous.
For example, consider someone who is observed to have poor mental health entering our
data. This individual's personal history and particular life circumstances, some of which are
outside the scope of our model, likely contributed to that poor health state, and also makes
this individual more susceptible to bad mental health shocks moving forward. One reason
that we model permanent unobserved heterogeneity is to capture the persistence of mental
health shocks in an individual like this, but we must also address the endogeneity of their
initial poor mental health.39 As such, we condition type probabilities, k , on the initial state
vector, 0 , which includes all endogenous initial conditions, as well as exogenous variables
X0 . Thus, in the example above, the fact that this individual entered the data with poor
mental health is allowed to influence the probability that they are of an unobserved type,
k , that experiences worse mental health shocks. In using this strategy, we assume that all
initial conditions are exogenous, conditional on unobserved type k . To our knowledge, this
strategy was first used to address endogenous initial conditions in Keane and Wolpin (1997)
and was later formalized by Wooldridge (2005).40


5.3     Identification
Identification follows standard arguments from Magnac and Thesmar (2002). In a dynamic
discrete choice model, one needs state-specific choice probabilities and choice-and-state spe-
cific transition probabilities along with normalizations, a fixed discount factor, and distri-

  39. Note that several other initial conditions pose similar endogeneity concerns, including initial wages,
employment, treatment, education, and household income.
  40. We prefer this strategy to modeling all endogenous initial conditions separately (e.g., as in Darden,
2017), as it (i) does not require additional exclusion restrictions to identify the initial conditions and (ii)
allows type probabilities to vary by observables, which eases the post-estimation interpretation of types.


                                                      26
butional assumptions on error terms to identify utility parameters. Note, this relates to
identification in the rank order sense, the idea being that there is a unique set of parameters
that maximize the likelihood function. In the model, agents form expectations based on
the transition process, which includes changes to mental health and, thus, to productivity.
Given this information, agents choose between treatment alternatives, the values of which
are a function of future transitions, but also of current-period payments. This identifies
preferences over mental health treatments. Preferences over work are similarly identified
from joint work decisions. Differences in treatment decisions across the price distributions,
as well as differences in work decisions across the household income and wage distributions,
identify the consumption utility parameter. Preferences over illness, which are identified
in a dynamic model but not a static one, are identified by the restriction that treatment
preferences are not allowed to vary across mental health levels; thus, differences in treatment
choices across the mental health distribution identify preferences for good mental health.41
    Obtaining the correct utility parameters requires that the modeled beliefs about the
impacts of treatment are a correct representation of agents' beliefs. One approach would be
to estimate the effect of treatment using the mental health transitions in the data, where
selection concerns are addressed through distributional assumptions, as well as exclusion
restrictions. In Appendix Section A.III.2, we discuss our efforts with this approach. Another
approach is to simply use treatment effects established in well-identified settings, such as the
clinical trials literature. We use the latter approach in this paper.42 Still, as in all cases
where no belief data is available, rational expectations are a key identifying assumption
(Magnac and Thesmar, 2002). Consider an agents' reluctance to use psychotherapy; it could
be because they believe it is effective, but have a distaste. Alternatively, agents may think
the treatment's productivity is less than what is found in clinical trails and this biased belief
affects their choice. Absent belief data, either narrative could explain the same data pattern.

  41. The variation that identifies these effects is displayed in Table 3. Note that treatment is decreasing
in mental health. The model does not allow this variation to be explained by heterogeneity in treatment
preferences across the mental health distribution; rather, conditional on productive treatment, greater treat-
ment in worse health states suggest that individuals dislike being in poor health and are, thus, willing to
undertake the various treatment costs in order to improve their mental health.
  42. In Section 3.4, we argue that the average standardized impact of prescription drugs and psychotherapy
on mental health are approximately 0.3 and 0.6, respectively. Standardized effects for an outcome, Y , are
measured as (Y1 - Y0 )/SD(Y ), where Y1 measures the outcome for the treated group and Y0 for the untreated
group. We can utilize these estimates within our model, despite having a different measure of mental health,
by scaling the medical literature estimates by the standard deviation of the latent mental health variable
in Equation 8. Note that the standard deviation of M  is a function of model parameters and, thus, must
be calculated at every iteration of the model. As such, for a given iteration of the parameter set s , we
calculate treatment effects as 0,1 = 0.3  SD(M  (s )) and 0,2 = 0.6  SD(M  (s )). Furthermore, we
assume that discontinuation visits have no impact on mental health in the following period. We explore the
robustness of these assumptions in Section 6.3.



                                                     27
Consistent with much of the dynamic structural literature, we impose rational expectations,
functionally assuming that agents have the right average treatment effects in mind when
making choices. Here, one can imagine that patients (or their doctors) use evidence from
the medical literature when making choices. Somewhat reassuringly, we show in Section 6.3
that the main results are not terribly sensitive to using a range of treatment effects from the
literature or from our own reduced-form estimates discussed in Appendix Section A.III.1.
     Another source of concern is poorly measured mental health. In particular, we are con-
cerned that not all reports of, say, "fair" mental health reflect mental illness, as generally
healthy people may offer this report on a particularly bad day. Similarly, perpetually ill
individuals may report "very good" mental health on a good day. The problem with these
isolated reports is that they do not represent the need to alter one's treatment course. Upon
experiencing such a shock, perpetually sick or healthy individuals likely expect to return to
the status quo. To address this measurement error, we allow for permanent unobserved het-
erogeneity in mental health. By identifying some proportion of the population as persistently
well or sick, the model no longer needs to rationalize non-use of psychotherapy by people
who wouldn't really benefit from it. Allowing for permanent unobserved heterogeneity also
addresses a more general concern in dynamic structural models, which is the identification
of parameters measuring the impact of one endogenous variable on another. For instance,
the impact of period t - 1 mental health on mental health in period t, or the impact of
mental health on wages. As discussed below, permanent unobserved heterogeneity allows us
to distinguish true causal relationships from (i) correlation arising via state dependence and
(ii) common omitted variables.
    Three attributes of the model and data help to identify the permanent unobserved type
distribution. The first is repeated individual-level observations. Assume that a subset of
the population is persistently healthy and that this persistence cannot be explained by
observables. The estimation procedure, then, identifies a type, k , that corresponds to that
subset. The larger the subset, the larger the share, k , assigned to that type. The better
their mental health, the larger the factor loading, µM  k , on that type. Second, as discussed
above, unobserved type shares are estimated conditional on endogenous initial conditions.
To understand how this affects, say Mt /Mt-1 , again assume that unobserved type k is
persistently healthy. The model allows initial mental health to influence the probability that
an individual is of type k . An individual who is observed to have perfect mental health in
each period, including t = 0, then contributes little to the estimation of Mt /Mt-1 , as their
data is best explained by them being type k with high probability. Third, non-linearities and
exclusion restrictions aid in determining whether the relationship between two endogenous
variables is causal or due to common unobservables. For example, note that wages and mental

                                              28
health are positively correlated (see Table 3). This relationship could be due to a causal effect
of mental health on wages (i.e., wt /Mt > 0) or permanent unobserved heterogeneity (i.e.,
for unobserved reasons, the people who are most likely to fall into poor mental health may
also receive the lowest wage offers). Exclusion restrictions, such as having a problematic
child and observed treatment choices, help to distinguish these competing explanations by
generating unique variation in mental health that cannot be entirely explained by permanent
unobserved heterogeneity. If variation in these exclusion restrictions is also associated with
changes in wages, then it suggests a direct relationship between mental health and wages,
and the unobserved heterogeneity parameters must adjust accordingly.
    Conditional on knowing the number of unobserved types in the population, K , the estima-
tion of {k , µk }K
                 k=1 is straightforward, as these parameters are part of the likelihood function
described below.43 Determining K is less straightforward. Mroz (1999) recommends an
"upwards-testing approach," where one first estimates all model parameters assuming one
unobserved type, K = 1, which produces a log-likelihood function value, LLF1 , and a set
of maximizing parameters, 1 . The model is then re-estimated with two unobserved types,
K = 2, using the previously estimated parameters, 1 , as starting values, which produces
a new log-likelihood function value, LLF2 , and a new set of maximizing parameters, 2 . A
likelihood ratio (LR) test is used to determine whether the additional unobserved type led
to a significant improvement in the log-likelihood function. Mroz suggests continuing in this
fashion, adding additional types so long as significant improvements are made in the value
of the log-likelihood function. Using this strategy, we arrive at four types.


5.4     Likelihood Function
Observed decisions (i.e., drce  t ), stochastic state transitions (i.e., Mt , Dt ), and stochastic pay-
offs (i.e., pe     x
             t , wt ) are partly determined by a set of random variables, t , that agents observe,
but that we, the econometricians, do not. Constructing the likelihood function requires
that we assume to know the distribution from which these unobservables are drawn. We
begin by assuming that unobservables impacting discontinuation, D              t , and mental health,
 M
 t , are drawn from a logistic distribution, making P (Dt ) and P (Mt ) logit and ordered logit
probabilities, respectively. We further assume that log-wage errors are normally distributed,
 w,e
 t    N (0, w,e   2
                     ). We assume non-zero price errors, f,x t , are drawn from a logistic distribu-
tion, while log-price errors (conditional on prices being non-zero) are drawn from a normal

  43. Identifying {k , µk }K
                           k=1 requires several normalizations. First, if K = 1, then 1 = 1 and µ1 is not
separately identified from the model's constants, so the vector is set to zero. In other words, setting K = 1
                                                                                                    K
assumes that the model's error terms are conditionally independent. If K > 1, then 1 = 1 - k=2 k and
{µk }Kk=2 are only identified relative to µ1 ; thus, we set µ1 to zero throughout our analysis.


                                                     29
distribution, p,x
              t
                          2
                   N (0, p,x ).44 We assume that the unobservables impacting treatment and
employment decisions, rce
                        t , are drawn from a Type 1 Extreme Value (T1EV) distribution.
This assumption is popular in the DP literature because it yields closed form expressions for
both the maximal value function in Equation 10 and choice probabilities; specifically,

                                                        1        1       2
                                                                                            rce
          EV (t+1 , wt+1 , pt+1 ) =  + log                                       exp V            (t+1 , wt+1 , pt+1 )                    (12)
                                                      r=0 c=0 e=0


and
                                                                                 rce
                                                                 exp V                 (t , wt , pt )
                      P (drce
                          t   = 1|t , wt , pt ) =       1    1       2
                                                                                                                                          (13)
                                                                                           rce
                                                                             exp V               (t , wt , pt )
                                                       r=0 c=0 e=0

where  is Euler's constant and V (·) is the deterministic part of the value function.
    Let the variables et = {0, 1, 2}, rt = {0, 1}, and ct = {0, 1} represent observed, period
t employment, antidepressant use, and psychotherapy use, respectively. Under the above
assumptions, an individual's contribution to the likelihood function, for a given realization
of the parameter set , can thus be expressed as

                             1
            Li,t (|t ) =g1 (wt |t )1[et =1] g2 (wt
                                                 2
                                                   |t )1[et =2] hr (pr
                                                                     t |t )
                                                                           1[rt =1] h (pc | )1[ct =1]
                                                                                     c t   t
                             1    1   2                                      1
                                            P (drce
                                                t     = 1|t )                          P (Dt = mm|t , drce
                                                                                                       t )
                            r=0 c=0 e=0                              mm=0                                                                 (14)
                              5                                                                          1[rt =r,ct =c,et =e]
                                                                                           1[Ft =mm]
                                  P (Mt =     m|t , drce    1[Mt =m]
                                                     t , mm)                                                                    .
                            m=1

The first row measures wage and price contributions to the likelihood function, which exist
only if the individual was employed and/or sought treatment. The second row measures
the choice and discontinuation contribution.45 The last row measures the mental health
contribution, where the probability of observing health state m is allowed to vary by the

  44. Under these assumptions, the price probability density function is as follows, where (·) is the CDF of
a standard logistic distribution and (·) is the pdf of a standard normal distribution.
                                                                                                                                    1[px
                                          1[px
                                             t =0]                                     log (px
                                                                                       1              x   p,x
                                                                                             t ) - Xt  - µk
                                                                                                                                       t =0]

   hx (px
        t |t )   = 1 - (Xt  +x
                                  µf,x
                                   k )                (Xt  +     x
                                                                     µf,x
                                                                      k               
                                                                                  p,x             p,x

 45. For simplicity, choice probabilities are written unconditional on wages and prices. In practice, we
only observe wages and/or prices when individuals are employed and/or consume treatment; thus, in the
absence of employment/treatment, choice probabilities are calculated by integrating over wage and price
distributions, g (·) and h(·). When individuals are employed and/or consume treatment, choice probabilities
are calculated conditional on observed wages/prices.


                                                            30
observed choice vector, (rt , ct , et ), and whether discontinuation occurs, Dt .
    The individual likelihood contribution is conditional on t , which contains type k , which
is unobserved by the econometrician. Thus, construction of the log-likelihood function below
requires that Li,t (|t ) is calculated for each k , then weighted appropriately.

                                     N           K              T
                             L =           log         k (0 )         Li,t (|t )                        (15)
                                     i=1         k=1            t=1



6     Results and Counterfactuals

6.1     Parameter Estimates and Model Fit
Parameter estimates and model fit tables can be found in Appendix Section A.V. We provide
a brief overview here. Model parameters are presented in Tables A.X - A.XVI and contain
estimates from the model with just one unobserved type (i.e., K=1) and four unobserved
types (i.e., K=4). Table A.X contains unobserved heterogeneity parameters for the four type
model. Note that Type 1 marginal effects are normalized to zero, which complicates the
interpretation of some of the model's parameters. For example, 1,0 measures the disutility
of psychotherapy for Type 1 individuals, while the disutility of psychotherapy for Type 2
individuals is 1,0 + µU, 0
                      k . The interpretation of the remaining preference parameters and all
model constants are similarly affected.
     Utility function parameters are presented in Table A.XI. Note that the CRRA parameter,
0 , which is identified according to the discussion in Section 5.3, is held fixed in estimation.
While we have estimated this parameter under several specifications of the model, includ-
ing multiple unobserved heterogeneity types, estimation has consistently yielded very large
estimates. For example, our baseline model with one unobserved type estimates 0 at ap-
proximately 4. The estimate produces a utility-consumption profile that is essentially flat,
which would suggest that individuals do not consider wage offers in employment decisions,
nor prices in treatment decisions.46 While large estimates of this parameter are not unheard
of in the literature (see, for example De Nardi, French, and Jones, 2016), estimates between
0.8 and 1.1 are far more common (Hurd, 1989; Rust and Phelan, 1997; Blau and Gilleskie,
2008; Cronin, 2019). In Appendix Section A.IV, we detail the underlying sources of variation
that contribute to our large estimate and argue that the most conservative path forward is
to fix the CRRA parameter to 0.95.

  46. In early iterations, we also explored allowing consumption preferences to vary by current mental health
status, but ultimately removed this feature as it revealed little heterogeneity.


                                                       31
    Parameter signs meet apriori expectations. We briefly describe some of these findings.
First, regarding medical treatments: (i) holding future mental health constant, individu-
als derive disutility from antidepressants, and even greater disutility from psychotherapy;
(ii) past psychotherapy use lowers the disutility of current psychotherapy use, indicating
search costs; (iii) past drug use lowers the disutility of current psychotherapy use, indicat-
ing dynamic complementarities;47 (iv) employed individuals derive greater disutility from
treatment and this effect is largest for full-time employees, indicating that both treatments
involve relevant time costs; and (v) employment-by-psychotherapy disutility is greater than
employment-by-drug disutility, indicating psychotherapy has greater time costs than drugs.
Second, regarding employment: (i) holding earnings constant, individuals derive disutility
from part-time employment, but greater disutility from full-time employment, indicating
the value of leisure; (ii) past employment lessens employment disutility, indicating switching
costs; and (iii) the disutility from employment increases as mental health worsens.48 Third,
regarding mental health: (i) individuals derive disutility from poor mental health; (ii) poor
mental health in the past lowers current mental health; and (iii) wages decrease as mental
health worsens, though these effects are very small.
   To assess the model's ability to explain unique features of the data, we use the model to
simulate new datasets and compare key moments of the observed and simulated data. The
simulated data are constructed by sampling from the joint error distribution, permanent
unobserved heterogeneity distribution, and parameter covariance matrix 50 times for each
individual, then forward simulating. Appendix Table A.XVII shows that the model matches
the data on most key moments, including mean treatment and employment, as well as mental
health, wage, and price distributions. Appendix Figures A.II-A.V show that we also match
these key moments across genders and across the age distribution. Note that for all of these
comparisons, the one unobserved type model does just as well as the four type model.
   Table A.IV highlights a key challenge of our analysis. The table suggests that those who
received treatment in period t have worse mental health in period t +1 than those not receiv-
ing treatment, conditional on mental health in period t. Moreover, we use treatment effect

  47. The same effects exist for current drug use. That the treatments would act as dynamic complemen-
tarities is quite sensible in this setting. In most cases, in order to acquire either treatment patients must
first reveal depressive symptoms to their general practitioner (GP), who serves as gatekeeper. The GP may
prescribe antidepressants or refer the patient to a specialist, who can administer/prescribe either type of
treatment. In this setting, using one type of treatment both reveals a willingness to treat their symptoms
and opens a dialogue with the gatekeeper, each of which facilitates greater use of alternative treatments in
the future.
  48. Quidt and Haushofer (2016) posit that depression acts as an exogenous shock to an agent's beliefs about
the returns to effort; whereby pessimistic beliefs may reduce expected productivity for a fixed amount of
effort or the expected cost of effort, ultimately reducing labor supply. The latter interpretation may explain
why we find the disutility from employment to be increasing as mental health worsens.


                                                     32
   estimates from the medical literature that suggest that both types of medical treatments are
   productive. With these treatment effects, it is difficult for our model to explain the data
   pattern in Table A.IV, i.e., persistently poor mental health, despite the use of treatment.
   The implications of this dichotomy can be seen in Table A.XVII. For both types of treat-
   ment, when there is only one unobserved type, the model under-predicts treatment when
   individuals are in the lowest two mental health states. The treatment effects suggest that
   these individuals' health should improve, while the data suggests that their health does not
   improve; thus, the model cannot rationalize the treatment decision.49 The four unobserved
   type model offers an improvement. By allowing permanent unobserved heterogeneity, the
   model rationalizes the conflict with an unobserved type that (i) received consistently poor
   mental health shocks and (ii) has strong preferences for treatment.
       Finally, consider the four permanent unobserved types revealed by the model. In each
   of the simulations described above, individuals receive a permanent unobserved type draw
   according the estimated posterior probability distribution. The initial conditions 0 and
   simulated outcomes of each type are described in Table 7. Each unobserved type can be
   characterized as follows:50

Type 1: These individuals represent roughly 5% of the population. They have persistently
        poor mental health and consume substantially more treatment than the other types.
        These individuals have an incredibly low employment rate, earn the lowest full-time
        wages conditional on employment, and the second lowest part-time wages. Given
        these characteristics, it is unsurprising that these individuals enter the data in poor
        health with high rates of unemployment and high rates of treatment. In terms of
        demographics, these individuals are relatively likely to be women and nonwhite; are
        unlikely to live in an MSA, to be married, or to have a college degree; are very likely
        to be publicly insured; and have the lowest household income.

Type 2: These individuals represent 16% of the population. Their mental health is notably

     49. In Section 5.3 above, we explain how measurement error in mental health forces the model to rationalize
   a lack of treatment use when individuals may simply be having a bad day. We also explain how allowing
   for permanent unobserved heterogeneity corrects this problem. The implication for parameter estimates can
   be see in Table A.XI. Note that the marginal disutility of poor mental health (i.e., 5 , 6 ) increases with
   unobserved heterogeneity. In other words, when mental health is mismeasured, the model underestimates the
   disutility associated with poor mental health in order to rationalize the lack of treatment when individuals
   face intermittent illness. This bias produces the under-prediction of treatment while ill in column 1 of Table
   A.XVII.
     50. Type labels have no inherent ordinal meaning (i.e., 1, 2, 3, and 4 could just as easily be red, orange,
   blue, and yellow). As such, to ease interpretation, we use numerical labels and order types in a way that
   is consistent with the unobserved type's persistent mental health state--Type 1 having the worst mental
   health and Type 4 having the best.


                                                        33
          better than Type 1, but worse than Types 3 and 4. Despite this, the group consumes
          less treatment than Type 3 individuals. Type 2 individuals also have employment rates
          that are somewhere between the very low rates of Type 1 individuals, and the higher
          rates of Types 3 and 4. Demographically, Type 2 individuals again find themselves
          somewhere between Types 1 and 3, except the high proportion of females and household
          income that exceeds even that of Type 3 individuals.

Type 3: These individuals represent 74% of the population. They have persistently good men-
        tal health and consume the second most treatment of the four types, which is a small
        fraction of Type 1 consumption. These individuals have the highest employment and
        wage rate. Endogenous initial conditions match this description. In terms of demo-
        graphics, these individuals are relatively unlikely to be women and nonwhite and are
        the most (least) likely to have private (public) insurance.

Type 4: These individuals represent 5% of the population. Their outcomes are like Type 3
        individuals in all ways except they consume less treatment and are less likely to work
        at their lower wages. Demographically, they have slightly larger household incomes
        and more education than Type 3 individuals.51


   6.2     Counterfactuals
   In this section, we use the estimated model to perform several counterfactuals. Our first
   counterfactual assesses the personal and economic value of improvements to mental health.
   In order to place these findings within the literature, we use our nationally representative
   estimation sample as the basis for analysis. After establishing the potential for economic
   gains, our second and third counterfactuals focus on the decision to improve one's mental
   health via psychotherapy. In light of the starkly different choices and outcomes observed
   among our four permanent unobserved types, these counterfactuals aim to highlight differ-
   ences in their responses. To do so, we begin by returning to our full data file, Sample C
   described in Table A.I. Using the estimated posterior unobserved type probabilities, we first
   assign an unobserved type to each individual, based on their initial state vector. We then
   define a new sample of 10,000 individuals that includes 2,500 randomly selected individuals
   of each type. We conduct these counterfactuals using this sample in order to avoid statistical

     51. Note that Type 4 individuals are incredibly unlikely to visit a therapist. As a result, psychotherapy-type
   specific price and discontinuation parameters are not identified for these individuals. Given the similarities
   between Types 3 and 4, we set these parameters at Type 3 levels, which has virtually no impact on the
   likelihood function, but is relevant in counterfactual analysis, where individuals are, at times, assigned to
   treatment.


                                                         34
error in simulated differences due to small samples; in particular, our concern is with Types
1 and 4, which are under-represented in the population. Simulations are conducted in the
manner described in the previous section.


6.2.1    The Value of Mental Health Improvements

We begin by measuring the economic value of improvements to mental health. Specifically,
we simulate behaviors and outcomes over a two-year period while assuming that an individ-
ual's mental health cannot fall below the baseline sample mean. To fix ideas, this would be
like inventing a totally costless treatment (i.e., no financial cost, no time cost, etc.) guaran-
teed to return an individual's mental health to the population average; as such, those below
the average would always take the treatment and those above never would. With the coun-
terfactual simulation in hand, we then return to the baseline model and calculate consumer
willingness to pay for the hypothetical treatment, which accounts for the aggregate utility
and labor market effects yielded by the mental health improvements. The experiment serves
two purposes. First, it provides a sanity check for our model, as other researchers have also
estimated the impact that mental illness has on the labor market at large. Second, because
mental health is the mechanism through which treatment can yield welfare improvements,
this counterfactual establishes the potential gains of treatment inducing policy.
    The counterfactual environment produces mental health improvements for nearly every-
one, ranging from 78 percent on average for Type 1 individuals to 10 percent for Types 3
and 4. The increase in mental health results in full-time (part-time) employment increases
of 2.8 (0.6) percent, while full-time (part-time) wages actually fall by 0.2 (0.7) percent;52
though these aggregate changes mask important heterogeneity. For example, full-time em-
ployment increases by 103 and 18 percent for (low-employment, poor-health) Types 1 and 2
individuals, respectively, but just one and four percent for (high-employment, good-health)
Types 3 and 4 individuals. A full set of results is available upon request.
    In Figure 4 we summarize the average economic gains produced by the hypothetical treat-
ment, as well as individual willingness to pay for the treatment, by unobserved heterogeneity
type. The left-most (black) bar measures willingness to pay for the treatment, holding house-
hold income constant across types, while the middle (speckled) bar allows household income
to vary.53 We make both calculations to highlight that while the sickest Type 1 individuals
                                                                                        e        e
  52. Ceteris paribus increases in mental health yield small wage gains (see parameters 2 and 3    in Appendix
Table A.XIV). This counterfactual lowers wages slightly due to selection into employment, i.e., those selecting
into employment in light of their improved mental health are low wage earners.
  53. In both instances, employment decisions are simulated and influenced by prospective wages; however,
in the former willingness to pay calculation, we assume individuals have an ex-post total annual disposable


                                                      35
(who have the most to gain from the treatment) are willing to pay the most, their valuation
is somewhat constrained by the fact that they have little disposable income. The right-most
(grey) bar measures the average earning gains for individuals of each type. The figure clearly
shows that (i) willingness to pay falls as baseline mental health improves, (ii) labor market
gains only account for a fraction of the total gains produced by improved mental health,
and (iii) the share of the total gains attributable to the labor market is falling in baseline
employment.
    With the obvious caveat that all labor market changes reflect a partial equilibrium re-
sponse, we can use the model predictions and supplemental data to calculate the total
economic and welfare cost of below average mental health in the U.S. For example, the U.S.
had approximately 101.7 million residents between the ages of 26 and 55 years old in 2002
(FRED). Our findings suggest that in this year, the U.S. population was willing to pay just
over $103 billion (in 2002 dollars) to avoid below average mental health and that just 15
percent ($16 billion) of this value is attributable to labor market gains.54 This valuation
contrasts with Kessler et al. (2008), who argue that serious mental illness cost the U.S.
$193 billion in lost earnings in 2002, a figure commonly cited by the American Psychological
Association. The difference in our findings is not surprising, as our study accounts for the
endogeneity of mental illness.55 To put these figures in perspective, Ricci and Chee (2005)
estimate that obese workers cost the U.S. $42 billion in 2002 in lost productive time annually.


6.2.2    Assignment to Psychotherapy

We have established that mental health has direct utility and indirect earnings benefits and
relied on myriad findings showing that psychotherapy is the most effective mental health
treatment. Our second counterfactual assigns all individuals to psychotherapy in the first
period of the model. We assume perfect compliance, but allow for discontinuation. The
counterfactual is meant to mimic a randomized control trial that assigns a treatment group
to psychotherapy, but cannot guarantee that follow-up visits occur. We begin our analy-

household income of $40,000.
  54. The year 2002 was chosen for ease of comparison across papers. Adjusted for inflation and popula-
tion growth, the total value of mental health improvement in 2018 is $148 billion, $22 billion of which is
attributable to labor market gains. To generate the $103 billion figure, willingness-to-pay is calculated for
each individual from the baseline simulation (i.e., not fixing income), then averaged across individuals of
each type, as in the middle (speckled) bar in Figure 4. We then weight each of these values by the share of
the population corresponding to the type (e.g., 74 percent of the population is of Type 3) and multiply by
101.7 million. Similar steps are taken to calculate aggregate labor market gains.
  55. Kessler et al. (2008) simply calculate the difference in earnings and wages for those with serious mental
illnesses vs. well individuals, while controlling for age, gender, race, census region, and urbanicity. When
additional controls for education, marital status, and household size are added, the figure is reduced to $144
billion dollars.

                                                      36
sis by calculating the average increase in mental health over the next three periods, which
represents approximately a year and a half. For the sickest Types 1 and 2, which comprise
roughly 20% of the population, mental health increases by an average of 16.2 and 5.9 per-
cent, respectively. For the healthiest Types 3 and 4, which comprise roughly 80% of the
population, mental health increases by an average of 4.2 and 3.6 percent, respectively. This
is a fairly unsurprising conclusion, but it is also an important point to make. Our model of
heterogeneous types highlights that even when we assume that treatment effects are constant
in the population, a large subset of the population benefits little from treatment because
their mental health is quite high without it.56
    We further explore the response to assigned treatment for the two sickest types in Table
8.57 For Type 1 individuals, we find that a year and a half after assignment to treatment
(i.e., column labeled t = 4), women (men) are 59.9 (81.8) percent more likely to go to psy-
chotherapy, which is in part due to the alleviation of search costs captured by 1,1 . Moreover,
the dynamic complementarities between psychotherapy and antidepressants produces a 30.7
(50.2) percent increase in female (male) antidepressant use over the same time interval. Both
treatment increases are economically meaningful, yielding a 13.1 (13.3) percent increase in
mental health. These findings are qualitatively similar to Baranov et al. (2019), who find
that women suffering postpartum depression who are randomly assigned to psychotherapy
exhibit mental health improvements, but that these improvements diminish over time.
   Our finding of positive spill-overs of psychotherapy to other choices (e.g., antidepressant
use) but not secondary outcomes (e.g., wages) is also consistent with Baranov et al. (2019),
who find that psychotherapy significantly increased mothers' financial empowerment and
parental investments, but had no impact on child outcomes. An advantage of our structural
model is that it enables us to explore the mechanisms behind these changes. Most notably,
despite the increase in mental health that follows assignment for Type 1 individuals, we
do not observe an increase in wages as (i) our model suggests that the impact of mental
                                    e       e
health on wages is very small (see 2  and 3   in Table A.XIV) and (ii) few Type 1 individuals
work. Moreover, we observe economically inconsequential changes in employment for these
individuals because, while employment preferences are increasing in mental health, they are
decreasing in treatment; thus, the model suggests that any positive employment effects for

  56. Note that the mechanism here is somewhat subtle. By assigning psychotherapy in the first period, we
lower the search cost for both types of treatment in the following period. Despite these lower search costs,
few Type 3 and 4 individuals choose to go to treatment, because their mental health is already quite good,
meaning future mental health doesn't improve above baseline.
  57. We present results for healthy Types 3 and 4 in Appendix Table A.XVIII. As the aggregate mental
health effects for these types is quite small, it should come as no surprise that the dynamic treatment response
is also quite minor and there are virtually no long-run employment effects.



                                                      37
Type 1 individuals produced by better mental health are offset by the additional time cost
of treatment that generates these mental health improvements.
     Type 2 individuals, despite having less than perfect mental health, are incredibly re-
luctant to use psychotherapy. Just a year after assignment to psychotherapy (i.e., column
labeled t = 3), fewer than 1 percent are still using it. As a result, this group experiences much
smaller improvements in their mental health and these improvements are driven mostly by
(i) increases in antidepressant use, which they have stronger preferences for, and (ii) the dy-
namic effects of the initial improvement in mental health that was caused by psychotherapy
assignment.
    Assignment to psychotherapy can be viewed as a very strong one-time public policy. For
Type 1 individuals, i.e., the sickest 5 percent of the population, this policy produced long-run
mental health improvements, but only by generating post-assignment increases in mental
health treatment. For moderately depressed Type 2 individuals, the reduction of future
treatment search costs produced by assignment was not enough to spawn sustained increases
in future treatment. A clear implication of these findings is that more sustained interventions
are needed to reach individuals not dealing with severe mental health conditions. Moreover,
more realistic policy interventions must be considered for those with more serious mental
health conditions. We explore such interventions in the next subsection.


6.2.3    Lower Costs of Psychotherapy

Our third set of counterfactuals explores several potential policies designed to reduce the
costs of using psychotherapy. We again focus on how our four unobserved types differ in
their response. Results for the sickest Types, 1 and 2, are presented in Table 9. Results for
the healthier Types, 3 and 4, are again left to the Appendix (Table A.XIX), as the previous
section revealed that these individuals stand to benefit little from more treatment. The first
column of these tables reports baseline sample means for the simulated data, averaged over
the four interview periods. For each policy, we then present the corresponding sample mean
and percentage change from baseline.
   The first policy that we consider eliminates the financial cost associated with psychother-
apy. Note that over the past three decades, several major US policies have attempted to
encourage mental health treatment by forcing insurers to share in the monetary cost of treat-
ment, effectively lowering the out-of-pocket price for individuals.58 Table A.II provides some

  58. Examples include state-level mental health parity laws passed throughout the 1990s and early 2000s;
the (federal) Mental Health Parity Act of 1996 and Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008;
and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010, which made mental health one of 10 essential



                                                   38
evidence that these policies may have been effective at reducing costs as, in our data, a large
share of the sample receives psychotherapy with no out-of-pocket cost and the share of the
total cost of care paid out of pocket has fallen over time. Table 9 suggests that Types 1 and
2 are essentially unaffected by the policy change, as psychotherapy increases by roughly 1.5
percent.59 The finding is somewhat surprising, particularly for Type 1 individuals, who (i)
have the lowest earnings (labor and household) of the four types and (ii) are the most willing
to use treatment. Low prices are likely a contributing factor to this finding. According to
Table A.XVII, Type 1 individuals receive almost 70% of their psychotherapy for zero out-
of-pocket cost, which is partly explained by the high rate of public insurance among these
individuals.
    The second policy that we consider eliminates the possibility of discontinuation. In other
words, upon visiting a therapist, the policy guarantees that the patient completes a full
eight sessions and, thus, reaps the productive benefits of psychotherapy.60 This policy has
a large impact on psychotherapy use for Type 1 individuals, increasing average use from 25
(14) to 55 (37) percent for women (men). This increase, plus the corresponding increase in
antidepressant use, increases mental health by 18 (14) percent for women (men) on average.
Much like the findings in Section 6.2.2, the policy yields no employment benefit, as the
employment gains from improved mental health are offset by the time-cost of treatment.
For Types 2-4, the removal of discontinuation also produces a large percentage increase
in psychotherapy use (roughly 70 percent); however, baseline psychotherapy levels are so
low that this large percentage increase is not economically meaningful, e.g., average mental
health increases by well under 1 percent for each group.
     Our third policy experiment eliminates the employment/time cost of psychotherapy. In
practice, we simulate the model with 1,3 = 1,4 = 0. The counterfactual is meant to explore
the value of bringing psychotherapists into the work-place and allowing employees to visit a
therapist during work hours. Similar employee benefits are already provided by some large
employers (McLeod, 2001). Both Type 1 and Type 2 individuals are unlikely to work; thus,
it is unsurprising that Table 9 reveals little change in psychotherapy use in response to this

health benefits all individual and small-group insurance plans must cover.
  59. We see similar results for Types 3 and 4 in Table A.XIX. In relation to this finding, recall that the
CRRA parameter was selected in a way that would make individuals more sensitive to price changes than
the data suggest. As such, this finding provides some confidence that fixing the CRRA parameter has a
minimal impact on our findings.
  60. Here, we approximate the benefit of policies designed with the intent of reducing discontinuation. Such
policies could, for example, promote the medically-proven benefits of completing a full psychotherapy course
(Cahill et al., 2003). Alternative policies could use machine learning to increase the likelihood that patients
find a therapist best-suited for their needs and preferences. The use of machine learning to improve patient
outcomes has received some attention in the psychology literature (see, for example, Imel et al. (2017)).



                                                      39
policy.61 Reducing employment costs for Type 3 and Type 4 individuals produces a stronger
psychotherapy response, but again, the level change in treatment is unremarkable, meaning
overall employment and mental health are unaffected.
    Finally, our fourth experiment implements all three policies, i.e., eliminating the finan-
cial, discontinuation, and the employment/time cost of psychotherapy. The result of this
experiment is unsurprising given the findings above, but illustrates an important point: for
95% of the population, a wildly ambitious, expensive, and likely unrealistic effort to encour-
age use of psychotherapy would have virtually no impact on aggregate mental health and
employment. This includes Type 2 individuals, who may be described as having moderate
mental health. The remaining 5% of the population, who we identify as persistently ill Type
1 individuals, would realize significant mental health improvements, which would generate
small improvements in employment among this group. As was previously shown, virtually
all of this benefit is produced by the elimination of psychotherapy discontinuation.
    These results show that factors widely viewed as critical barriers to psychotherapy use,
such as time and monetary costs, explain little patient reluctance to use the treatment. More-
over, even when psychotherapy is increased, via incentives or counterfactual assignment to
treatment, the resulting improvement in mental health does not yield increases in employ-
ment or wages. Independent of treatment, our first counterfactual showed that when mental
health was increased artificially, employment increased as well. Though not discussed above,
artificial mental health improvements produced the largest employment gains for several
low employment subgroups. For example, full-time (part-time) employment increased by
3.8 (1.0) percent among women. For Type 2 individuals, full-time (part-time) employment
increases by 18.3 (7.1) percent, on a base of 8.4 (9.5) percent. Recall, these individuals, who
represent 15 percent of the population, exemplify the take-up issue that challenges policy
makers. Type 2 individuals have persistently moderate mental health and relatively low rates
of employment at baseline; however, policy does not improve their labor market outcomes
due to a lack of take-up, despite the fact that mental health improvements in this population
can yield meaningful labor market gains. This brings us back to the critical question: Could
new approaches to policy improve psychotherapy take-up?
    Above, we show that policies aimed at reducing discontinuation rates may be effective at
increasing psychotherapy use, though gains were found to be concentrated among the sickest
subset of the population, where treatment rates are already high. Policy makers may also
consider addressing the stigma of mental health treatment. Such anti-stigma programs are
discussed by Corrigan (2004). Unfortunately, measuring stigma is challenging; thus, as it

  61. Type 1 individuals seem to increase their employment by roughly 10 percent; however, base employment
is so low that this increase is quite small.

                                                   40
relates to our model, the impact of stigma on treatment decisions is unobserved and there-
fore one of the many factors contributing to the disutility of treatment. In our final set of
counterfactuals, we consider the potential impact of anti-stigma programs by reducing the
disutility associated with psychotherapy. Table 10 shows the change in treatment for disu-
tility reductions between 2.5 and 30 percent.62 While it is difficult to know how a particular
antistigma policy maps to a specific percentage reduction in disutility, two things are made
clear by this simulation. First, seemingly modest reductions in treatment disutility produce
large increases in treatment use. For example, a 20 percent reduction in the disutility of
psychotherapy more than doubles baseline psychotherapy use to 4.5%, which is the same ag-
gregate take-up rate induced by the wildly impractical "Policy 4" that makes psychotherapy
free, removes the possibility of discontinuation, and removes the time/employment cost of
psychotherapy (see Tables 9 and A.XIX). Second, the increase in treatment is not limited
to Type 1 individuals. With a 20% reduction in psychotherapy disutility, Type 2-4 individ-
uals increase their psychotherapy use by more than 200 percent of their respective baselines
(reported in Table 7); increases that are notably larger than those induced by Policy 4.


6.3     Robustness and Limitations
Modeling treatment choices requires many decisions. We have experimented, estimating
models with a number of alternative assumptions. In general, our results remain robust
to these assumptions. In particular, all models yield four unobserved types that can be
characterized in a way that is similar to our preferred model, especially as it pertains to
mental health and psychotherapy use, e.g., Type 1 is the sickest and is relatively willing to
use psychotherapy, while Type 2 is moderately ill, though unwilling to use the treatment.
We discuss a subset of alternative assumptions in more detail here.63
    First, we reestimate the model allowing psychotherapy discontinuation to have some pro-
ductive health effects; namely, as the average number of visits in a completed episode is 8.2,
while the average number of visits in a discontinuation episode is 1.4, we scale the effect
size for discontinuation episodes by 1.4/8.2.64 Parameter estimates are virtually identical.

  62. To account for heterogeneity in psychotherapy preferences, we multiply all psychotherapy utility pa-
rameters (i.e., main and interaction effects), excluding treatment-employment interactions, by 1-x, where x
ranges from zero to 0.3.
  63. Given the computational cost of reestimating the model, for all of the robustness tests shown we start
with four unobserved types, beginning from the parameters recovered from the preferred model. We only
add a fifth type if it yields a significant improvement in the likelihood function.
  64. While Cahill et al. (2003) and Hansen, Lambert, and Forman (2002) highlight the benefits of completing
a full course of psychotherapy sessions, they cannot rule out the possibility that effect sizes are simply
proportional to the total number of visits, i.e., that discontinuation episodes are effective, but just less so



                                                      41
Second, there is some concern that persistently healthy individuals never consider mental
health treatment and, thus, our model overstates distaste for treatment. To address this
concern, we reestimate the model while excluding individuals who report "excellent" mental
health in every period (12.5 percent of the sample). Parameter estimates change in pre-
dictable ways. For example, lagged mental health is found to have less of an impact on
current mental health. Importantly, the characterization of the four unobserved types is the
same, though the share of the population that is the healthy Type 3 falls by 1.5 percentage
points and the share that is less healthy (i.e., Types 1 and 2) increases proportionally. Inter-
estingly, as many of the "excellent" health group choose not to work, removing them from
the sample leads to a stronger, negative relationship between mental health and employment
preferences. Third, in an effort to validate the chosen interpretation of our results, i.e., that
our results relate mainly to depressive conditions and related treatment, we reestimate the
model while excluding those reporting a non-DAS mental health condition (about 2 percent
of the sample), as described in Section 3.2. Predictably, the share of the population that
is Type 1 falls by a small amount (0.7 percentage points), but otherwise, results are very
similar.
    Finally, we explore robustness to the average treatment effects that we take from the
medical literature; in particular, we reestimate the model while (i) halving our preferred
treatment effects, (ii) increasing our preferred treatment effects by 50 percent,65 and (iii)
allowing the antidepressant treatment effects to vary by lagged mental health status. The
latter is motivated by the meta-analysis of Fournier et al. (2010), which finds that the
effectiveness of antidepressants is increasing in illness severity, and Elkin et al. (1989), which
finds that psychotherapy is no more effective than antidepressants for severely depressed
patients.66 These alternative specifications have a notable impact on the disutility of mental
illness, but little else. When treatment effects are small (large), the disutility of poor mental
health increases (decreases).67 These differences reflect the key empirical challenge discussed

than completed episodes, because the former contain fewer visits.
  65. These effects are close to the treatment effects that we estimate in Appendix Section A.III.1, using the
observational MEPS data and 2SLS specification.
  66. We can find no consistent evidence to suggest that psychotherapy effectiveness is either increasing or
decreasing in illness severity. Fournier et al. (2010) reports effect sizes of 0.11 for mild to moderate depression,
0.17 for severe depression, and 0.47 for very severe depression; the latter has a 95 percent confidence interval
from 0.22 to 0.71, making it somewhat consistent with Elkin et al. (1989). In our robustness analysis, we
assume that those entering a period with self-reported mental health of "poor" are, as Fournier et al. (2010)
describes, "very severely depressed", meaning antidepressants have an effect size of 0.47. Similarly, we
assume treatment effects for those with fair, good, very good, and excellent mental health are 0.17, 0.11,
0.09, and 0.09, respectively.
  67. When antidepressant treatment effects are heterogeneous, results look similar to when treatment effects
are halved. This is because (i) antidepressants are much more popular than psychotherapy and (ii) most
individuals are in relatively good mental health, meaning the alternative specification represents a decline


                                                        42
in Section 6.1. Namely, the raw data suggest that those with the worst mental health are the
most likely to consume treatment (see Table 3), yet poor mental health is persistent, even
with treatment (see Appendix Table A.XVII). This pattern is difficult to rationalize with
positive treatment effects; thus, when large treatment effects are imposed on the model,
persistence in poor mental health observed in the data is rationalized with low marginal
utility from better mental health, producing a weaker mental health treatment gradient.
Lowering treatment productivity makes it easier for the model to match persistence in poor
mental health and high treatment use among the sick. The result is stronger preferences for
mental health, which leads to higher treatment levels when sick.
    Several of our assumptions cannot be tested, so our results should be interpreted with
these assumptions in mind. For example, as discussed in Section 5.3, we assume that individ-
uals have rational expectations, which implies that when making treatment decisions, they
understand average treatment effects as reported in the medical literature and act accord-
ingly. A possibility is that individuals make treatment decisions with incorrect expectations,
which would bias our estimates. This hypothesis could be tested with subjective data on
expected treatment effects, which we leave to future work. We also remind readers that all
simulations are conducted in a partial equilibrium setting. This limitation is most notable
in Section 6.2.1, where we conceive of a new medical treatment that has strong employment
effects. Clearly, both medical care and labor markets are likely to respond to this counterfac-
tual. Finally, we are careful not to simulate long-run effects. Our model is estimated using
just two years of data and the unobserved types revealed in estimation are strong determi-
nants of mental health, treatment, and labor force participation. It is certainly possible that
these types are more flexible over a longer time horizon.


7     Conclusion
A variety of literatures, including economics (Baranov et al., 2019), show that randomly
assigning psychotherapy improves mental health. Yet, psychotherapy is rarely used in prac-
tice. To understand why, we estimate a structural model of mental health treatment choices
which we use to assess counterfactual policies that remove purported barriers to psychother-
apy. Model estimates provide evidence that mental health is valuable and that roughly
20% of the population would benefit from psychotherapy. Yet, removing barriers to psy-
chotherapy does little to increase use. An exception is that lowering the likelihood of early
discontinuations of a full course of psychotherapy, which occurs frequently and merits further

in antidepressant effectiveness.


                                              43
attention, increases usage among the 5% of the population with persistently "fair" or "poor"
mental health. Thus, while the benefits of psychotherapy are increasingly indisputable, these
benefits are difficult to leverage since people are unwilling to engage in the treatment.
    Moreover, a frequently endorsed narrative is that policies designed to encourage mental
health treatment are likely to "pay for themselves" (Laynard et al., 2007). Such arguments
typically rely on the premises that treatment has been shown to be clinically effective and
individuals with mental health issues are (i) unlikely to be employed and (ii) have large
medical costs when untreated. Easing access to treatment would then necessarily increase
treatment use, reducing medical costs and increasing employment (and thus tax revenue) in
a way that compensates for any new government expenditures. Our analysis, which allows
for rich individual-level heterogeneity, suggests that this is unlikely to be the case. Our
counterfactuals show that while the sickest individuals are the most responsive to policy,
they also have strong preferences for leisure and low earning potential; thus, when policy
yields mental health improvements for this group, there is no earnings gain. Moreover, those
in our sample with higher earning potential also have consistently higher rates of mental
health, meaning they benefit little from additional treatment. As such, when treatment is
incentivized, they simply do not respond.
    Improving population mental health thus requires that we look beyond commonly sug-
gested impediments, such as time and monetary costs. It is possible that individuals simply
dislike psychotherapy and that the utility costs we estimate should be taken at face value.
Stigma, i.e., that individuals feel ashamed that they need professional help to process their
emotions, may explain some of this distaste. There is some evidence that increased infor-
mation about mental health can work to overcome stigma and encourage people to seek
effective treatment (Corrigan, 2004). Another possibility is that biases in beliefs about the
effectiveness of psychotherapy drive use patterns. For example, individuals may find that
taking a pill is a concrete step that makes them feel better, but that talking about their
private issues with a professional is an absurd form of treatment that is unlikely to work.
This could also be corrected with information. A caveat, however, is that there may be
actual heterogeneity in treatment effects that require further study.
    As a concrete step to explore reluctance to use psychotherapy, it would be useful to
collect information on stigma and beliefs. Ideally, such information would be collected as a
module in an existing data set (such as the MEPS) so that it could be analyzed alongside
treatment choices, mental health, employment and other sources of heterogeneity (including
unobserved heterogeneity). As such an effort would be a costly, if worthwhile, undertaking,
initial data collection efforts could be in the form of surveys designed to assess not only
the roles of beliefs or stigma, but whether there are other barriers to psychotherapy that

                                             44
merit exploration in future work. These could eventually be incorporated into the type of
model estimated here to evaluate counterfactual policies designed improve population mental
health.


References
Arcidiacono, Peter, Holger Sieg, and Frank Sloan. 2007. "Living rationally under the volcano?
    An empirical analysis of heavy drinking and smoking." International Economic Review
    48 (1): 37­65.

Ardito, Rita B, and Daniela Rabellino. 2011. "Therapeutic alliance and outcome of psy-
    chotherapy: historical excursus, measurements, and prospects for research." Frontiers
    in psychology 2.

Baranov, Victoria, Sonia Bhalotra, Pietro Biroli, and Joanna Maselko. 2019. "Maternal De-
    pression, Women's Empowerment, and Parental Investment: Evidence from a Random-
    ized Control Trial." American Economic Review.

Bellman, Richard. 1966. "Dynamic programming." Science 153 (3731): 34­37.

Berndt, E.R., Richard G. Frank, and Thomas G. McGuire. 1997. "Alternative Insurance
    Arrangements and the Treatment of Depression: What are the Facts?" American Journal
    of Managed Care 3:243­250.

Berndt, Ernst R, Bronwyn H Hall, Robert E Hall, and Jerry A Hausman. 1974. "Estima-
    tion and inference in nonlinear structural models." In Annals of Economic and Social
    Measurement, Volume 3, number 4, 653­665. NBER.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Mallesh M Pai, and Agne Suziedelyte. 2017. "Mental health stigma."
    Economics Letters 159:57­60.

Blau, David M, and Donna B Gilleskie. 2008. "The role of retiree health insurance in the
    employment behavior of older men." International Economic Review 49 (2): 475­514.

Butikofer, Aline, Christopher Cronin, and Meghan Skira. 2020. "Employment Effects of
    Healthcare Policy: Evidence from the 2007 FDA Black Box Warning on Antidepres-
    sants." Journal of Health Economics, no. Forthcoming.




                                             45
Cahill, Jane, Michael Barkham, Gillian Hardy, Anne Rees, David A Shapiro, William B
    Stiles, and Norman Macaskill. 2003. "Outcomes of patients completing and not com-
    pleting cognitive therapy for depression." British Journal of Clinical Psychology 42 (2):
    133­143.

Cascade, Elisa, Amir H Kalali, and Sidney H Kennedy. 2009. "Real-world data on SSRI
    antidepressant side effects." Psychiatry (Edgmont) 6 (2): 16.

Chan, Tat Y, and Barton H Hamilton. 2006. "Learning, private information, and the eco-
   nomic evaluation of randomized experiments." Journal of Political Economy 114 (6):
   997­1040.

Chan, Tat Y, Barton H Hamilton, and Nicholas W Papageorge. 2015. "Health, risky be-
   haviour and the value of medical innovation for infectious disease." The Review of Eco-
   nomic Studies 83 (4): 1465­1510.

Churchill, Rachel, V Hunot, R Corney, Martin Knapp, H McGuire, A Tylee, and S Wessely.
   2002. "A systematic review of controlled trials of the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
   of brief psychological treatments for depression." Health Technology Assessment 5 (35):
   1­173.

Cipriani, Andrea, Toshi A Furukawa, Georgia Salanti, Anna Chaimani, Lauren Z Atkinson,
    Yusuke Ogawa, Stefan Leucht, Henricus G Ruhe, Erick H Turner, Julian PT Higgins, et
    al. 2018. "Comparative efficacy and acceptability of 21 antidepressant drugs for the acute
    treatment of adults with major depressive disorder: a systematic review and network
    meta-analysis." Lancet 391 (10128): 1357­1366.

Constantino, Michael J, Diane B Arnkoff, Carol R Glass, Rebecca M Ametrano, and JuliAnna
    Z Smith. 2011. "Expectations." Journal of Clinical Psychology 67 (2): 184­192.

Corrigan, Patrick. 2004. "How stigma interferes with mental health care." American psy-
    chologist 59 (7): 614­625.

Crawford, B Y Gregory S, and Matthew Shum. 2005. "Uncertainty and Learning in Phar-
    maceutical Demand." Econometrica 73 (4): 1137­1173.

Cronin, Christopher J. 2019. "Insurance-Induced Moral Hazard: A Dynamic Model of Within-
    Year Medical Care Decision Making Under Uncertainty." International Economic Re-
    view 60 (1): 187­218.




                                             46
Cuijpers, Pim, Annmikae van Straten, Ernst Bohlmeijer, SD Hollon, and Gerhard Andersson.
    2010. "The effects of psychotherapy for adult depression are overestimated: a meta-
    analysis of study quality and effect size." Psychological Medicine 40 (2): 211­223.

Currie, Janet, and Mark Stabile. 2006. "Child mental health and human capital accumula-
    tion: the case of ADHD." Journal of Health Economics 25 (6): 1094­1118.

Darden, Michael. 2017. "Smoking, expectations, and health: a dynamic stochastic model of
    lifetime smoking behavior." Journal of Political Economy 125 (5): 1465­1522.

Davis, Morris A, and E Michael Foster. 2005. "A stochastic dynamic model of the mental
    health of children." International Economic Review 46 (3): 837­866.

De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones. 2016. "Medicaid insurance in
    old age." American Economic Review 106 (11): 3480­3520.

DeRubeis, Robert J, Steven D Hollon, Jay D Amsterdam, Richard C Shelton, Paula R
   Young, Ronald M Salomon, John P OReardon, Margaret L Lovett, Madeline M Gladis,
   Laurel L Brown, et al. 2005. "Cognitive therapy vs medications in the treatment of
   moderate to severe depression." Archives of General Psychiatry 62 (4): 409­416.

Dickstein, Michael. 2014. "Efficient provision of experience goods: Evidence from antidepres-
    sant choice." Working Paper.

Dimidjian, Sona, Steven D Hollon, Keith S Dobson, Karen B Schmaling, Robert J Kohlen-
   berg, Michael E Addis, Robert Gallop, Joseph B McGlinchey, David K Markley, Jackie
   K Gollan, et al. 2006. "Randomized trial of behavioral activation, cognitive therapy,
   and antidepressant medication in the acute treatment of adults with major depression."
   Journal of consulting and clinical psychology 74 (4): 658.

Ekers, David, David Richards, and Simon Gilbody. 2008. "A meta-analysis of randomized
    trials of behavioural treatment of depression." Psychological Medicine 38 (5): 611­623.

Elkin, Irene, Tracie M. Shea, John T. Watkins, Stanley D. Imber, Stuart M. Sotsky, Joseph
    F. Collins, David R. Glass, et al. 1989. "National Institute of Mental Health Treatment
    of Depression Collaborative Research Program." Archives of General Psychiatry 46:971­
    982.

Ellis, RP. 1986. "Rational behavior in the presence of coverage ceilings and deductibles."
     RAND Journal of Economics 17 (2): 158­175.




                                             47
Ettner, Susan L, Richard G Frank, and Ronald C Kessler. 1997. "The Impact of Psychiatric
    Disorders on Labor Market Outcomes." Industrial and Labor Relations Review Labor
    Relations Review 51 (1): 64­81.

Fletcher, Jason, and Barbara Wolfe. 2008. "Child mental health and human capital accumu-
     lation: the case of ADHD revisited." Journal of health economics 27 (3): 794­800.

Fletcher, Jason M. 2008. "Adolescent depression: diagnosis, treatment, and educational at-
     tainment." Health economics 17 (11): 1215­1235.

      . 2014. "The effects of childhood ADHD on adult labor market outcomes." Health
    economics 23 (2): 159­181.

Fournier, Jay C, Robert J DeRubeis, Steven D Hollon, Sona Dimidjian, Jay D Amsterdam,
    Richard C Shelton, and Jan Fawcett. 2010. "Antidepressant drug effects and depression
    severity: a patient-level meta-analysis." Jama 303 (1): 47­53.

Frank, R. G., and T. G. McGuire. 1986. "A review of studies of the impact of insurance on
    the demand and utilization of specialty mental health services." Health services research
    21:241­265. issn: 00179124.

Frank, R.G., and Paul Gertler. 1991. "An Assessment of Measurement Error Bias for Esti-
    mating the Effect of Mental Distress on Income." The Journal of Human Resources 26
    (1): 154­164.

Gilleskie, Donna B. 1998. "A dynamic stochastic model of medical care use and work ab-
     sence." Econometrica: 1­45.

Gloaguen, Val´ erie, Jean Cottraux, Michel Cucherat, and Ivy-Marie Blackburn. 1998. "A
    meta-analysis of the effects of cognitive therapy in depressed patients." Journal of af-
    fective disorders 49 (1): 59­72.

Gould, Robert A, Michael W Otto, Mark H Pollack, and Liang Yap. 1997. "Cognitive be-
    havioral and pharmacological treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: A preliminary
    meta-analysis." Behavior therapy 28 (2): 285­305.

Greenberg, Paul E, Ronald C Kessler, Howard G Birnbaum, Stephanie A Leong, Sarah W
    Lowe, Patricia A Berglund, and Patricia K Corey-Lisle. 2003. "The economic burden of
    depression in the United States: how did it change between 1990 and 2000?" Journal of
    clinical psychiatry 64 (12): 1465­1475.




                                             48
Greenberg, Roger P, Michael J Constantino, and Noah Bruce. 2006. "Are patient expecta-
    tions still relevant for psychotherapy process and outcome?" Clinical Psychology Review
    26 (6): 657­678.

Greenblatt, David, Jerold Harmatz, and Richard Shader. 2018. "Update on Psychotropic
    Drug Prescribing in the United States." Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology 38 (1):
    1­4.

Grossman, M. 1972. "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health." Journal
    of Political Economy 80 (2): 223­255. issn: 0022-3808.

Guilkey, David K, and Peter M Lance. 2014. "Program impact estimation with binary out-
    come variables: Monte Carlo results for alternative estimators and empirical examples."
    In Festschrift in honor of Peter Schmidt, 5­46. Springer.

Hansen, Nathan B, Michael J Lambert, and Evan M Forman. 2002. "The psychotherapy dose-
   response effect and its implications for treatment delivery services." Clinical Psychology:
   science and practice 9 (3): 329­343.

Heckman, J., and B. Singer. 1984. "A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional
    Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data." Econometrica 52 (2): 271­320.

Hofmann, Stefan G, Anu Asnaani, Imke JJ Vonk, Alice T Sawyer, and Angela Fang. 2012.
    "The efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy: A review of meta-analyses." Cognitive
    therapy and research 36 (5): 427­440.

Hurd, Michael D. 1989. "Mortality risk and bequests." Econometrica: Journal of the econo-
    metric society: 779­813.

Imel, Zac, Derek Caperton, Michael Tanana, and David Atkins. 2017. "Technology-enhanced
    human interaction in psychotherapy." Journal of Counseling Psychology 64 (4): 385­
    393.

Jarrett, Robin B, Martin Schaffer, Donald McIntire, Amy Witt-Browder, Dolores Kraft, and
    Richard C Risser. 1999. "Treatment of atypical depression with cognitive therapy or
    phenelzine: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial." Archives of General Psychiatry 56
    (5): 431­437.

Jolivet, Gregory, and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2020. A Structural Analysis of Mental Health and
     Labor Market Trajectories. IZA DP No. 13518.

Kazdin, Alan E. 1999. "The meanings and measurement of clinical significance."



                                             49
Keane, M.P., and K.I. Wolpin. 1997. "The Career Decisions of Young Men." Journal of
    Political Economy 105 (3): 473­522.

Keeler, Emmett B., Willard G. Manning, and Kenneth B. Wells. 1988. "The demand for
    episodes of mental health services." Journal of Health Economics 7 (4): 369­392. issn:
    01676296. doi:10.1016/0167-6296(88)90021-5.

Kessler, Ronald C, Steven Heeringa, Matthew D Lakoma, Maria Petukhova, Agnes E Rupp,
    Michael Schoenbaum, Philip S Wang, and Alan M Zaslavsky. 2008. "Individual and
    societal effects of mental disorders on earnings in the United States: results from the
    national comorbidity survey replication." American Journal of Psychiatry 165 (6): 703­
    711.

Kirsch, Irving, Brett J Deacon, Tania B Huedo-Medina, Alan Scoboria, Thomas J Moore,
    and Blair T Johnson. 2008. "Initial severity and antidepressant benefits: a meta-analysis
    of data submitted to the Food and Drug Administration." PLoS Med 5 (2): e45.

Kowalski, Amanda E. 2015. "Estimating the tradeoff between risk protection and moral
   hazard with a nonlinear budget set model of health insurance." International journal of
   industrial organization 43:122­135.

Laynard, R, David Clark, Martin Knapp, and Guy Mayraz. 2007. "Cost-benefit analysis of
    psychological therapy." National Institute Economic Review 202 (1): 90­98.

Magnac, Thierry, and David Thesmar. 2002. "Identifying dynamic discrete decision pro-
   cesses." Econometrica 70 (2): 801­816.

McLeod, John. 2001. Counselling in the workplace: The facts: A systematic study of the
   research evidence. British Association for Counselling / Psychotherapy.

Mitte, Kristin, Peter Noack, Regina Steil, and Martin Hautzinger. 2005. "A meta-analytic
    review of the efficacy of drug treatment in generalized anxiety disorder." Journal of
    Clinical Psychopharmacology 25 (2): 141­150.

Moffitt, Robert. 1983. "An economic model of welfare stigma." American Economic Review
     73 (5): 1023­1035.

Mroz, Thomas A. 1999. "Discrete Factor Approximations in Simultaneous Equation Models:
   Estimating the Impact of a Dummy Endogenous Variable on a Continuous Outcome."
   Journal of Econometrics 92 (2): 233 ­274.

Papageorge, Nicholas W. 2016. "Why Medical Innovation Is Valuable: Health, Human Cap-
    ital, and the Labor Market." Quantitative Economics 7 (3): 671­725.

                                             50
Pratt, Laura A, Debra J Brody, and Qiuping Gu. 2017. "Antidepressant Use among Persons
    Aged 12 and Over: United States, 2011-2014. NCHS Data Brief. Number 283." National
    Center for Health Statistics.

Prochaska, Judith J, Hai-Yeng Sung, Wendy Max, Yanling Shi, and Michael Ong. 2012.
    "Validity of the K6 scale as a measure of moderate mental distress based on mental
    health treatment need and utilization." International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric
    Research 21 (2): 88­97.

Quidt, Jonathan de, and Johannes Haushofer. 2016. Depression for Economists. NBER
    Working Paper.

Ricci, Judith A, and Elsbeth Chee. 2005. "Lost productive time associated with excess
    weight in the US workforce." Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine 47
    (12): 1227­1234.

Ronda, Victor. 2019. The Effect of Maternal Psychological Distress on Children's Cognitive
   Development. Mimeo, Aaruhus University Denmark.

Rust, John. 1987. "Optimal replacement of GMC bus engines: An empirical model of Harold
    Zurcher." Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society: 999­1033.

Rust, John, and Christopher Phelan. 1997. "How social security and medicare affect re-
    tirement behavior in a world of incomplete markets." Econometrica: Journal of the
    Econometric Society: 781­831.

Shapiro, Bradley. 2020. "Promoting wellness or waste? evidence from antidepressant adver-
    tising." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, no. Forthcomming.

Smits, JAJ, and SG Hofmann. 2009. "A meta-analytic review of the effects of psychotherapy
    control conditions for anxiety disorders." Psychological Medicine 39 (2): 229­239.

Sotsky, Stuart M, David R Glass, M Tracie Shea, Paul A Pilkonis, F Collins, Irene Elkin,
    John T Watkins, et al. 2006. "Patient predictors of response to psychotherapy and phar-
    macotherapy: findings in the NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research
    Program." Focus: The Journal of Lifelong Learning in Psychiatry 4 (2): 278­290.

Stewart, Rebecca E, and Dianne L Chambless. 2009. "Cognitive­behavioral therapy for adult
    anxiety disorders in clinical practice: A meta-analysis of effectiveness studies." Journal
    of consulting and clinical psychology 77 (4): 595.




                                             51
Stewart, Walter F, Judith A Ricci, Elsbeth Chee, Steven R Hahn, and David Morganstein.
    2003. "Cost of Lost Productive Work Time Among US Workers With Depression."
    JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association 289 (23): 3135­3144. doi:10.
    1001/jama.289.23.3135.

Swift, Joshua K, and Roger P Greenberg. 2012. "Premature discontinuation in adult psy-
    chotherapy: A meta-analysis." Journal of consulting and clinical psychology 80 (4): 547.

Thornicroft, Graham, Somnath Chatterji, Sara Evans-Lacko, Michael Gruber, Nancy Samp-
    son, Sergio Aguilar-Gaxiola, Ali Al-Hamzawi, et al. 2017. "Undertreatment of people
    with major depressive disorder in 21 countries." The British Journal of Psychiatry 210
    (2): 119­124.

Turner, Erick H, Annette M Matthews, Eftihia Linardatos, Robert A Tell, and Robert Rosen-
    thal. 2008. "Selective publication of antidepressant trials and its influence on apparent
    efficacy." New England Journal of Medicine 358 (3): 252­260.

Wampold, Bruce E, Gregory W Mondin, Marcia Moody, Frederick Stich, Kurt Benson,
   and Hyun-nie Ahn. 1997. "A meta-analysis of outcome studies comparing bona fide
   psychotherapies: Empiricially," all must have prizes."." Psychological bulletin 122 (3):
   203.

Wampold, Bruce E, Takuya Minami, Thomas W Baskin, and Sandra Callen Tierney. 2002.
   "A meta-(re) analysis of the effects of cognitive therapy versus other therapies for de-
   pression." Journal of affective disorders 68 (2-3): 159­165.

Wierzbicki, Michael, and Gene Pekarik. 1993. "A meta-analysis of psychotherapy dropout."
    Professional psychology: research and practice 24 (2): 190.

Wong, Jenna, Aude Motulsky, Tewodros Eguale, David L Buckeridge, Michal Abrahamowicz,
   and Robyn Tamblyn. 2016. "Treatment indications for antidepressants prescribed in
   primary care in Quebec, Canada, 2006-2015." Jama 315 (20): 2230­2232.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2005. "Simple solutions to the initial conditions problem in dynamic,
   nonlinear panel data models with unobserved heterogeneity." Journal of applied econo-
   metrics 20 (1): 39­54.

Yu, Hang. 2019. Social Stigma as a Barrier to HIV Testing: Evidence from a Randomized
    Controlled Trial in Mozambique. Working Paper.




                                             52
Tables and Figures


                          Table 1: Mental Health and Treatment Decisions By Age

                           Subjective MH            DAS Disorder           Antidepressants           Psychotherapy
        Ages    26-30          4.114                   0.060                    0.040                    0.013
        Ages    31-35          4.052                   0.077                    0.054                    0.016
        Ages    36-40          3.982                   0.091                    0.066                    0.019
        Ages    41-45          3.911                   0.107                    0.078                    0.022
        Ages    46-50          3.844                   0.121                    0.093                    0.024
        Ages    51-55          3.800                   0.135                    0.105                    0.024
       Notes: An observation is an interview period; thus, sample statistics are calculated across all 208,113 observations
      in the estimation sample (54,989 individuals). Subjective MH is the respondent's subjective assessment of own
      mental health and ranges from 1 (poor) to 5 (excellent). Depression and anxiety indicators are based on the ICD-9
      codes associated with reported diagnoses.




                                  Table 2: Sample Means By Treatment Choice

                                                  Antidepressants           Psychotherapy             Both            Neither
                                                    N=12,091                   N=878                 N=3,284         N=191,860
 Demographics
  Male                                                   0.296                     0.339               0.307            0.470
  Age                                                    43.412                    41.54               42.780           40.818
  Live in M.S.A.                                         0.777                     0.877               0.834            0.826
  Married                                                 0.560                    0.448                0.385            0.660
  Family Size                                            2.909                     2.653               2.505            3.434
  White (race)                                           0.856                     0.798               0.799            0.766
  Public Insurance                                       0.303                     0.351               0.499             0.123
  Private Insurance                                       0.629                    0.580                0.463            0.661
  Non-Labor HH Income                                    28473                     26593               24178            27254
 Schooling and Employment
  High School Grad.                                       0.576                    0.483                0.542            0.529
  College Grad.                                           0.226                    0.344                0.244            0.255
  Employed                                                0.591                    0.607                0.414            0.783
  Hourly Wage                                            23.302                   27.609               24.779           23.421
 Mental Health
  Subjective                                              3.121                    2.899               2.467             4.026
  DAS disorder                                            0.936                    0.908               0.932             0.029
  Any disorder                                            0.999                    1.000               1.000             0.032
 Notes: An observation is an interview period; thus, sample statistics are calculated across all 208,113 observations in the estimation
sample (54,989 individuals). The mean hourly wage excludes the unemployed. Subjective MH is the respondent's subjective
assessment of own mental health and ranges from 1 (poor) to 5 (excellent). Depression and anxiety indicators are based on the
ICD-9 codes associated with reported diagnoses.




                                                                53
                           Table 3: Sample Means By Subjective Mental Health

                                              MH=5             MH=4            MH=3             MH=2    MH=1
                                            N=78,512         N=63,258        N=51,540         N=11,877 N=2,926
 Demographics
  Male                                            0.484           0.458            0.432           0.393          0.393
  Age                                            40.188          40.957           41.718          42.851         43.759
  Live in M.S.A.                                  0.844           0.828            0.801           0.787          0.746
  Married                                         0.699           0.673            0.611           0.445          0.328
  Family Size                                     3.404           3.423            3.434           3.026          2.725
  Problem Child                                   0.444           0.571            0.668           0.968          1.150
  White (race)                                    0.766           0.793            0.769           0.722          0.616
  Public Insurance                                0.087           0.102            0.178           0.415          0.616
  Private Insurance                               0.734           0.699            0.568           0.386          0.245
  Non-Labor HH Income                             30942           28227            23079           18781          16592
 Schooling & Employment
  High School Grad.                               0.521           0.542            0.539           0.525          0.523
  College Grad.                                   0.327           0.271            0.162           0.111          0.073
  Employed                                        0.832           0.809            0.712           0.460          0.220
  Hourly Wage                                    25.623          23.516           20.247          18.589         19.400
 Treatment Decisions
  Psychotherapy                                   0.003            0.009           0.025            0.111          0.227
  Antidepressants                                 0.023            0.053           0.103            0.299          0.476
 Mental Health
  DAS disorder                                    0.034            0.071           0.139            0.393          0.599
   Any Condition                                  0.038            0.077           0.147            0.418          0.646
 Notes: An observation is an interview period; thus, sample statistics are calculated across all 208,113 observations in the
estimation sample (54,989 individuals). The mean hourly wage excludes the unemployed. Subjective MH is the respondent's
subjective assessment of own mental health and ranges from 1 (poor) to 5 (excellent). Depression and anxiety indicators are
based on the ICD-9 codes associated with reported diagnoses.




                                                            54
            Table 4: DAS Reporting and Treatment by Subjective Mental Health

                                             Minimum Subjective Mental Health Observed
                                           Poor    Fair    Good Very Good Excellent
                                          (3.4%) (11.2%) (40.6%)     (29.6%)     (15.2%)

 DAS disorder ever (Yes)                   0.693        0.455         0.153          0.072            0.037
  Psychotherapy ever                       0.434        0.305         0.168          0.116            0.063
  Antidepressants ever                     0.784        0.691         0.645          0.582            0.516
  Average Subj. MH                         1.892        2.751         3.547          4.358            5.000

 DAS disorder ever (No)                    0.307        0.545         0.847          0.928            0.963
  Psychotherapy ever                       0.069        0.012         0.002          0.001            0.000
  Antidepressants ever                     0.094        0.023         0.007          0.006            0.004
  Average Subj. MH                         2.160        2.930         3.682          4.420            5.000
 Notes: An observation is an individual; thus, statistics are calculated across 54,989 observations. Table columns
group individuals by their minimum subjective mental health report during the 5 survey rounds.




                                                       55
                   Table 5: A Multinomial Logit for Treatment Choices

                                Antidepressants              Psychotherapy                  Both
                                 Coef.       SE               Coef.     SE              Coef.    SE
 Constant                       -2.386    0.086              -3.554 0.275              -2.079 0.144
 Male                           -0.718    0.021              -0.451 0.072              -0.601 0.040
 Age                             0.032    0.001               0.002 0.004               0.016 0.002
 MSA                            -0.092    0.025               0.397 0.106               0.221 0.051
 Married                        -0.265    0.021              -0.591 0.074              -0.607 0.041
 Mental Health
   Excellent         -3.097                    0.055         -3.663       0.165        -5.003 0.098
   Very Good         -2.304                    0.052         -2.701       0.147        -3.897 0.077
   Good              -1.637                    0.050         -1.956       0.138        -2.649 0.064
   Fair              -0.544                    0.052         ­0.709       0.140        -0.976 0.062
 Region
   Midwest            0.306                    0.033         -0.194       0.099        -0.000 0.056
   South              0.226                    0.030         -0.604       0.097        -0.338 0.053
   West              -0.133                    0.033         -0.424       0.098        -0.367 0.056
 Race
   Black             -1.061                    0.034         -0.617       0.103        -0.856 0.055
   Other (non-white) -0.673                    0.048         -0.560       0.150        -0.665 0.086
 Education
   High School        0.457                    0.027          0.518       0.099         0.621 0.049
   College            0.598                    0.034          1.374       0.113         1.312 0.062
 Insurance
   Public             1.112                    0.029          1.174       0.098         1.499 0.051
   Private            0.603                    0.028          0.426       0.097         0.491 0.053
 The model is estimated on the full estimation sample and the base outcome is no treatment. All models
control for mental health, sex, age, race, marital status, MSA, region, education, and insurance status. The
excluded mental health category is poor, the excluded region is the north, the excluded race is white, the
excluded education level is less than high school, and the excluded insurance status is uninsured.




                   Table 6: Mental Health and Labor Market Outcomes

                                Employment                ln(Wage)                  Hours
                                Coef.  SE                Coef.   SE              Coef.    SE
         Mental Health
          Excellent             0.536 0.007              0.123 0.020             3.822 0.432
          Very Good             0.525 0.007              0.081 0.020             3.420 0.433
          Good                  0.459 0.007              0.022 0.020             3.035 0.434
          Fair                  0.230 0.008             -0.026 0.021             1.777 0.454
         Observations            N=208,113               N=159,284                N=159,284
        The excluded mental health group is "poor". All models control for sex, age, race, marital
       status, MSA, region, year effects, and education. Models for hours and hourly wage are
       estimated on those who are working.



                                                    56
                      Table 7: Model Predictions by Unobserved Type

                                Type 1             Type 2             Type 3            Type 4
  Variable                    Mean     S.E.    Mean        S.E      Mean      S.E    Mean      S.E
  Treatment
   Psychotherapy Ever         0.375 0.004       0.016    0.001      0.036 0.000       0.004 0.001
   Any Psych. per. t          0.212 0.003       0.004    0.000      0.010 0.000       0.001 0.000
      Share with pc t =0      0.685 0.004       0.496    0.021      0.270 0.006       0.325 0.057
      pc       c
        t = 0|pt > 0        316.943 7.368 272.117 24.526 385.197 6.965 285.006 43.51
      Dt |Mt = 1              0.392 0.006       0.424    0.021      0.480 0.006       0.546 0.059
   Rx Ever                    0.641 0.003       0.100    0.002      0.113 0.001       0.075 0.003
   Any Rx period t            0.516 0.003       0.044    0.001      0.051 0.000       0.029 0.001
      Share with pr t =0      0.212 0.002       0.125    0.004      0.036 0.001       0.073 0.007
      pc       r
        t = 0|pt > 0        233.815 2.344 152.451        2.853 183.208 1.601 131.101 7.027
  Employment
   PT                         0.026 0.001       0.095    0.001      0.187 0.001       0.193 0.003
      Mean: Wt1              18.281 0.244       9.983    0.031     21.522 0.047     20.124 0.149
      SD: Wt1                 9.331 0.286       3.849    0.055     17.653 0.076     11.951 0.163
   FT                         0.009 0.001       0.084    0.001      0.762 0.001       0.543 0.004
      Mean: Wt0               6.624 0.196     10.663     0.051     24.769 0.018     19.641 0.129
      SD: Wt0                 3.449 0.257       4.494    0.110     16.431 0.025     12.008 0.119
  Mental Health
   M Ht = 5                   0.024 0.001       0.311    0.001      0.414 0.000       0.422 0.003
   M Ht = 4                   0.069 0.001       0.301    0.001      0.311 0.000       0.307 0.001
   M Ht = 3                   0.309 0.002       0.313    0.001      0.234 0.000       0.230 0.002
   M Ht = 2                   0.390 0.002       0.067    0.001      0.037 0.000       0.036 0.001
   M Ht = 1                   0.207 0.002       0.009    0.000      0.004 0.000       0.005 0.000
  0
   log(Initial wage)          3.714 0.111       2.674    0.046     22.881 0.014     18.997 0.204
   PT0                        0.056 0.002       0.023    0.001      0.199 0.000       0.133 0.003
   FT0                        0.036 0.002       0.035    0.001      0.786 0.000       0.436 0.004
   M H0 = 5                   0.030 0.001       0.333    0.001      0.449 0.000       0.448 0.005
   M H0 = 4                   0.078 0.002       0.278    0.001      0.307 0.000       0.299 0.003
   M H0 = 3                   0.317 0.002       0.303    0.001      0.209 0.000       0.211 0.003
   M H0 = 2                   0.381 0.002       0.074    0.001      0.032 0.000       0.036 0.001
   M H0 = 1                   0.193 0.002       0.012    0.000      0.003 0.000       0.006 0.000
   c0                         0.184 0.002       0.009    0.000      0.010 0.000       0.000 0.000
   r0                         0.469 0.003       0.031    0.001      0.045 0.000       0.032 0.002
   female                     0.585 0.003       0.792    0.001      0.495 0.000       0.522 0.006
   age0                      43.598 0.047     39.570     0.025     40.321 0.004     39.828 0.064
   year0                      8.523 0.032       7.917    0.012      7.702 0.002       8.185 0.035
   ave. msa                   0.702 0.003       0.803    0.001      0.820 0.000       0.837 0.004
   ave. pub. ins.             0.742 0.004       0.321    0.001      0.065 0.000       0.106 0.003
   ave. priv. ins.            0.179 0.002       0.331    0.002      0.783 0.000       0.621 0.005
   hs education               0.504 0.003       0.483    0.001      0.541 0.000       0.494 0.003
   college education          0.103 0.002       0.110    0.001      0.287 0.000       0.338 0.004
   nonwhite                   0.340 0.003       0.227    0.001      0.202 0.000       0.220 0.004
   ave. married               0.346 0.003       0.641    0.002      0.668 0.000       0.690 0.005
   ave. hh income /100      241.337 1.759 393.918        1.290 354.390 0.223 451.708 3.323
  Share of Population         0.049 0.000       0.162    0.001      0.742 0.000       0.047 0.001
 Notes: The simulated data are constructed by sampling from the joint error distribution, permanent
unobserved heterogeneity distribution, and estimated parameter covariance matrix 50 times for each
individual, then forward simulating four periods from initial conditions. All moments are calculated
over all four simulation periods.
                                                 57
                                   Table 8: Assigned Psychotherapy in First Period, Sick Types

                                     t=1                           t=2                         t=3                          t=4
                            Base     Sim      %           Base     Sim     %          Base     Sim      %          Base     Sim      %
      Type 1, Women
      Psychotherapy         0.235 1.000       3.254       0.265 0.663 1.500           0.270 0.524 0.944            0.223 0.357 0.599
      Medication            0.587 0.738       0.256       0.618 0.842 0.362           0.626 0.833 0.332            0.575 0.751 0.307
      Avg MH               2.355 2.355        0.000       2.317 2.620 0.130           2.307 2.649 0.148           2.301 2.603 0.131
      Working PT            0.034 0.027      -0.194       0.028 0.026 -0.093         0.029 0.027 -0.069            0.021 0.021 -0.032
      Working FT            0.007 0.005      -0.266       0.007 0.006 -0.076         0.008 0.008 0.004             0.007 0.007 0.024
      Avg Wage             15.609 16.467 0.055           16.563 16.660 0.006         16.103 16.161 0.004          15.118 15.323 0.014
      Type 1, Men
      Psychotherapy         0.146 1.000       5.868       0.151 0.497 2.288           0.151 0.358 1.377            0.128 0.233 0.818
      Medication            0.395 0.542       0.373       0.407 0.657 0.615           0.412 0.645 0.567            0.378 0.568 0.502
      Avg MH               2.394 2.394        0.000       2.304 2.629 0.141           2.250 2.588 0.150           2.220 2.516 0.133
      Working PT            0.035 0.030      -0.152       0.031 0.027 -0.101         0.029 0.027 -0.076            0.021 0.021 -0.008
      Working FT            0.013 0.010      -0.176       0.011 0.009 -0.160         0.010 0.011 0.060             0.009 0.010 0.109
      Avg Wage             15.516 16.373 0.055           16.314 17.093 0.048         16.122 15.802 -0.020         15.178 14.954 -0.015
      Type 2, Women




58
      Psychotherapy         0.005 1.000 187.932           0.004 0.047 9.840           0.004 0.007 1.031            0.004 0.005 0.092
      Medication            0.046 0.068       0.461       0.049 0.118 1.379           0.051 0.090 0.769            0.052 0.072 0.383
      Avg MH               3.915 3.915        0.000       3.872 4.166 0.076           3.849 4.036 0.049           3.833 3.947 0.030
      Working PT            0.077 0.064      -0.163       0.107 0.100 -0.060         0.111 0.108 -0.027            0.082 0.081 -0.006
      Working FT            0.050 0.043      -0.147       0.071 0.069 -0.032         0.081 0.080 -0.009            0.064 0.064 -0.004
      Avg Wage             10.084 10.123 0.004           10.048 10.122 0.007         10.062 10.085 0.002          10.041 10.067 0.003
      Type 2, Men
      Psychotherapy         0.004 1.000 267.932           0.002 0.033 15.123         0.002 0.004 0.661            0.003 0.003 0.058
      Medication            0.025 0.035       0.416       0.026 0.068 1.572           0.028 0.047 0.645            0.033 0.042 0.260
      Avg MH               3.751 3.751        0.000       3.804 4.090 0.075           3.844 4.015 0.044           3.851 3.949 0.025
      Working PT            0.080 0.068      -0.149       0.111 0.107 -0.031         0.115 0.114 -0.014            0.084 0.087 0.028
      Working FT            0.123 0.104      -0.151       0.163 0.154 -0.056         0.173 0.168 -0.031            0.137 0.135 -0.013
      Avg Wage             10.607 10.768 0.015           10.584 10.658 0.007         10.471 10.473 0.000          10.506 10.555 0.005
      Notes: We construct the simulated data by first using the estimated posterior unobserved type probabilities to simulate a type for
     each individual in Sample C referenced in Table A.I. We then randomly select 2,500 individuals of each type. For this sample of 10,000
     individuals, we sample from the joint error distribution and estimated parameter covariance matrix 50 times for each individual. We
     then forward simulate four periods from the observed initial conditions. In this table, we compare choices and outcomes in each of
     the four simulation periods for Types 1 and 2, using the baseline model and an alternative model where individuals are assigned to
     psychotherapy in period t = 1.
                                 Table 9: Counterfactual Policy Simulations, Sick Types

                                    Base               Policy 1                  Policy 2                   Policy 3                   Policy 4

                                    Level          Level       %              Level       %             Level        %             Level        %
      Type 1, Women
      Psychotherapy                 0.248          0.252      0.015           0.554 1.232                0.250      0.009          0.565 1.275
      Medication                    0.602          0.603       0.002         0.752 0.250                 0.602       0.001          0.757 0.259
      Avg MH                       2.299          2.302       0.001          2.719 0.182                2.301       0.001          2.730 0.188
      Working PT                    0.028         0.028       -0.002         0.025 -0.092                0.030       0.072          0.031 0.104
      Working FT                    0.007         0.007       -0.004          0.007 -0.070               0.008       0.075          0.008 0.115
      Avg Wage                     15.856         15.859      0.000          15.964 0.007               15.803      -0.003         15.786 -0.004
      Type 1, Men
      Psychotherapy                 0.144          0.146       0.015          0.374       1.595          0.145      0.010          0.383 1.661
      Medication                    0.398          0.399       0.003         0.537       0.350           0.399       0.002          0.543 0.364
      Avg MH                       2.241          2.242        0.001         2.554       0.140          2.242       0.001          2.565 0.145
      Working PT                    0.029         0.029        0.002          0.028      -0.044          0.030       0.046          0.032 0.097
      Working FT                    0.011         0.011        0.000          0.010      -0.027          0.011       0.049          0.012 0.107




59
      Avg Wage                     15.780         15.777       0.000         15.809      0.002          15.738      -0.003         15.665 -0.007
      Type 2, Women
      Psychotherapy                 0.004          0.004       0.016          0.008       0.729          0.005      0.052          0.008       0.868
      Medication                    0.050          0.050       0.001         0.051       0.020           0.050      0.001           0.051      0.024
      Avg MH                       3.843          3.843        0.000         3.849       0.001          3.844       0.000          3.849       0.001
      Working PT                    0.094         0.094        0.000          0.094      -0.001          0.094      0.001           0.094      0.002
      Working FT                    0.067         0.067        0.000          0.067      -0.001          0.067      0.002          0.067       0.002
      Avg Wage                     10.058         10.058       0.000         10.060      0.000          10.058      0.000          10.060      0.000
      Type 1, Men
      Psychotherapy                 0.003          0.003       0.013          0.005       0.782          0.003      0.068          0.005       0.958
      Medication                    0.028          0.028       0.000         0.028       0.010           0.028      0.001           0.028      0.009
      Avg MH                       3.837          3.837        0.000         3.841       0.001          3.837       0.000          3.841       0.001
      Working PT                    0.098         0.098        0.000          0.098      -0.001          0.098      0.001           0.098      0.001
      Working FT                    0.149         0.149        0.000          0.149      -0.002          0.149      0.002          0.149       0.001
      Avg Wage                     10.539         10.539       0.000         10.539      0.000          10.536      0.000          10.538      0.000
       Notes: We construct the simulated data by first using the estimated posterior unobserved type probabilities to simulate a type for each individual
     in Sample C referenced in Table A.I. We then randomly select 2,500 individuals of each type. For this sample of 10,000 individuals, we sample
     from the joint error distribution and estimated parameter covariance matrix 50 times for each individual. We then forward simulate four periods
     from the observed initial conditions. In this table, we compare choices and outcomes for Type 1 and 2 individuals using the baseline model and
     five alternative models representing the following policy interventions. Policy 1: Remove the financial cost of psychotherapy. Policy 2: Remove the
     possibility of discontinuation. Policy 3: Remove the employment/time cost of psychotherapy (i.e., 1,3 = 1,4 = 0). Policy 4: Remove all non-utility
     psychotherapy costs (i.e., combine Policies 1, 2, and 3). Sample moments are aggregated across all four simulated periods.
Table 10: Reducing the Disutility of Psychotherapy

    Disutility    Psychotherapy Antidepressants
    Reduction           Use                Use
    0%                 0.019              0.071
    2.5%               0.020              0.071
    5%                 0.023              0.071
    7.5%               0.027              0.073
    10%                0.028              0.075
    12.5%              0.031              0.076
    15%                0.036              0.076
    17.5%              0.043              0.078
    20%                0.045              0.080
    22.5%              0.053              0.080
    25%                0.057              0.079
    27.5%              0.065              0.083
    30%                0.072              0.085
    For 20%
    Reduction
      Type 1           0.410              0.606
      Type 2           0.015              0.045
      Type 3           0.030              0.056
      Type 4           0.023              0.037
   Notes: This table shows the proportion of the pop-
  ulation using treatment in a survey period, for dif-
  ferent percentage reductions in the disutility of psy-
  chotherapy. The simulated data are constructed
  by sampling from the joint error distribution and
  permanent unobserved heterogeneity distribution,
  then forward simulating four periods from initial
  conditions. Sample moments are calculated over all
  four simulation periods. Each row of the table rep-
  resents a separate simulation with a different level
  of psychotherapy disutility.




                           60
                    Figure 1: Mental Health Treatment Choices Over Time




                   .1
                   .08
                   .06
                   .04
                   .02
                   0




                         1996   1998    2000      2002     2004     2006      2008     2010
                                                         Year

                                            Rx only                    Therapy only
                                            Rx and Therapy


 Notes: Calculated using 1996-2011 MEPS cohorts. Individuals are grouped by cohort year and are categorized
according to whether they ever received psychotherapy/counseling (i.e., psychoth from the office-based visits file)
or ever consumed prescription drugs for depression (i.e., ICD9 codes 296 or 311), anxiety (300), or stress-related
                          ailments (308 or 309) during the first three survey rounds.




              Figure 2: Estimated Effects of Psychotherapy on Mental Health




                                                         61
                                Figure 3: Therapist Discontinuation




  Notes: This figure is produced using Sample C referenced in Table A.I. Sequences of psychotherapy visits are
   grouped into episodes according to a two-month gap rule - i.e., if a gap of two months or longer is observed
    between two visits, the visits are grouped into different episodes. The figure then displays the number of
                                  individual psychotherapy visits in each episode.



                      Figure 4: The Value of Mental Health Improvements




 Notes: This figure measures the value of a hypothetical treatment that ensures one's mental health never drops
below the baseline sample mean. The left-most (black) bar measures willingness to pay for the treatment, holding
household disposable income at $40,000 annually, while the middle (speckled) bar allows household income to vary.
The right-most (grey) bar measures the average earning gains for individuals of each type. All values are measured
                                                 in 2018 dollars.




                                                       62
A.I      Data

A.I.1     Estimation Sample Construction
We begin with individuals from the 1996-2011 MEPS cohorts. We then restrict the sample
to those between the ages of 26 and 55 in order to focus on individuals for whom education
is unlikely to change and who are making non-retirement employment decisions. We also
remove round one observations, as lags of several variables are used as controls in our econo-
metric specification. Demographic information for this subsample (Sample A) is provided
below in Table A.I. We then limit this sample to those who complete each of the five possible
interview rounds over a two year period; Sample B.
     In each round, MEPS participants answer questions related to behaviors and outcomes
occurring since the most recent interview. These interview periods vary in length--on aver-
age, they are about 5.2 months long and approximately 85% are between 3.5 and 7 months
long. Figure A.I shows the distribution of period lengths, rounded to the nearest half-month
intervals. Period length was randomly allocated as a part of the survey design. The esti-
mation of our structural model requires that each interview period covers an approximately
equal amount of time; thus, we eliminate observations where the length of time between
interviews is less than 3.5 months or greater than 7 months. To avoid needing to integrate
over missing time periods in the estimation of the structural model, we use the following
process to eliminate individuals and observations from the data: (i) drop any observation
where length is less than 3.5 months; (ii) drop any observation where length is greater than
7 months; and (iii) drop any individual whose 2nd, 3rd, or 4th interview is dropped in (i) or
(ii). The resulting Sample C is used in estimation.


A.I.2     Treatment Prices across Time and Insurance Status
Table A.II shows how inflation-adjusted prices for individual psychotherapy sessions and
individual antidepressant prescription fills have changed over the sample period. The growth
in total expenditures from all sources is shown in columns 3 and 6. This growth is consistent
with medical prices in general rising faster than inflation in the sample period (Peter G.
Peterson Foundation, 2020). Columns 1 and 4 show how the proportion of individuals
paying nothing out of pocket has grown over time, while columns 2 and 5 show that average
out-of-pocket expenditures, conditional on spending anything, have fallen. Both patterns
are consistent with third-party payers, i.e., government and insurers, paying a larger share
of the ever growing price of treatment over time.


                                             63
           Table A.I: Sample Statistics Across Limiting Samples

                                             Sample A         Sample B        Sample C
 Demographics
   Male                                            0.467           0.456            0.457
   Age                                            40.572          40.937           41.002
   Live in M.S.A.                                  0.833           0.828            0.824
   Married                                         0.630           0.658            0.649
   Family Size                                     3.418           3.432            3.386
   White (race)                                    0.760           0.772            0.772
   Problem Child                                                   0.566            0.574
 Health Insurance
   Public Insurance                                                 0.130            0.140
   Private Insurance                                                0.659            0.656
 Schooling & Employment
   High School Grad.                                               0.538            0.532
   College Grad.                                                   0.258            0.253
   Employed                                                        0.769            0.765
   Hourly Wage                                                    23.693           23.441
   Non-Labor HH Income                                             27964            27274
 Treatment Decisions
   Psychotherapy (round)                                            0.019            0.020
   Psychotherapy (ever)                                             0.041            0.043
   Antidepressants (round)                                          0.070            0.074
   Antidepressants (ever)                                           0.113            0.121
 Mental Health
   Subjective                                                      3.954           3.944
   DAS (round)                                                     0.095           0.100
   DAS (ever)                                                      0.162           0.169
 Individuals                                    103,239           87,021          54,989
 Observations                                   451,616          348,084         208,113
 Notes: Sample A indicates MEPS participants from 1996-2011 between the ages of 25 and
55, excluding Round 1. Sample B eliminates from Sample A all individuals not completing
all five interviews. Sample C eliminates from Sample B all individuals who have at least one
interview period with a length less than three and a half months or greater than seven months,
as well as any individual with an excluded month in rounds two, three, or four. Problem
child is measured in rounds two and four as the average response to 13 questions regarding
problems with a child in the house. Examples are "(child has) problem getting along with
Mom" and "(child has) problem behavior in school." A larger value indicates more problems
and we measure the most problematic child in the household. Non-Labor Household Income
is the weighted sum of an individual's own non-labor income and total income (labor and
non-labor) of household members. Spousal income is given full weight, while non-spousal
household income is weighted at a third of its full value. The mean hourly wage excludes the
unemployed. Subjective MH is the respondent's subjective assessment of own mental health
and ranges from 1 (poor) to 5 (excellent). The depression, anxiety, stress (DAS) indicator is
based on the ICD-9 codes associated with reported disorders.




                                             64
                    Figure A.I: The Distribution of Period Lengths in MEPS

                                       Distribution of Interview Period Lengths




                              15
                              10
                    Percent
                              5
                              0




                                   0   1   2   3    4       5     6     7   8   9   10   11
                                                        Period Length

     Notes: Sample B interview periods contribute to this distribution (see Appendix Section A.I.1).
          Period 1 is excluded for all individuals; thus, there are 348,084 observations in total.



    The second half of the table displays treatment prices by insurance status. Publicly
insured individuals are found to be the most likely to pay nothing out-of-pocket for antide-
pressants, while facing the highest total price. These findings are consistent with both the
generosity of Medicaid, as well as the federal governments inability to negotiate for drug
prices, which influences Medicaid drug prices. That the uninsured face the lowest total
antidepressant prices likely reflects selection into generic medication, while the relatively
high out-of-pocket prices reflects the fact that there are few opportunities for reduced-price
drugs. For psychotherapy, the most generous type of coverage is public insurance, which is a
somewhat misleading indicator that psychotherapy is affordable and attainable for all pub-
licly insured individuals. In reality many therapist simply do not accept Medicaid patients,
which can make it difficult for patients to receive psychotherapy. Finally, a somewhat sur-
prising finding is how little the uninsured pay for psychotherapy. Several factors contribute
to this finding. First, these figures suggest selection into treatment, i.e., those facing the
lowest prices for care are the most likely to select it; thus, the low prices observed among
the uninsured population partly reflects the fact that only those who can find lower prices
choose treatment. Second, it is widely known that many psychologists use "sliding scale"
pricing, meaning low-income and/or uninsured patients are charged less, or nothing at all
for treatment.
   Finally, while single session and refill prices are presented in the table, prices enter the


                                                         65
model as per-round expenditure levels (see Section 5.1). The average number of psychother-
apy sessions attended per round (for someone attending at all) is 6.3, meaning out-of-pocket
expenditure per-period averages about $175. The average antidepressant user has 5.7 refills
per-period, meaning expenditure per-period is similar to that for psychotherapy. That said,
the combination of high discontinuation rates and a relatively large proportion of individuals
receiving free psychotherapy masks how much more psychotherapy is for some. For exam-
ple, an individual completing their course of psychotherapy attends 8.2 sessions per-period
on average; thus, if this individual does not receive any free care and pays just the average
(non-zero) out-of-pocket price observed in the data, the individual pays over $400 per-period
for psychotherapy.




                                             66
                                                               Table A.II: Treatment Prices

                                                      Antidepressants                                                 Psychotherapy
                                     % zero          Ave. OOP Paid     Ave. Paid                    % zero          Ave. OOP Paid              Ave. Paid
                                    paid OOP         (cond. non-zero) (all sources)                paid OOP         (cond. non-zero)          (all sources)
      Sample Mean

      Year
      1997                             0.092                37.366                 95.054             0.437                50.031                99.922
      1998                             0.073                37.767                105.418             0.455                38.759                100.090
      1999                             0.075                38.875                 99.419             0.363                86.188                141.166
      2000                             0.047                42.963                108.810             0.508                40.061                103.671
      2001                             0.086                42.861                114.676             0.468                45.954                175.505
      2002                             0.079                35.672                105.674             0.459                47.452                108.116
      2003                             0.062                48.699                109.472             0.522                45.745                117.211




67
      2004                             0.116                36.687                115.898             0.475                57.641                119.556
      2005                             0.108                39.437                113.600             0.495                48.749                131.805
      2006                             0.073                32.263                106.361             0.507                46.183                116.929
      2007                             0.087                30.022                112.816             0.443                45.119                118.165
      2008                             0.089                31.001                115.995             0.531                51.214                119.845
      2009                             0.132                32.448                110.969             0.517                35.993                170.334
      2010                             0.165                30.190                115.132             0.556                39.208                133.321
      2011                             0.145                19.414                114.975             0.515                44.646                129.248

      Insurance Status
      Privately Insured                0.025                32.457                 105.99             0.206                 50.16                 130.15
      Publically Insured               0.246                28.275                121.747             0.800                 37.16                 130.91
      Uninsured                        0.050                75.441                 91.267             0.485                 58.17                 98.10
      Notes: Table reports average inflation-adjusted price per psychotherapy visit and average inflation-adjusted price per prescription. All prices are in 2018
     dollars. Calculations use Sample C referenced in Table A.I
A.I.3     Alternative Measures of Mental Health
It is noted that there are various ways to measure mental health. We use subjective mental
health as the primary measure throughout. There are three other potential measures of
mental health in the MEPS data, but each as a significant downside that prevents us from
using it as our primary measure. First, in every round, an individual is able to report
depression as a medical condition, which is then coded (via ICD9) by professional coders.
As discussed in Section 3.2 this report likely suffers from non-classical measurement error, as
it is likely to be influenced by past, unobserved interactions with medical professional. We
also have information on two indices used to measure mental health via survey questions:
the Kessler 6 index (K-6) and the the Mental Component Summary (MCS). The K-6 is a
commonly used mental health scale that is calculated from responses to six questions of the
form: "During the past 30 days, how often did you feel . . . [nervous, hopeless, restless
or fidgety, so depressed that nothing could cheer you up, that everything was an effort,
worthless]?" For each question, a value of 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 is assigned to the answers "none of
the time," "a little of the time," "some of the time," "most of the time," or "all of the time,"
respectively. The K6 is calculated by summing the scores from each of the six questions,
generating a 0-24 scale, with higher scores indicating a greater tendency towards mental
illness. The MCS is calculated from the standardized SF-12 health screening questions,
where mental health questions (6-9) are weighted more heavily. The index range is 1-78,
where higher scores indicated better mental health. Unfortunately, these two measures are
only collected in rounds 2 and 4, the K-6 has only been collected since 2005, and the MCS
has only been collected since 2001.
  In Table A.III, we show that the subjective mental health scores capture significant
amounts of variation in reporting of depression and in the two mental health indices.


        Table A.III: Association between Subjective Mental Health and Other Measures

                                                   MH=5         MH=4        MH=3         MH=2         MH=1
        Mental Health
        Depression/Anxiety                           0.022       0.054        0.120        0.393       0.613
        Kessler-6                                    1.975       2.955        4.613       10.057      15.016
        Mental Component Summary                    54.084      51.363       47.572       37.577      29.896
       Notes: An observation is an interview period in round 2 or 4 as these are the only rounds in which the K-6
      and MCS can be observed. Subjective MH is the respondent's subjective assessment of own mental health
      and ranges from 1 (poor) to 5 (excellent). Depression and Anxiety shares are based on the ICD-9 codes
      associated with reported diagnoses. K-6 ranges from 0-24, while MCS ranges from 1-78. A higher (lower)
      score indicates greater mental distress for the K-6 (MCS) measure. The K-6 was first collected in 2005,
      while the MCS was first collected in 2001.




                                                          68
A.II        Model

A.II.1       Disposable Income
The disposable income function D(·) in equation 3 adjusts gross household income, GYt , for
approximate total tax liability, housing expenses, and family size. To calculate D(·), we first
separate households into income quintiles. We then calculate disposable income as

                                                                               2
                DYt = GYt  (1 - T rq )  (1 - Hrq )           1- 1-
                                                                           (1 + F S )

where T rq and Hrq approximate the average total (federal, state, and local) tax rate and
housing cost rate by income quintile. For the total tax rate, Wamhoff and Gardner (2019)
estimate the following rates for the lowest to highest income quintiles: (20.7, 23.2, 26.5,
28.9, 32.0). Calculations are made prior to the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (see Table 2, p.
5). We calculate the following after-tax housing cost rates, again for the lowest to highest
income quintiles, using the American Community Survey micro-data: (50.14, 33.24. 22.98,
17.48, 13.04).68
    We then adjust for family size. Similar to Eckstein, Keane, and Lifshitz (2019), the
fraction of income that is spent on other family members is calculated as 1 - 2/(1 + F S ),
where F S is family size; thus, a single person has F S = 1 and consumes 100 percent of their
disposable income, a married couple with one child has F S = 3 and consumes 69.7 percent
of their disposable income, etc.


A.III         Mental Health Treatment Effects
The dynamic model presented in Section 4 assumes that individuals make treatment decisions
based on their beliefs about the productivity of treatment. Moreover, model simulations
require estimates of the impact of treatment on mental health outcomes in order to determine
the value of counterfactual policies. We assume that individuals have rational expectations,
meaning they make treatment decisions based on the true impact of treatment on mental
health, or in our case, the average treatment effect.

  68. To calculate housing costs as a percent of household income, we use the 2011 1-year PUMS from the
American Community Survey. Housing costs are based on the reported first mortgage payment for those
households that own a home and on the gross rent payment for those who rent a home. We exclude from our
calculation the 3.8 percent of households in the survey for whom total housing costs (based on 12 months of
the mortgage or rent payment) are greater than household income.



                                                    69
    A separate challenge is estimating average treatment effects. The strategy we use is
to take estimates from the robust, well-identified clinical trial literature. We discuss this
literature in Section 3.4.3. An alternative approach is to estimate treatment effects internally,
using our observational data. Estimating causal effects from observation data is challenging
for a number of reasons. In this instance, endogenous selection into treatment is the primary
issue, i.e., the sickest individuals select into treatment. In this section, we explore using both
structural and reduced form techniques for dealing with this selection problem.


A.III.1        Reduced-Form Approach to Estimating Treatment Effects
Table 2 clearly shows that the sickest individuals select into both types of treatment; thus,
the initial identification challenge amounts to what is essentially an omitted variable problem,
where mental health at the time of medical care consumption is the key omitted variable.
The simplest solution, then, is to estimate the impact of treatment on mental health while
conditioning on lagged mental health. This solution does not produce positive treatment
effects in our setting (see Table A.V, column 1).69 Table A.IV provides insight into the scope
of the selection problem and why conditioning on lagged mental health is a poor solution.
The table shows that conditional on mental health in period t - 1, mental health in period
t is worse, on average, for those receiving treatment than those not receiving treatment.
This general relationship holds for both types of treatment and across the mental health
distribution. These findings suggest that lagged mental health is an imperfect proxy for
mental health at the time of medical care consumption. In other words, conditional on lagged
mental health, individuals receive mental health shocks over the course of an interview period
that influence both mental health transitions (from Mt-1 to Mt ) and treatment decisions,
which must be accounted for in order to identify causal effects
    We attempt to solve this selection problem using an instrumental variables approach. The
instrumental variables strategy requires a minimum of two instruments that (i) alter mental

  69. Column 1 contains parameter estimates from a linear model where self-reported mental health status is
regressed on treatment, lagged mental health, demographic characteristics, and county and time fixed effects.
Throughout this analysis, we further restrict the estimation sample discussed in Section A.I.1 to include only
individuals with private insurance. This restriction strengthens the first stage effect of one of our instruments
(i.e., number of psychiatrists per capita) and, thus, the precision of our 2SLS estimate. A separate analysis
of publicly insured and uninsured individuals reveals that their treatment decisions are not responsive to
changes in the instrument--these results are available upon request. Many private practice psychiatrists
do not accept Medicaid patients (Taube, Goldman, and Salkever, 1990), which comprises nearly all of the
publicly insured individuals in our estimation sample. Furthermore, according to our data, the uninsured
are simply very unlikely to consume any mental health treatment, making the supply of psychiatrists mostly
irrelevant for them. In light of the county fixed effect, we also drop counties in the bottom 10th percentile
of total observations.



                                                       70
health treatment decisions (i.e., instruments are not weak) and (ii) have no direct effect on
mental health (i.e., instruments are exogenous). The first instrument that we consider is the
number of psychiatrists per capita in an individual's county of residence. This information
can be found in the Area Health Resource File (AHRF), which is collected annually by
the US Department of Health and Human Services, for every year between 1995 and 2016,
except for 2008. There is substantial variation in the number of psychiatrists per capita
across the sample--nearly 10% of individuals live in a county without any psychiatrists,
the average individual lives in a county with 1.3 psychiatrists per 10,000 people, and the
individual at the 90th percentile lives in a county with 2.5 psychiatrists per 10,000 people.
Unsurprisingly, this variable is highly persistent over time--regressing the variable on county
fixed effects produces an R-squared of 0.97, suggesting that just 3% of the overall variation
in psychiatrists per capita is due to within county variation. Because county fixed effects are
included in our 2SLS specification, identification will come from these within-county changes
in the number of psychiatrists per capita, which we argue is conditionally random.
    A second instrument we consider is an indicator for whether the individual's county of
residence has a Walmart with a pharmacy and the survey period ends in 2007 or later.70
On September 21, 2006, Walmart began offering almost 300 generic prescriptions at a price
of $4 for a monthly supply at it's stores in Tampa Florida.71 Initially, Walmart planned
to expand the offering to all Florida stores in January of the following year; however, by
November 27, 2006, Walmart had expanded the policy to all of its US stores. In a 2006
company newsletter, (then) Executive VP of Professional Services, Bill Simon, explained
that, "many customers have greatly benefited from the savings and consumer demand has
been a significant factor in the program's expansion." According to the AARP, the average
annual retail cost of prescription medication psychotherapy for a basket of 280 popular
generics in 2006 was $391 (i.e., roughly $33 for a monthly prescription). This suggests that
Walmart's offering of $4 monthly prescriptions could represent significant cost savings for
individuals and, thus, increase the quantity of antidepressants demanded. 90% of our sample
lives in a county with a Walmart and, therefore, had access to these low cost medications.
   Our first stage results can be found in Table A.VI. All models control for county and
year fixed effects as well as lagged mental health and a robust set of demographic controls.
Column 1 displays the relationship between our instruments and whether an individual
consumes any psychotherapy. The estimates reveal that the number of psychiatrists per

  70. We purchased data from AggData containing information on the 4,618 Walmart stores operating in
the US in 2016, including opening dates and whether a store has a pharmacy. These data do not contain
information an Walmart closures.
  71. On this list are roughly 28 medications used in the treatment of mental health, including Fluoxetine
(Prozac), Citalopram (Celexa), and Paroxetine (Paxil), all popular antidepressants.


                                                   71
capita significantly increases psychotherapy use, while having access to low cost generic
prescriptions via Walmart has no significant effect. Column 2 displays the relationship
between our instruments and whether an individual consumes any prescription medications
for mental illness. The estimates reveal that both psychiatrists per capital and low cost
generic prescriptions through Walmart significantly increase prescription medication use.
    Weak instruments can produce biased, inconsistent 2SLS estimates (Bound, Jaeger, and
Baker, 1995). In the standard one-instrument, one-endogenous variable setting, it is gen-
erally accepted that the instrument is adequately strong if it's F-statistic is greater than
10, which corresponds to a bias in the 2SLS estimate that is less than (approximately) 10%
of the bias in the OLS estimate. With multiple instruments and endogenous variables, the
magnitude of the joint F-statistic, calculated from the instrument set in each first stage
equation, cannot be interpreted in the same fashion. To see why, consider a two-instrument,
two-endogenous variable setting, it is possible that only one instrument explains variation
in the two endogenous variables, which can generate large F-statistics, but an underidenti-
fied model. Kleibergen and Paap (2006) develop a Lagrange Multiplier (LM) statistic for
this scenario, which allows for a test of the null hypothesis that the rank of the instrument
set is greater than the number of endogenous variables minus one (i.e., that the model is
underidentified).72 Moreover, Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) develop an F-statistic for
weak instruments with multiple endogenous variables that has the same interpretation as
a traditional F-statistic in the typical single endogenous variable model, i.e., the bias of
the IV estimate relative to the OLS estimate is approximately 1/F .73 Table A.VI pro-
vides Kleibergen-Paap LM and Sanderson-Windmeijer F-statistics for each of the models
presented.
    While the instruments presented in our first specification (Columns 1 and 2) significantly
alter treatment decisions, the instruments set is weak. Moreover, with just two instru-
ments and two endogenous variables, we cannot test of the exogeneity of our instruments.
In Columns 3 and 4 of Table A.VI, we present our preferred instrument set, which con-
tains interactions of original instruments with several demographic variables. In Column 3,
the presence of psychiatrists significantly increases the use of psychotherapy for previously
married and white individuals. Access to low cost medications through Walmart decreases
psychotherapy use, presumably as individuals substitute psychotherapy for prescription med-
ications. In Column 4, the presence of psychiatrists increases prescription medication use,

  72. The Kleibergen-Paap LM statistic is a cluster-robust alternative to a similar statistic provided in Cragg
and Donald (1993), which is only valid with homoskedastic errors.
  73. Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) F-statistic is also is only valid assuming homoskedastic errors; how-
ever, a valid weak instrument test that relaxes this assumption with multiple endogenous variables has yet
to be developed.


                                                      72
but for males only, as does the presence of a Walmart after the generic medication price drop.
The Kleibergen-Paap LM statistic allows us to reject the null of underidentification at a 7%
significance level, while the Sanderson-Windmeijer F-statistic suggest that our instruments
are not weak, as the approximate relative bias is well under 10%.
    Column 2 of Table A.V contains parameter estimates from our 2SLS specification. The
first two rows show that our identification strategy has the desired effect. Both antidepres-
sants and psychotherapy are found to be effective in improving an individual's mental health.
Moreover, consistent with the medical literature previously cited, psychotherapy is found to
have a larger positive effect than antidepressants. Because our model is over-identified, we
are also able to conduct a Hausman J test, which tests the assumption that our instru-
ments are exogenous. This test statistic, which is Chi-squared with 2 degrees of freedom, is
2.924 (p-value 0.233). Thus, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the instruments are
exogenous, which supports our identifying assumptions.
    In Column 3 of Table A.V, we repeat our analysis after coding discontinuation psy-
chotherapy visits as if psychotherapy was not attended (i.e., Any Psychotherapy =0). These
estimates lead to an increase in the effect of psychotherapy on mental health, suggesting that
discontinuation visits are less efficacious.74 As such, we believe that these sessions generally
represent costly, unproductive medical care consumption that occurs primarily due to a lack
of information.


                   Table A.IV: Mental Health Transitions by Treatment Choice

                                                    Mental         Health at t
                                            Antidep. Use            Psychotherapy Use
                                             No     Yes              No        Yes
                     M Ht-1     =5          4.533 4.055             4.524        3.380
                     M Ht-1     =4          4.004 3.589             3.987        3.320
                     M Ht-1     =3          3.479 3.009             3.441        2.829
                     M Ht-1     =2          2.781 2.333             2.686        2.200
                     M Ht-1     =1          2.087 1.683             1.975        1.535
                     Notes: Subjective MH is the respondent's subjective assessment of own mental
                    health and ranges from 1 (poor) to 5 (excellent). Psychotherapy use in this
                    table excludes discontinuation episodes.




 74. Note also that the impact of psychotherapy on mental health is more significant in this specification,
2SLS-B. First stage results are presented in Column 5 of Table A.VI.


                                                         73
                Table A.V: Mental Health Production Function, OLS and 2SLS

                                          (1) OLS                  (2) 2SLS - A                 (3) 2SLS - B
                                      Coef.        SE              Coef.       SE              Coef.         SE
 Any Antidepressants                 -0.355 (0.009)                0.741 (0.346)               0.711        (0.337)
 Any Psychotherapy                   -0.414 (0.016)                1.265 (0.804)               1.524        (0.902)
 Lagged MH
    Fair                              0.510      (0.035)          0.894      (0.120)           0.883 (0.113)
    Good                              1.111      (0.037)          1.829      (0.198)           1.806 (0.179)
    Very Good                         1.565      (0.035)          2.384      (0.222)           2.357 (0.199)
    Excellent                         2.055      (0.037)          2.920      (0.233)           2.891 (0.209)
 Age                                 -0.005      (0.000)         -0.005      (0.001)          -0.005 (0.000)
 Male                                 0.017      (0.003)          0.079      (0.017)           0.076 (0.0161)
 Nonwhite                            -0.020      (0.007)          0.058      (0.021)           0.055 (0.019)
 Marriage Status
    Never Married                    -0.041 (0.007)              -0.044 (0.008)               -0.045        (0.008)
    Previously Married               -0.035 (0.007)              -0.052 (0.011)               -0.051        (0.019)
 Family Size                          0.007 (0.002)               0.017 (0.003)                0.017        (0.003)
 Education
    High school Grad.                 0.106 (0.008)                0.065 (0.015)               0.067        (0.014)
    College Grad.                     0.082 (0.005)                0.053 (0.010)               0.053        (0.009)
 Income
    Second Quartile                   0.030 (0.008)                0.030 (0.007)               0.031        (0.007)
    Third Quartile                    0.071 (0.007)                0.078 (0.006)               0.078        (0.006)
    Fourth Quartile                   0.126 (0.006)                0.130 (0.008)               0.129        (0.008)
 County & Time FE                              X                           X                            X
 R-Squared                                  0.333                       0.137                        0.146
 Hansen J Stat  2 (2)                                                   2.924                        2.957
 (P-value)                                                             (0.233)                      (0.228)
 Notes: The sample includes all 22-62 year olds from MEPS cohorts between 1996 and 2011 who are privately
insured. Further, we remove counties in the lowest 10th percentile of total observations. There are a total of 179,259
observations. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. In 2SLS - A(B), discontinuations are coded as Any
Psychotherapy =1(0). All models also include the number of psychiatrists per capital as a control variable. The
Hansen J Statistic is distributed 2 with degrees of freedom equal to the number of instruments minus the number
of endogenous variables. The statistic enables a test of the joint null hypothesis that the instruments as uncorrelated
with the second stage error term.




                                                         74
                                      Table A.VI: Mental Health Production Function: First Stage Linear Probability
                                                                       Models

                                                            Specification 1                                       Specification 2A                             Specification 2B
                                              (1) Any Psychotherapy         (2) Any Rx               (3) Any Psychotherapy         (4) Any Rx              (5) Any Psychotherapy
                                               Coef.             SE           Coef.     SE           Coef.              SE          Coef.     SE            Coef.             SE
      Instruments
         Psychiatrists per cap.                0.041            (0.020)       0.079    (0.035)        0.042            (0.022)      0.046    (0.033)        0.040            (0.020)
         Psych. per cap. * Nonwhite                *                  *           *          *       -0.025            (0.013)      0.010    (0.012)       -0.023            (0.010)
         Psych. per cap. * Prev. Married           *                  *           *          *        0.031            (0.008)      0.023    (0.013)        0.028            (0.008)
         Psych. per cap. * Male                    *                  *           *          *       -0.003            (0.008)      0.059    (0.009)       -0.001            (0.007)
         Walmart * (Year>2006)                -0.005            (0.003)       0.019    (0.006)       -0.005            (0.003)      0.018    (0.005)       -0.004            (0.002)
      Lagged MH
         Fair                                 -0.100            (0.024)      -0.199    (0.019)       -0.100            (0.024)     -0.199    (0.019)       -0.080            (0.022)
         Good                                 -0.179            (0.024)      -0.381    (0.019)       -0.179            (0.024)     -0.381    (0.019)       -0.141            (0.023)
         Very Good                            -0.199            (0.025)      -0.442    (0.021)       -0.199            (0.025)     -0.442    (0.021)       -0.156            (0.024)
         Excellent                            -0.206            (0.025)      -0.474    (0.022)       -0.206            (0.025)     -0.473    (0.022)       -0.162            (0.024)
      Age                                     -0.000            (0.000)       0.001    (0.000)       -0.000            (0.000)      0.001    (0.000)       -0.000            (0.000)
      Male                                    -0.008            (0.001)      -0.043    (0.003)       -0.008            (0.001)     -0.051    (0.003)       -0.006            (0.001)
      Nonwhite                                -0.011            (0.001)      -0.054    (0.004)       -0.007            (0.002)     -0.055    (0.005)       -0.005            (0.001)
      Marriage Status
         Never Married                         0.003            (0.001)      -0.002    (0.003)        0.003            (0.001)     -0.001    (0.003)        0.003            (0.001)




75
         Previously Married                    0.006            (0.001)       0.006    (0.002)        0.002            (0.002)      0.003    (0.003)        0.001            (0.002)
      Family Size                             -0.002            (0.000)      -0.007    (0.001)       -0.002            (0.000)     -0.007    (0.001)       -0.002            (0.000)
      Education
         High school Grad.                     0.008            (0.002)       0.027    (0.003)       0.008             (0.002)      0.027    (0.003)        0.006            (0.001)
         College Grad.                         0.009            (0.001)       0.012    (0.002)       0.009             (0.001)      0.012    (0.002)        0.001            (0.002)
      Income
         Second Quartile                      -0.001            (0.001)       0.001    (0.003)       -0.001            (0.001)      0.001    (0.003)       -0.001            (0.001)
         Third Quartile                       -0.001            (0.002)      -0.004    (0.004)       -0.001            (0.002)     -0.004    (0.004)       -0.001            (0.001)
         Fourth Quartile                      -0.001            (0.002)      -0.002    (0.005)       -0.000            (0.002)     -0.002    (0.005)       -0.000            (0.001)
      County & Time FE                                   X                          X                           X                          X                          X
      Sanderson-Windmeijer F-Stat.                      6.65                      17.52                       24.29                      16.29                      24.12
      (P-value)                                        (0.01)                     (0.00)                      (0.00)                     (0.00)                     (0.00)
      Kleibergen-Paap rk LM Stat.                                   2.36                                                   6.91                                      7.72
      (P-value)                                                    (0.13)                                                 (0.07)                                    (0.05)
     Notes: The sample includes all 22-62 year olds from MEPS cohorts between 1996 and 2011 who are privately insured. Further, we remove counties in the lowest 10th
     percentile of total observations. There are a total of 179,259 observations. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
      Psychiatrists per capita is part of the instrument set for Specification 1, but is part of the control variables for Specifications 2A and 2B as the instrument set is weakened

     by it's inclusion.
      In Specification 2B, discontinuations are coded as Any Psychotherapy =0.
A.III.2      Structural Approach to Estimating Treatment Effects
Within our structural model, we attempt to estimate the impact of treatment on mental
health by allowing for permanent correlation between unobserved preference and mental
health shocks. Such correlation can rationalized the patterns seen in Table A.IV if un-
healthy types, who regularly receive poor health shocks also have strong preferences for
treatment. Unfortunately, our structural model consistently yields negative treatment ef-
fects. This finding is robust to numerous model specifications, including (i) allowing for
heterogeneous treatment effects by lagged mental health status and/or unobserved type, (ii)
adjusting the number of unobserved types, and (iii) expanding the set of exclusion restrictions
(i.e., variables that impact mental health only through treatment choices) from insurance
status, initial wages, household income, and employment choices to also include number of
psychiatrists and Walmarts per county (i.e., the instruments used in Section A.III.1 above).
    The negative treatment effects may be in part to due to a lack of flexibility in the
error correlation we allow. The permanent unobserved heterogeneity described in Section
5.2 allows some individuals to always receive worse mental health draws and have stronger
preferences for treatment. This error structure cannot account for temporary correlation in
 M       rce
 t and t     that would result from a one-time intra-interview period health shock. Such a
shock would be captured if the model allowed for time-varying unobserved heterogeneity.
    Given the complexity of the full structural model and the computational resources re-
quired to estimate it, we decided to test the importance of time-varying unobserved hetero-
geneity by estimating a simpler, but closely related system of equations. The auxiliary model
has the following features: (i) psychotherapy and prescription drug "probit" equations are
specified with exclusion restrictions; (ii) mental health is determined via ordered probit and
is written as a function of lagged treatment and lagged mental health; (iii) permanent unob-
served heterogeneity common to the three equations is allowed; (iv) initial mental health is
allowed to impact the probability of permanent unobserved types, much like in the dynamic
structural model, accounting for the endogeneity if this initial condition (Wooldridge, 2005);
and (v) estimation is conducted via joint MLE. Importantly, to test whether accounting
for time-varying heterogeneity yields positive treatment effects, we allow for time-varying
correlation between each equation's unobservables. With this model, we again find negative
treatment effects both with and without time-varying unobserved heterogeneity; however,
the size of the (negative) treatment effect is roughly halved when we allow for time-varying
unobserved heterogeneity.




                                              76
A.IV         CRRA Parameter
When estimated using the procedure described in Section 5, the CRRA parameter, 0 ,
grows to a large, positive value (e.g., a magnitude of roughly 4). The value corresponds to a
flat utility-consumption profile, which suggests that individuals do not consider wage offers
in employment decisions, nor prices in treatment decisions. This finding is robust to the
number of unobserved types assumed in estimation. Our most basic economic priors, as well
as most empirical research, suggest that this relationship is unlikely. Rather, utility should
be increasing in numeraire consumption (i.e., individuals prefer more money), albeit at a
decreasing rate (i.e., the marginal utility of an extra dollar diminishes as income grows).
    Within the context of our model, there are three potential behavioral patterns in the data
that would be consistent with, and therefore potentially identify, positive but decreasing
marginal returns to consumption. After consistently finding negligible marginal returns to
consumption, we looked for evidence of these behaviors in the raw data. A discussion of our
findings is below. Some of our analysis is omitted for brevity, but anything not provided is
available upon request.
    We first ask, is there any evidence that those with higher household income are less likely to
work? 75 Such a finding would suggest decreasing marginal utility of a dollar. In Table A.VII
below, we show household income (in thousands of dollars) by employment status. The first
three rows show that mean household income is falling as work intensity increases; however,
the pattern does not hold at the median. More importantly, recall two features of the
structural model: (i) lagged employment shifts the marginal utility of current employment
and (ii) initial employment and household income impact one's permanent unobserved type.
As a result of these two features, period t employment decisions are largely explained by
lagged employment and one's unobserved type. Only the remaining variation in employment
decisions, and the extent to which this variation correlates with household income, is available
to aid in the identification of the CRRA parameter. As such, in rows 4­6 we attempt to
isolate this variation by showing household income across employment status, only for those
changing their employment status. Here, there is no clear, consistent negative relationship
between household income and work intensity.
    Second, we ask are those with higher expected wages more likely to work? Such a finding
would suggest positive marginal returns to consumption. Answering this question is com-
plicated by the fact that we only observe wages for those who choose to work. Thus, we
estimate simple linear models of log part-time and full-time wages and use the estimated

 75. Household income is defined in Table A.I. Note that it excludes an individuals labor income.



                                                   77
             Table A.VII: Relationship Between Employment and Household Income

                                                                                     Mean Median
              Unemployed (N=48,829)                                                   39.4  23.8
              Part-Time (N=35,052)                                                    38.5  25.2
              Full-Time (N=124,232)                                                   34.6  23.4
              Unemployed | Not Unemp. last period (N=6,518)                           31.1  19.4
              Part-Time | Not PT last period (N=3,871)                                33.0  20.3
              Full-Time | Not FT last period (N=4,874)                                29.2  18.4
             Notes: An observation is an interview period; thus, sample statistics are calculated across all
            208,113 observations in the estimation sample (54,989 individuals). Household Income is measured
            in thousands of dollars.


parameters to predict wages independent of employment status.76 In Table A.VIII below, we
show average predicted hourly wages by employment status. The first three rows display the
exact wage-employment pattern we expect, i.e., employed individuals have higher expected
wages than unemployed individuals. However, again, employment decisions in the structural
model are made conditional on lagged employment and one's permanent unobserved type;
thus, the CRRA parameter is identified by the relationship between expected wages and
employment, conditional on these factors. Rows 4-6 show that once we limit our analysis to
periods where individuals switch their employment status, there is no longer a relationship
between expected wages and employment.77
    Third, we ask is there any evidence that those with higher incomes are more likely to
purchase medical treatments? Such a finding would suggest decreasing marginal utility of a
dollar. To answer this question, we first group individuals by quantiles of disposable income
(see Appendix Section A.II.1) and then examine treatment rates across these groups. We find
that the individuals with the lowest disposable incomes consume the most psychotherapy
and prescription drugs, i.e., the opposite of the relationship needed for decreasing marginal
utility of a dollar. That said, there are many confounding factors in this relationship, includ-

  76. The statistical specification of these models exactly matches the wage equations in the structural model
without unobserved heterogeneity, though we ignore endogenous selection into employment. Detailed results
are available upon request.
  77. Note that the expected relationships between (i) household income and employment and (ii) expected
wages and employment vanish once we condition on lagged employment. Interestingly, in early versions of
the model, we did not allow lagged employment to impact the marginal utility of employment. With lagged
employment excluded and no permanent unobserved heterogeneity, the CRRA parameter was estimated to
be roughly 0.8. Then, upon adding mass points to the unobserved heterogeneity distribution, the CRRA
parameter slowly increased, until it became very large. Ultimately, we realized that the main unobserved
factor captured by the permanent unobserved type was stickiness in employment, which lead us include lagged
employment as a preference shifter; however, as is shown above, this inclusion complicates the estimation of
the CRRA parameter.



                                                          78
               Table A.VIII: Relationship Between Employment and Expected Wages

                                                                              Part-Time     Full-Time
                                                                            Mean Median Mean Median
  Unemployed (N=48,829)                                                      13.8     12.6 15.3     14.6
  Part-Time (N=35,052)                                                       19.4     14.3 20.1     14.8
  Full-Time (N=124,232)                                                      22.9     19.2 23.5     19.3
  Unemployed | Not Unemp. last period (N=6,518)                              17.1     13.2 17.7     14.4
  Part-Time | Not PT last period (N=3,871)                                   15.0     12.8 16.1     14.6
  Full-Time | Not FT last period (N=4,874)                                   16.1     13.0 17.1     14.7
  Notes: An observation is an interview period; thus, sample statistics are calculated across all 208,113 observations in the
 estimation sample (54,989 individuals). Wages are predicted from a linear regression of log part-time or full-time wages
 on mental health, mental health squared, log initial wage, log initial wage squared, high school graduate indicator, college
 graduate indicator, nonwhite, female, age, age squared, experience, and experience interacted with age.



ing mental health and employment; thus, we also examine the relationship using a regression
based approach. Table A.IX reports results from a regression of any psychotherapeutic treat-
ment (i.e., psychotherapy or drugs) on disposable income quintile indicators and a number
of controls. Column 1 shows a clear positive relationship between disposable income and
treatment. However, much like the discussion above regarding employment, treatment deci-
sions in the structural model are made conditional on lagged treatment and one's permanent
unobserved type; thus, the CRRA parameter is identified by the relationship between dis-
posable income and treatment, conditional on these factors. In an attempt to isolate this
variation, in column 2 we add lagged treatment as a control variable; note that the relation-
ship between disposable income and treatment becomes notably weaker. Finally, in column
3 we add an individual fixed effect, which the permanent unobserved heterogeneity in the
structural model is meant to approximate, and the relationship between disposable income
and treatment goes away entirely.
    In summary, we consider three potential data patterns that would identify positive, de-
creasing marginal utility for numeraire consumption. We cannot find strong evidence of
any of the three. Despite additional structure imposed by the model and controlling for
numerous confounding factors, this lack of identifying variation yields large CRRA param-
eter estimates. Taken at face value, these estimates would suggest that individuals are not
sensitive to changes in numeraire good consumption.
    Assume for a moment that we accept this result and proceed with our counterfactual
analysis. Recall that one important objective of our analysis is to determine which economic
costs prevent individuals from using psychotherapy. We perform this analysis in Section
6.2.3 by removing each economic cost and simulating the increase in psychotherapy use.


                                                             79
          Table A.IX: Regression of Any Treatment on Disposable Income and Controls

                                                        (1)                      (2)                       (3)
                                                Coef.          S.E.      Coef.         S.E.        Coef.          S.E.
      Lagged Any Treatment                                               0.671      (0.004)

      Income Quintile
      2                                         0.125      (0.009)       0.040      (0.004)       -0.003      (0.008)
      3                                         0.135      (0.010)       0.044      (0.004)       -0.002      (0.009)
      4                                         0.146      (0.010)       0.048      (0.004)        0.001      (0.009)
      5                                         0.150      (0.010)       0.049      (0.004)        0.006      (0.009)

      Lagged Mental Health
      Fair                 -0.167 (0.012) -0.047 (0.007) -0.007 (0.009)
      Good                 -0.359 (0.012) -0.103 (0.007) -0.017 (0.009)
      Very Good            -0.412 (0.012) -0.119 (0.007) -0.019 (0.009)
      Excellent            -0.442 (0.012) -0.128 (0.007) -0.020 (0.009)

      Employment
      Part-Time                                -0.156 (0.009) -0.054 (0.004) -0.013 (0.008)
      Full Time                                -0.171 (0.009) -0.059 (0.004) -0.008 (0.008)

      Individual Fixed Effects                         N                         N                        Y
      Observations                                  208,113                   208,113                  208,113
      Notes: An observation is an interview period; thus, sample statistics are calculated across all 208,113 observations
     in the estimation sample (54,989 individuals). The table reports results from a linear regression of any treatment
     (binary) on the listed controls, as well as sex, race, age, age squared, and education. We report robust standard
     errors clustered at the individual level.



Importantly, in a model where 0  4, individual treatment decisions are totally unaffected
by a reduction in treatment prices. Moreover, assume wages are found to be increasing in
mental health; a policy that encourages mental health treatment could then, in theory, lead
to increases in employment by improving mental health, which yields higher wages, which
yields selection into employment. However, in a model where 0  4, such a finding is not
possible because marginally higher wages do not elicit greater employment, because people
simply do not care about increasing numeraire consumption.
    As discussed in Section 5.3, our CRRA parameter estimate is well outside what has been
estimated elsewhere in the literature. As a result, we elected to fix the parameter at the more
conservative level of 0.95. Note that this value suggests that individuals are more responsive
to changes in numeraire good consumption (and therefore prices and wage) than our data
would suggest. We then estimated our model and conducted counterfactual analysis. This


                                                              80
counterfactual analysis suggests that individuals are surprisingly unresponsive to changes in
the price of psychotherapy, despite our correction. Moreover, mental health is found to have
incredibly small effects on wages; thus, any impact that treatment policies are found to have
on employment operate through channels other than wages, meaning our assumption about
the CRRA parameter is inconsequential. Given these findings it seems that our adjustment
of the CRRA parameter has few substantive effects on our analysis.


A.V       Parameter Estimates and Model Fit




                                             81
                        Table A.X: Unobserved Heterogeneity Parameter Estimates

                                                      Type 1           Type 2                 Type 3                 Type 4
 Equation                  Param.                       Est.          Est.   S.E             Est.   S.E              Est.   S.E
 Utility
    therapy                 µU,
                             k
                                 0
                                                         0.000      -1.044     0.356        0.103     0.212        -2.126     0.767
    rx                      µU,
                             k
                                 1
                                                         0.000      -0.461     0.120       -0.246     0.122        -0.573     0.210
    pt emp.                 µU,
                             k
                                 2
                                                         0.000       1.222     0.149        2.564     0.148         1.849     0.164
    ft emp.                 µU,
                             k
                                 3
                                                         0.000       0.827     0.215        2.617     0.213         1.873     0.222
 Mental health               µMk                         0.000       2.358     0.064        2.450     0.060         2.498     0.083
 Discontinuation             µDk                         0.000       0.239     0.588        0.530     0.200         0.530       ***
 PT wage                    µw,
                              k
                                  1
                                                         0.000      -0.507     0.031        0.833     0.030         0.246     0.032
 FT wage                    µw,
                              k
                                  2
                                                         0.000       0.580     0.031        1.578     0.031         1.075     0.031
                              f,c
 Psychotherapy cost (any)   µk                           0.000       0.272     0.552        0.463     0.229         0.463       ***
 Psychotherapy cost         µp,c
                              k                          0.000      -0.260     0.406       -0.209     0.199        -0.209       ***
 Rx cost (any)              µf,r
                              k                          0.000       0.101     0.227        0.373     0.188        -0.189     0.777
 Rx cost                    µp,r
                              k                         0.000       -0.735     0.107       -0.601     0.074        -1.034     0.284
 Type prob. param.
                               0
    Constant                 k                          0.000        0.627 0.677 -3.793 0.757 -2.312 0.788
                              1
    Initial wage             k                          0.000       -0.405 0.342 -2.016 0.295 -0.835 0.318
                              2
    Initial PT emp.          k                          0.000       -0.554 1.076 11.000 0.932   3.502 1.023
                              3
    Initial FT emp.          k                          0.000        0.335 1.202 12.151 1.030   4.450 1.101
                              4
    Initial mh               k                          0.000        1.097 0.091 1.257 0.103    1.190 0.114
                              5
    Initial psychotherapy    k                          0.000       -1.139 0.452 -0.234 0.448 -10.000    ***
                              6
    Initial rx               k                          0.000       -2.561 0.283 -1.476 0.328 -2.026 0.436
                              7
    female                   k                          0.000        0.900 0.197 -0.024 0.213 -0.090 0.229
                              8
    Initial age              k                          0.000       -0.489 0.124 -0.491 0.135 -0.557 0.143
                              9
    Initial year             k                          0.000       -0.030 0.022 -0.040 0.024 -0.021 0.026
                              10
    Mean msa status         k                           0.000        0.634 0.224 1.067 0.251    0.857 0.276
                              11
    Mean pub. ins. status   k                           0.000       -1.381 0.232 -2.240 0.273 -2.371 0.326
                              12
    Mean priv. ins. status  k                           0.000        0.387 0.323 2.458 0.334    1.059 0.345
                              13
    Mean edu                k                           0.000       -0.459 0.153 0.225 0.163    0.216 0.176
                              14
    Nonwhite                k                           0.000       -0.492 0.211 -0.632 0.240 -0.470 0.255
                              15
    Mean marriage status     k                          0.000        0.457 0.228 0.401 0.250    0.467 0.265
                              16
    Mean log(hh inc.)/10    k                           0.000       -0.882 0.536 -1.834 0.549 -1.207 0.575
                              17
    Mean problem child       k                           0.000       0.240 0.158 0.184 0.177    0.312 0.195
 logit probabilities                                     0.049          0.164        0.739         0.048
 Notes: Permanent unobserved heterogeneity parameters are discussed in Section 5.2. We use a 20% random subsample of Sample
C from Appendix Table A.I to estimate the structural model. All Type 1 parameters are normalized to zero. Logit probabilities are
                exp(k 0 )
calculated as 4    exp(  )
                            . Type 4 individuals are found to be (i) very unlikely to be this type conditional on visiting a therapist
                k =1     k   0

in t = 0 (see 4 5 , restricted for computational reasons) and (ii) very unlikely to visit a therapist in later periods (see µU,0 ). As a
                                                                                                                             4
                                                                             f,c  p,c
result, several psychotherapy-specific parameters are not identified (µD4 , µ4 , µ4 ). Given that Types 3 and 4 are very similar on
other dimensions, we set these Type 4 parameters equal to those of Type 3 in estimation.




                                                               82
        Table A.XI: Utility Function Parameter Estimates

                                              K=1                  K=4
 Variable                 Parameter         Est.   S.E           Est.   S.E
 CRRA                        0             0.950   ***          0.950   ***
 Any Psychotherapy          1,0           -5.722 0.220         -6.157 0.266
   × ct-1                   1,1            2.797 0.093          2.641 0.099
   × rt-1                   1,2            1.664 0.106          1.428 0.111
   × PTt                    1,3           -0.505 0.122         -0.275 0.179
   × FTt                    1,4           -0.488 0.087         -0.312 0.165
   × female                 1,5           -0.074 0.093          0.055 0.111
   × aget                   1,6           -0.191 0.076         -0.191 0.082
   × msat                   1,7            0.216 0.112          0.227 0.135
 Any Rx                     2,0           -5.172 0.122         -5.351 0.152
   × ct-1                   2,1            1.226 0.102          1.126 0.105
   × rt-1                   2,2            4.127 0.047          4.003 0.048
   × PTt                    2,3           -0.226 0.047         -0.017 0.073
   × FTt                    2,4           -0.349 0.039         -0.131 0.071
   × female                 2,5            0.214 0.043          0.288 0.043
   × aget                   2,6            0.093 0.046          0.087 0.044
   × msat                   2,7           -0.116 0.043         -0.083 0.045
 PTt                        3,0          -10.154 0.266         -8.341 0.277
   × P Tt-1                 3,1            4.268 0.047          3.801 0.054
   × (5 - Mt )              3,2           -0.088 0.056         -0.105 0.064
   × (5 - Mt )2             3,3           -0.052 0.018          0.005 0.022
   × female                 3,4           -0.102 0.097         -0.066 0.112
   × aget                   3,5            0.031 0.303         -0.032 0.328
   × aget × femalet         3,6            0.146 0.152          0.082 0.179
   × age2t                  3,7            0.852 0.102          0.547 0.116
   × age2t × femalet        3,8           -0.011 0.050         -0.005 0.060
 FTt                        4,0          -17.284 0.517        -10.969 0.499
   × F Tt-1                 4,1            5.917 0.043          3.885 0.053
   × (5 - Mt )              4,2            0.008 0.051          0.032 0.060
   × (5 - Mt )2             4,3           -0.118 0.018         -0.069 0.022
   × female                 4,4           -0.361 0.079         -0.249 0.097
   × aget                   4,5            0.086 0.553         -0.232 0.585
   × aget × femalet         4,6            0.083 0.121          0.022 0.156
   × age2t                  4,7            1.665 0.183          1.102 0.206
   × age2t × femalet        4,8            0.024 0.040          0.018 0.052
 (5 - Mt )                   5            -0.684 0.290         -1.364 0.319
 (5 - Mt )2                  6            -0.017 0.061         -0.106 0.076
 Notes: Utility parameters are discussed in Section 4.2.1. We use a 20% random
subsample of Sample C from Appendix Table A.I to estimate the structural model.
The CRRA parameter is not estimated, which is discussed in Appendix Section A.IV.




                                       83
                Table A.XII: Mental Health Parameter Estimates

                                                           K=1          K=4
 Variable                            Parameter          Est.   S.E   Est.   S.E
 Constant                               0,0            7.053 0.070 5.039 0.082
 Any Rx                                 0,1            0.712   *** 0.726    ***
 Any Psychotherapy                      0,2            1.424   *** 1.452    ***
 (5 - Mt-1 )                            0,3           -1.128 0.021 -1.317 0.022
 (5 - Mt-1 )2                           0,4           -0.114 0.007 0.013 0.008
 problem childt                         0,5           -0.259 0.017 -0.299 0.017
 female                                 0,6           -0.217 0.064 -0.183 0.063
 aget                                   0,7           -0.422 0.074 -0.364 0.074
 age2
    t                                   0,8            0.077 0.024 0.070 0.024
 female × aget                          0,9            0.077 0.097 0.027 0.096
 female × age2t                        0,10           -0.012 0.032 0.002 0.032
 nonwhite                               0,11           0.071 0.022 0.142 0.024
 marriedt                               0,12           0.293 0.019 0.189 0.020
 high degree, high schoolt              0,13           0.256 0.023 0.210 0.024
 high degree, colleget                  0,14           0.533 0.027 0.475 0.029
 cut1                                   1              2.070 0.041 2.380 0.046
 cut2                                   2              4.568 0.046 5.025 0.051
 cut3                                    3             6.307 0.048 6.776 0.052
 Notes: Mental health transition parameters are discussed in Section 4.2.3. We use a 20% random
subsample of Sample C from Appendix Table A.I to estimate the structural model. The calculation
of treatment effect parameters is discussed in footnote 42.




              Table A.XIII: Discontinuation Parameter Estimates

                                                           K=1                   K=4
 Variable                            Parameter          Est.   S.E            Est.   S.E
 constant                               0             -0.467 0.366          -0.716 0.360
 female                                 1             -0.212 0.190          -0.135 0.191
 aget                                   2              0.004 0.121           0.021 0.123
 nonwhite                               3             -0.294 0.191          -0.072 0.171
 high degree, high schoolt              4             -0.430 0.189          -0.443 0.169
 high degree, colleget                  5             -0.868 0.245          -0.962 0.236
 msat                                   6              0.194 0.230           0.083 0.246
 Dt-1                                   7              2.354 0.350           2.605 0.351
 ct-1                                   8             -1.033 0.203          -1.010 0.207
 yeart                                  9              0.077 0.019           0.075 0.017
 Notes: Discontinuation parameters are discussed in Section 4.2.3. We use a 20% random subsample
of Sample C from Appendix Table A.I to estimate the structural model.




                                              84
                                           Table A.XIV: Log Wage Parameter Estimates

                                                                    K=1                                      K=4
                                                              PT           FT                          PT           FT
      Variable                           Parameter         Est.   S.E   Est.   S.E                  Est.   S.E   Est.   S.E
                                              e
      constant                              1             0.477 0.048 0.633 0.019                 -0.197 0.059 -0.837 0.035
                                              e
      (5 - Mt )                             2            -0.032 0.009 -0.002 0.004                -0.028 0.008 -0.008 0.004
                                              e
      (5 - Mt )2                            3             0.003 0.003 -0.002 0.002                 0.005 0.003 0.001 0.001
                                              e
      log (W0 )                             4             0.755 0.023 0.653 0.011                  0.621 0.035 0.580 0.015
                                               e
      log (W0 )2                             5            0.011 0.004 0.036 0.002                  0.046 0.006 0.053 0.003
                                               e
      1W0 =0                                 6            1.958 0.038 1.902 0.018                  2.893 0.050 2.522 0.022
                                              e




85
      marriedt                              7             0.023 0.006 0.018 0.002                  0.007 0.006 0.009 0.002
                                              e
      high degree, high schoolt             8             0.053 0.009 0.058 0.003                  0.029 0.008 0.044 0.003
                                              e
      high degree, colleget                 9             0.197 0.009 0.129 0.003                  0.105 0.008 0.094 0.003
                                             e
      nonwhite                              10           -0.012 0.007 0.000 0.002                 -0.008 0.008 0.003 0.002
                                             e
      female                                11           -0.038 0.007 -0.024 0.002                -0.016 0.006 -0.024 0.002
                                             e
      aget                                  12            0.043 0.015 0.004 0.006                  0.041 0.018 -0.003 0.006
                                             e
      age2
         t                                  13            0.000 0.005 0.000 0.002                 -0.002 0.005 0.002 0.002
                                             e
      female × aget                         14            0.000 1.000 0.000 1.000                  0.000 1.000 0.000 1.000
                                             e
      Kt                                    15            0.044 0.010 0.003 0.002                  0.031 0.009 0.001 0.002
                                             e
      Kt × aget                             16           -0.025 0.005 -0.002 0.001                -0.023 0.005 -0.002 0.001
                                             w,e
      variance                                            0.350 0.001 0.234 0.000                  0.282 0.001 0.197 0.000
      Notes: Wage parameters are discussed in Section 4.2.1. We use a 20% random subsample of Sample C from Appendix Table A.I to estimate
     the structural model.
                                                 Table A.XV: Price Parameter Estimates

                                                                       K=1                                        K=4
                                                                Rx       Psychotherapy                     Rx       Psychotherapy
      Variable                  Parameter                    Est.   S.E    Est.    S.E                  Est.   S.E    Est.    S.E
                                    x
      Non-zero Price constant      1                        4.062 0.709 -0.680 0.591                   3.519 0.829 -0.803 0.422
                                    x
      female                       1                       -0.052 0.109 0.165 0.162                   -0.061 0.112 0.161 0.168
                                    x
      aget                         1                       -0.069 0.076 -0.117 0.114                  -0.080 0.083 -0.055 0.096
                                    x
      nonwhite                     1                       -0.462 0.115 -0.209 0.184                  -0.442 0.119 -0.208 0.204
                                    x
      high degree, high schoolt    1                        0.217 0.111 0.372 0.211                    0.205 0.113 0.365 0.216
                                    x
      high degree, colleget        1                        0.948 0.219 1.051 0.254                    0.952 0.221 0.992 0.266
                                    x
      msat                         1                       -0.165 0.128 0.360 0.208                   -0.218 0.133 0.375 0.215
                                    x
      yeart                        1                       -0.119 0.051 0.027 0.050                   -0.088 0.058 0.008 0.042
                                    x
      pub. ins.t                   1                       -2.542 0.685 -0.714 0.491                  -1.960 0.791 -0.739 0.461
                                    x
      priv. ins.t                  1                        0.047 0.700 0.952 0.491                    0.344 0.785 0.622 0.481
                                    x
      pub. ins.t × yeart           1                        0.097 0.051 -0.069 0.053                   0.065 0.058 -0.049 0.046




86
                                    x
      priv. ins.t × yeart          1                        0.103 0.056 0.026 0.055                    0.077 0.062 0.044 0.051
      Log(Price)
                                    x
      constant                     1                        5.204     0.193      4.537      0.700      5.620    0.200      4.594      0.722
                                    x
      female                       1                       -0.059     0.049      0.020      0.141     -0.034    0.049      0.042      0.142
                                    x
      aget                         1                       -0.016     0.030     -0.112      0.093     -0.051    0.031     -0.114      0.095
                                    x
      nonwhite                     1                       -0.099     0.064     -0.218      0.192     -0.177    0.065     -0.213      0.195
                                    x
      high degree, high schoolt    1                        0.116     0.058      0.075      0.182      0.127    0.058      0.123      0.192
                                    x
      high degree, colleget        1                        0.199     0.076      0.434      0.209      0.200    0.075      0.467      0.220
                                    x
      msat                         1                        0.043     0.051      0.514      0.176      0.083    0.051      0.530      0.183
                                    x
      yeart                        1                       -0.055     0.016      0.002      0.068     -0.050    0.016      0.001      0.069
                                    x
      pub. ins.t                   1                        0.080     0.187     -0.865      0.607     -0.138    0.189     -0.826      0.630
                                    x
      priv. ins.t                  1                       -0.900     0.187      0.379      0.612     -0.723    0.187      0.434      0.625
                                    x
      pub. ins.t × yeart           1                       -0.078     0.017      0.061      0.068     -0.085    0.017      0.052      0.070
                                    x
      priv. ins.t × yeart          1                        0.048     0.017     -0.016      0.068      0.042    0.017     -0.015      0.070
      variance                     p,x                      1.445     0.018      1.243      0.048      1.423    0.018      1.239      0.048
      Notes: Price parameters are discussed in Section 4.2.1. We use a 20% random subsample of Sample C from Appendix Table A.I to estimate the
     structural model.
Table A.XVI: Terminal Value Function Parameter Estimates

                                         K=1                    K=4
 Variable            Parameter         Est.   S.E            Est.   S.E
 (5 - MT +1 )          0,0           -0.194 1.385          -1.636 1.269
    × aget             0,1           -0.227 1.657           1.023 1.465
    × age2t            0,2            0.064 0.486          -0.309 0.435
 (5 - MT +1 )2         1,0           -0.515 0.427          -0.555 0.370
    × aget             1,1           -0.269 0.545          -0.562 0.453
    × age2t            1,1            0.055 0.158           0.143 0.132
 KT +1                 2,0           12.733 0.557           5.665 0.488
    × aget             2,1            0.439 0.608           0.810 0.646
    × age2t            2,2           -1.909 0.197          -1.316 0.221
 cT                     3             0.892 0.129           0.853 0.147
 rT                     4             0.476 0.200           0.360 0.225
 Notes: The terminal value function is discussed in Section 4.2.5. We use a 20%
random subsample of Sample C from Appendix Table A.I to estimate the structural
model.




                                      87
                           Table A.XVII: Model Fit

                               Est. Sample         Sim, K=1              Sim, K=4
 Variable                         Mean             Mean   S.E.           Mean   S.E
 Treatment
  Any Psychotherapy                   0.020        0.017     0.000      0.019      0.000
     if ct-1 = 1                      0.519        0.428     0.003      0.477      0.003
     if rt-1 = 1                      0.192        0.157     0.001      0.177      0.002
     if Mt-1 = 5                      0.003        0.008     0.000      0.006      0.000
     if Mt-1 = 4                      0.009        0.013     0.000      0.012      0.000
     if Mt-1 = 3                      0.026        0.023     0.000      0.027      0.000
     if Mt-1 = 2                      0.110        0.052     0.001      0.079      0.001
     if Mt-1 = 1                      0.197        0.098     0.001      0.122      0.003
     Share with pc   t =0             0.509        0.475     0.003      0.509      0.004
     pct = 0 | pc
                t > 0               346.384      346.691     4.999    357.789      6.087
     Dt |Mt = 1                       0.348        0.432     0.005      0.428      0.004
  Any Rx                              0.073        0.071     0.000      0.072      0.000
     if ct-1 = 1                      0.699        0.641     0.004      0.664      0.003
     if rt-1 = 1                      0.729        0.691     0.001      0.705      0.002
     if Mt-1 = 5                      0.023        0.046     0.000      0.037      0.000
     if Mt-1 = 4                      0.050        0.061     0.000      0.056      0.000
     if Mt-1 = 3                      0.104        0.089     0.001      0.092      0.001
     if Mt-1 = 2                      0.296        0.159     0.001      0.221      0.002
     if Mt-1 = 1                      0.467        0.225     0.003      0.322      0.003
     Share with pr   t =0             0.105        0.096     0.001      0.108      0.001
     pct = 0 | pr
                t > 0               190.077      193.235     1.394    195.062      1.380
 Employment
  PT                                   0.163       0.165     0.000       0.165     0.001
     if P Tt-1 = 1                     0.890       0.845     0.001       0.860     0.001
     if F Tt-1 = 1                     0.008       0.006     0.000       0.012     0.000
     if Mt-1 = 5                       0.160       0.167     0.001       0.168     0.001
     if Mt-1 = 4                       0.168       0.166     0.001       0.168     0.001
     if Mt-1 = 3                       0.169       0.168     0.001       0.169     0.001
     if Mt-1 = 2                       0.147       0.153     0.001       0.135     0.001
     if Mt-1 = 1                       0.105       0.112     0.002       0.076     0.002
     Mean: Wt1                        20.436      20.109     0.032      20.344     0.044
     SD: Wt1                          16.994      16.511     0.065      16.862     0.072
  FT                                   0.602       0.594     0.001       0.605     0.001
     if P Tt-1 = 1                     0.040       0.017     0.000       0.048     0.000
     if F Tt-1 = 1                     0.959       0.934     0.000       0.944     0.000
     if Mt-1 = 5                       0.672       0.648     0.001       0.671     0.001
     if Mt-1 = 4                       0.644       0.620     0.001       0.637     0.001
     if Mt-1 = 3                       0.540       0.546     0.001       0.553     0.001
     if Mt-1 = 2                       0.302       0.414     0.002       0.350     0.002
     if Mt-1 = 1                       0.139       0.279     0.003       0.156     0.002
     Mean: Wt0                        24.163      23.963     0.014      24.221     0.016
     SD: Wt0                          15.513      16.205     0.017      16.262     0.024
 Mental Health
  M Ht = 5                             0.376       0.379     0.000       0.378     0.000
  M Ht = 4                             0.302       0.295     0.000       0.297     0.000
  M Ht = 3                             0.249       0.249     0.000       0.250     0.000
  M Ht = 2                             0.059       0.061     0.000       0.059     0.000
  M Ht = 1                             0.014       0.017     0.000       0.015     0.000
 Notes: The simulated data are constructed by sampling from the joint error distribu-
tion, permanent unobserved heterogeneity distribution, and estimated parameter covari-
ance matrix 50 times for each individual, then forward simulating four periods from initial
conditions. All moments are calculated over all four simulation periods.

                                            88
          Figure A.II: Treatment and Mental Health Fit Over Female Lifecycle




                                                                                           4.2
                          .08




                                                                                                           4.1
                              .06
                  Treatment Share




                                                                                             Mental Health
                                                                                                    4
                       .04




                                                                                           3.9
                          .02




                                                                                           3.8
                          0




                                    25   30        35    40          45    50         55
                                                        Age

                                         Rx base        Thrpy base          MH base
                                         Rx K=1         Thrpy K=1           MH K=1
                                         Rx K=4         Thrpy K=4           MH K=4


Notes: The simulated data are constructed by sampling from the joint error distribution, permanent unobserved
heterogeneity distribution, and estimated parameter covariance matrix 50 times for each individual, then forward
   simulating four periods from initial conditions. All moments are calculated over all four simulation periods.




           Figure A.III: Treatment and Mental Health Fit Over Male Lifecycle


                                                                                           4.4
                          .15




                                                                                                         4.2
                  Treatment Share
                              .1




                                                                                           Mental Health
                                                                                                4
                  .05




                                                                                           3.8
                                                                                           3.6
                          0




                                    25   30        35    40          45    50         55
                                                        Age

                                         Rx base        Thrpy base          MH base
                                         Rx K=1         Thrpy K=1           MH K=1
                                         Rx K=4         Thrpy K=4           MH K=4


Notes: The simulated data are constructed by sampling from the joint error distribution, permanent unobserved
heterogeneity distribution, and estimated parameter covariance matrix 50 times for each individual, then forward
   simulating four periods from initial conditions. All moments are calculated over all four simulation periods.




                                                        89
                Figure A.IV: Employment and Wages over Female Lifecycle




                                                                                             3.2
                           .8




                                                                                             3.1
                                  .6
                   Employment Share




                                                                                             Log Wages
                                                                                                 3
                         .4




                                                                                             2.9
                  .2




                                                                                             2.8
                           0




                                       25   30         35    40       45   50           55
                                                            Age

                                             PT base        FT base        lwage base
                                             PT K=1         FT K=1         lwage K=1
                                             PT K=4         FT K=4         lwage K=4


Notes: The simulated data are constructed by sampling from the joint error distribution, permanent unobserved
heterogeneity distribution, and estimated parameter covariance matrix 50 times for each individual, then forward
   simulating four periods from initial conditions. All moments are calculated over all four simulation periods.




                  Figure A.V: Employment and Wages over Male Lifecycle
                           .6




                                                                                             2.95
                                                                                             2.9
                                  .5
                  Employment Share




                                                                                              Log Wages
                                                                                                   2.85
                         .4




                                                                                             2.8
                  .3




                                                                                             2.75
                           .2




                                                                                             2.7




                                       25   30         35    40       45   50           55
                                                            Age

                                             PT base        FT base        lwage base
                                             PT K=1         FT K=1         lwage K=1
                                             PT K=4         FT K=4         lwage K=4


Notes: The simulated data are constructed by sampling from the joint error distribution, permanent unobserved
heterogeneity distribution, and estimated parameter covariance matrix 50 times for each individual, then forward
   simulating four periods from initial conditions. All moments are calculated over all four simulation periods.




                                                            90
                             Table A.XVIII: Assigned Psychotherapy in First Period, Healthy Types

                                     t=1                           t=2                          t=3                         t=4
                            Base    Sim        %           Base    Sim      %         Base      Sim     %          Base     Sim      %
      Type 3, Women
      Psychotherapy         0.018 1.000      55.943        0.014 0.113 7.079          0.012 0.030 1.497            0.011 0.014 0.307
      Medication            0.073 0.103        0.405       0.074 0.159 1.157          0.071 0.129 0.816            0.066 0.098 0.488
      Avg MH               4.115 4.115        0.000        4.065 4.318 0.062          4.028 4.205 0.044            4.003 4.116 0.028
      Working PT            0.335 0.332       -0.009       0.325 0.325 0.001          0.309 0.311 0.006            0.265 0.266 0.004
      Working FT            0.627 0.619       -0.013       0.649 0.644 -0.007         0.648 0.646 -0.004           0.588 0.586 -0.003
      Avg Wage             22.030 22.051      0.001       21.954 22.011 0.003        21.964 22.001 0.002          22.126 22.147 0.001
      Type 3, Men
      Psychotherapy         0.007 1.000 139.440            0.007 0.075 9.674          0.006 0.014 1.235            0.007 0.008 0.146
      Medication            0.029 0.042        0.473       0.030 0.074 1.480          0.031 0.055 0.795            0.033 0.045 0.353
      Avg MH               4.174 4.174        0.000        4.123 4.353 0.056          4.090 4.235 0.035            4.073 4.156 0.020
      Working PT            0.098 0.098       0.009        0.094 0.096 0.021          0.093 0.095 0.014            0.088 0.089 0.016
      Working FT            0.877 0.870       -0.008       0.892 0.890 -0.003         0.885 0.883 -0.002           0.816 0.815 -0.002
      Avg Wage             25.591 25.640      0.002       25.440 25.492 0.002        25.393 25.420 0.001          25.612 25.607 0.000
      Type 4, Women




91
      Psychotherapy         0.001 1.000 841.667            0.001 0.015 12.634         0.001 0.002 0.494            0.001 0.001 0.057
      Medication            0.042 0.053        0.284       0.036 0.084 1.305          0.035 0.057 0.653            0.037 0.048 0.281
      Avg MH               4.173 4.173        0.000        4.107 4.345 0.058          4.075 4.216 0.035            4.050 4.132 0.020
      Working PT            0.254 0.238       -0.060       0.279 0.274 -0.019         0.266 0.266 0.000            0.205 0.206 0.004
      Working FT            0.370 0.348       -0.060       0.424 0.416 -0.020         0.430 0.425 -0.012           0.356 0.354 -0.005
      Avg Wage             18.339 18.382      0.002       18.365 18.437 0.004        18.442 18.474 0.002          18.605 18.629 0.001
      Type 4, Men
      Psychotherapy         0.001 1.000 1029.000           0.001 0.011 10.714         0.001 0.001 0.268            0.001 0.001 -0.091
      Medication            0.015 0.019        0.307       0.015 0.039 1.625          0.016 0.025 0.515            0.021 0.024 0.135
      Avg MH               4.152 4.152        0.000        4.126 4.348 0.054          4.111 4.235 0.030            4.103 4.172 0.017
      Working PT            0.143 0.137       -0.047       0.151 0.148 -0.018         0.145 0.143 -0.009           0.118 0.117 -0.004
      Working FT            0.681 0.657       -0.035       0.729 0.720 -0.012         0.718 0.714 -0.006           0.612 0.609 -0.004
      Avg Wage             21.174 21.292      0.006       20.948 21.006 0.003        20.915 20.935 0.001          21.122 21.124 0.000
      Notes: We construct the simulated data by first using the estimated posterior unobserved type probabilities to simulate a type for
     each individual in Sample C referenced in Table A.I. We then randomly select 2,500 individuals of each type. For this sample of 10,000
     individuals, we sample from the joint error distribution and estimated parameter covariance matrix 50 times for each individual. We
     then forward simulate four periods from the observed initial conditions. In this table, we compare choices and outcomes in each of
     the four simulation periods for Types 2 and 3, using the baseline model and an alternative model where individuals are assigned to
     psychotherapy in period t = 1.
                         Table A.XIX: Counterfactual Policy Simulations, Healthy Types

                                     Base              Policy 1                   Policy 2                   Policy 3                  Policy 4

                                    Level           Level       %             Level        %              Level       %             Level       %
      Type 3, Women
      Psychotherapy                 0.014           0.014 0.023              0.023        0.701          0.018 0.357                0.034      1.477
      Medication                    0.071           0.071 0.001              0.074        0.050           0.072 0.021              0.079       0.108
      Avg MH                       4.022           4.022 0.000               4.037        0.004          4.024 0.001               4.047       0.006
      Working PT                    0.308          0.308 0.000               0.309        0.001          0.308 0.000                0.309      0.001
      Working FT                    0.628          0.628 0.000                0.628       0.000          0.628 0.001                0.628      0.000
      Avg Wage                     22.015          22.015 0.000              22.019       0.000          22.017 0.000              22.021      0.000
      Type 3, Men
      Psychotherapy                 0.007           0.007 0.022              0.013 0.867                 0.009       0.381          0.019      1.725
      Medication                    0.031           0.031 0.002              0.032 0.031                  0.031      0.014         0.033       0.063
      Avg MH                       4.087           4.087 0.000               4.095 0.002                 4.088       0.000         4.101       0.003
      Working PT                    0.093          0.093 0.000               0.093 -0.001                 0.093      0.000         0.093       0.000
      Working FT                    0.868          0.868 0.000                0.868 0.000                0.868       0.000          0.868      0.000




92
      Avg Wage                     25.507          25.507 0.000              25.508 0.000                25.506      0.000         25.508      0.000
      Type 4, Women
      Psychotherapy                 0.001           0.001 0.016              0.002        0.621          0.002 0.228                0.003      1.093
      Medication                    0.038           0.038 0.000              0.038        0.006           0.038 0.002              0.038       0.008
      Avg MH                       4.065           4.065 0.000               4.066        0.000          4.065 0.000               4.067       0.000
      Working PT                    0.251          0.251 0.000               0.251        0.000          0.251 0.000                0.251      0.001
      Working FT                    0.395          0.395 0.000                0.395       0.000          0.395 0.000                0.395      0.000
      Avg Wage                     18.432          18.432 0.000              18.432       0.000          18.432 0.000              18.433      0.000
      Type 4, Men
      Psychotherapy                 0.001           0.001 0.009              0.001        0.689          0.001 0.302                0.002      1.316
      Medication                    0.017           0.017 0.000              0.017        0.004           0.017 0.002              0.017       0.008
      Avg MH                       4.110           4.110 0.000               4.111        0.000          4.110 0.000               4.112       0.000
      Working PT                    0.139          0.139 0.000               0.139        0.000          0.139 0.000                0.139      0.000
      Working FT                    0.685          0.685 0.000                0.685       0.000          0.685 0.000                0.685      0.000
      Avg Wage                     21.034          21.034 0.000              21.035       0.000          21.035 0.000              21.035      0.000
       Notes: We construct the simulated data by first using the estimated posterior unobserved type probabilities to simulate a type for each individual
     in Sample C referenced in Table A.I. We then randomly select 2,500 individuals of each type. For this sample of 10,000 individuals, we sample
     from the joint error distribution and estimated parameter covariance matrix 50 times for each individual. We then forward simulate four periods
     from the observed initial conditions. In this table, we compare choices and outcomes for Type 2 and 3 individuals using the baseline model and
     five alternative models representing the following policy interventions. Policy 1: Remove the financial cost of psychotherapy. Policy 2: Remove
     the possibility of discontinuation. Policy 3: Remove the employment/time cost of psychotherapy (i.e., 1,3 = 1,4 = 0). Policy 4: Remove all
     non-utility psychotherapy costs (i.e., combine Policies 1, 2, and 3). Sample moments are aggregated across all four simulated periods.
References
Bound, John, David A Jaeger, and Regina M Baker. 1995. "Problems with instrumental
   variables estimation when the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous
   explanatory variable is weak." Journal of the American statistical association 90 (430):
   443­450.

Cragg, John G, and Stephen G Donald. 1993. "Testing identifiability and specification in
    instrumental variable models." Econometric Theory 9 (2): 222­240.

Eckstein, Zvi, Michael Keane, and Osnat Lifshitz. 2019. "Career and family decisions: Co-
    horts born 1935­1975." Econometrica 87 (1): 217­253.

Kleibergen, Frank, and Richard Paap. 2006. "Generalized reduced rank tests using the sin-
    gular value decomposition." Journal of econometrics 133 (1): 97­126.

Peter G. Peterson Foundation. 2020. Medical Care Prices. https://www.pgpf.org/chart-
    archive/0254_medical_care_prices. Accessed: 05-04-2020.

Sanderson, Eleanor, and Frank Windmeijer. 2016. "A weak instrument F-test in linear IV
    models with multiple endogenous variables." Journal of Econometrics 190 (2): 212­221.

Taube, Carl A, Howard H Goldman, and David Salkever. 1990. "Medicaid coverage for mental
    illness: Balancing access and costs." Health Affairs 9 (1): 5­18.

Wamhoff, Steve, and Matthew Gardner. 2019. Who Pays Taxes in America in 2019? Tech-
   nical report. Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2005. "Simple solutions to the initial conditions problem in dynamic,
   nonlinear panel data models with unobserved heterogeneity." Journal of applied econo-
   metrics 20 (1): 39­54.




                                            93
