                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HAVE INCOME-BASED ACHIEVEMENT GAPS WIDENED OR NARROWED?

                                        Shirin A. Hashim
                                         Thomas J. Kane
                                      Thomas Kelley-Kemple
                                          Mary E. Laski
                                        Douglas O. Staiger

                                        Working Paper 27714
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27714


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2020




A grant from the Walton Family Foundation supported Mary Laski and Shirin Hashim. Pre-doctoral
training grant R305B150010-16 from the Institute of Education Sciences at the U.S. Department of
Education supported Thomas Kelley-Kemple. We thank Aimee Chen, Janet Currie, David Deming,
John Friedman, David Grissmer, Eric Hanushek, Caroline Hoxby, Dan Koretz, Eric Nielsen, Paul
Peterson, Steve Raudenbush, Sarah Reber, Jesse Rothstein, Sarah Turner, Jim Wyckoff and seminar
participants at the University of Virginia, Harvard Graduate School of Education and the 2020 NBER
Summer Institute for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27714.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Shirin A. Hashim, Thomas J. Kane, Thomas Kelley-Kemple, Mary E. Laski, and Douglas
O. Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Have Income-Based Achievement Gaps Widened or Narrowed?
Shirin A. Hashim, Thomas J. Kane, Thomas Kelley-Kemple, Mary E. Laski, and Douglas
O. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 27714
August 2020
JEL No. I21,I22,I24

                                          ABSTRACT

Since 1990, U.S. policymakers have worked to close gaps in academic achievement by income
and race (e.g. with school finance reform and school accountability systems) even as rising
income inequality and income-based residential segregation have threatened to widen them.
Using estimates of the mean and variance in household income for sampled schools, we
reconstruct the student-level relationship between achievement and household income in the
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) from 1990 to 2015. We find that
achievement at all levels of parental income rose substantially in 4th and 8th grade. In contrast to
Reardon (2011), we find that achievement gaps narrowed substantially in 4th grade reading and
math and in 8th grade math, while the gaps remained stable in 8th grade reading. As a robustness
check, we used the March Current Population survey to impute income for dependent children by
race, mother's education, urbanicity and state and then calculated mean achievement for those
same groups in the NAEP. Again, we found gaps in achievement narrowing between groups with
high and low predicted mean household incomes. Our results challenge the prevailing
understanding that income-based achievement gaps have widened in the United States over the
last 30 years.
Shirin A. Hashim                                 Mary E. Laski
255 W 94TH ST                                    marylaski@g.harvard.edu
APT 17F
10025                                            Douglas O. Staiger
NEW YORK, NY                                     Dartmouth College
shirin_hashim@g.harvard.edu                      Department of Economics
                                                 HB6106, 301 Rockefeller Hall
Thomas J. Kane                                   Hanover, NH 03755-3514
Harvard Graduate School of Education             and NBER
Center for Education Policy Research             douglas.staiger@dartmouth.edu
50 Church St., 4th Floor
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
kaneto@gse.harvard.edu

Thomas Kelley-Kemple
3436 30th St Apt 1
Astoria, NY 11106
tkelleykemple@g.harvard.edu
I.       Introduction 


         In 1848, Horace Mann famously described public education as "the great equalizer of the 

conditions of men" and the "balance wheel of the social machinery."   In the face of rising income 

inequality and incomebased housing segregation, policymakers and philanthropists have launched a 

series of efforts over the past three decades to preserve the balance wheel of schooling:  raising 

educational standards, increasing school accountability, opening charter schools and increasing state aid 

to lowincome districts.   Yet, we know remarkably little about how the relationship between parental 

income and achievement has changed over time.    


         The chief obstacle has been the lack of data.   In the United States, there is no nationally 

representative data source combining a consistent measure of academic achievement with the 

household income of individual students. 


         The best available evidence was provided in 2011, when Sean Reardon combined data from 

twelve nationally representative surveys, with different measures of academic achievement, 

administered to students at different ages, matched with different measures of studentreported or 

parentreported income.   After pooling the data for 12 cohorts of students, each with different 

measures of achievement and income, Reardon (2011) concluded that the incomebased achievement 

gap had expanded substantially for the cohorts born between 1974 and 2001:  the difference in mean 

achievement at the 90th and 10th percentiles of family income had risen by 40 to 50 percent in standard 

deviation units.    


         We take a different approach, supplementing the National Assessment of Educational Progress 

(NAEP) with neighborhood income measures from the U.S. Bureau of the Census.   Specifically, we use 

the schoollevel measures of achievement and income to reconstruct the studentlevel relationships.  To 

do so, we rely on the fact that the studentlevel leastsquares coefficient of achievement on household 
income is a weighted average of the betweenschool and withinschool relationships between 

achievement and income.   We estimate the betweenschool coefficient of achievement on income 

directly, regressing schoollevel mean achievement on mean household income for families living in the 

surrounding census tracts.   We then estimate the withinschool slope by regressing the withinschool 

variance in achievement on the variance in income.   Intuitively, the schools with more unequal incomes 

should also have proportionally more variance in achievement (and the slope of that relationship should 

be equivalent to the squared value of the withinschool slope).  We then combine the within and 

betweenschool coefficients with an estimate of the proportion of variance in income attributable to 

schools (a measure of the degree of income segregation by school) to estimate the studentlevel 

relationship between achievement and income.   


         Because census tract boundaries do not correspond with the boundaries of school attendance 

zones, our imputations of the mean and variance in income by school are subject to measurement error.   

However, because the correlation between our imputed income measure and schoolreported measures 

of free and reducedprice lunch receipt are stable over time, our finding of a declining slope is unlikely to 

be driven by measurement error. 


         As a robustness check, we use the March Current Population Survey to impute household 

income using the traits which are available for individual students in the NAEP:  race/ethnicity, mother's 

education, urbanicity and state.   We then investigate how the gaps in achievement associated with 

each of these traits compare with the changing gaps in family income corresponding to those same 

traits.   


         In contrast to Reardon (2011), we see no evidence of widening of achievement gaps in 4th grade 

or 8th grade math or reading.   In fact, we see achievement gaps narrowing in 4th grade math and reading 

as well as in 8th grade math.  For example, between 1990 and 2015, we estimate that the achievement 
of students at the 10th percentile of income improved substantially:  a full standard deviation in 4th grade 

math and .68 standard deviations in 8th grade math.  Although achievement also rose for higher income 

families, the achievement gap between those at the 90th and 10th income percentile closed by .4 and .15 

standard deviations respectively in 4th and 8th grade math.   When we plot the mean achievement of 

each subgroup of students by raceethnicity, mother's education, urbanicity and state against the mean 

income from the March CPS, we see consistent patterns of narrowing or stable achievement gaps 

between high and lowincome groups.  Our results challenge the prevailing view that gaps in 

achievement by family income have been widening.   In fact, just the opposite appears to be true.            


 


II.       Prior Literature   


          In a widely cited paper, Reardon (2011) combined survey data on parental income and 

achievement for multiple cohorts of children.    He reports that reading and math achievement gaps at 

the 90th and 10th family income percentiles grew by 40 to 50 percent among cohorts born between 1974 

and 2001.   


          However, each of the longitudinal surveys used a different measure of achievement and a 

different measure of income.   Thus, to make comparisons among the different surveys, Reardon was 

forced to make a number of adjustments:    


          First, because each survey measured student achievement at different ages (some measuring 

          students at ages 16 and others measuring students at age 18) Reardon adjusted each survey for 

          age differences.   
        Second, the achievement measures had varying reliabilities, ranging from .75 to .96.  As a result, 

        Reardon standardized scores and adjusted by the estimated reliability for each assessment 

        (multiplying scores by        ).   

        Third, each survey measured income differently.  Some used parentreported income; for 

        others, the income measures were reported by students.   Moreover, depending on the survey, 

        the number of income categories respondents could choose ranged from five to fifteen 

        categories.  For each survey, Reardon estimated the mean achievement in each income category 

        and then used the percentage of students in each income category to infer the estimated 

        achievement gap at the 90th and 10th income percentile.  Finally, he adjusted by              ).   


        Although the surveys prior to 1975 often included studentreported family income, all of the 

surveys for birth cohorts after 1975 (the period during which Reardon estimates a rapid growth in 

incomebased inequality) rely on parentreported income.1  Reardon assumes that all the parent

reported income measures had a reliability of .86.  For studies with student reported income, he used 

different reliabilities for students of different ages, assuming a reliability of 0.50 for 9th grade reports, 

0.57 for 10th grade, 0.65 for 11th grade, and 0.72 for 12th grade. 


        Nielsen (2019) analyzed data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth in 1979 and 1997 

(two out of the 13 surveys analyzed by Reardon).  Using fully ordinal methods (which do not rely on 

Reardon's assumption of a consistent linear scaling across the various achievement measures), Nielsen 

finds gaps narrowing.   When he uses Reardon's methods and similar definition of income, he finds that 




                                   
1
  For the birth cohorts for whom Reardon finds widening gaps in achievement by income, the income measures are 
parent reported.   Thus, it seems unlikely that the finding is driven by the shift from studentreported income 
measures (which tend to be less reliable) to parentreported measures.   
gaps were stable.     However, Reardon (2011) also finds the gaps to have been stable for those two 

surveys.   It was on the basis of the other surveys he analyzes that he finds gaps widening.    


        In a recent paper, Hanushek, Peterson, Talpey, and Woessmann (2020) take a different 

approach, using achievement data from a different set of national and international tests (PISA, TIMMS, 

and the NAEP).    Because none of the surveys include studentlevel measures of family income, the 

authors create an SES index using indicators of parental education and the number of home 

possessions as reported by students. Hanushek and colleagues find no change in reading or math 

achievement gaps between top and bottom quartiles of the SES distribution for 1317year old students 

born between 1954 and 2001.  


        However, the findings in Hanushek et al. (2020) of stable gaps in achievement by SES are not 

necessarily inconsistent with Reardon's findings.   Although Reardon focused primarily on incomebased 

gaps, he also reported differences in achievement by parental education (the main factor in the 

Hanushek et al. SES index.)   Like Hanushek et al., Reardon reported that achievement gaps by parental 

education have remained relatively stable over the same time period.  (One of our contributions below 

is to reconcile the findings in Reardon and Hanushek et al., by rescaling achievement gaps associated 

with mother's education by the average household income for mothers of varying education levels and 

raceethnicity.) 


        Often motivated by concerns over rising income inequality or lawsuits targeting inequities in 

school funding, U.S. policymakers have launched a series of policies over the last three decades to raise 

achievement in lowscoring and lowincome schools.   For instance, Dee and Jacob (2011) studied the 

effect of school accountability policies, which were adopted in 30 states between 1990 and 2001 and 

then expanded nationwide with the No Child Left Behind Act in 2002.   The strongest incentives were 

focused on lower performing schools and on subgroups of students by race/ethnicity and economic 
disadvantage.  Using state by year and subgroup means from the National Assessment of Educational 

Progress, the authors find that school accountability policies had positive effects on average 

achievement in 4th and 8th grade math, and weaker effects on 4th grade reading.   The effects were larger 

for African American and Hispanic students and students eligible for Free or Reduced Price Lunch, 

especially in 4th and 8th grade math. 


            Lafortune, Rothstein and Schanzenbach (2018) investigated the impact of school finance 

reforms (SFRs) on gaps in district spending and on achievement on the NAEP overtime.  They focused on 

64 major reform events across 26 states between 1990 and 2011. Leveraging the variation in timing of 

these reform events in an eventstudy framework, they find that SFRs were associated with an average 

total revenue increase of nearly $700 per pupil in the lowestincome quintile school districts relative to 

topincome quintile districts.  Moreover, they estimate that the impact of reform events on the test 

score gap between bottom and topquintile districts was 0.008 standard deviations per year, which they 

extrapolate to mean that SFRs reduced betweendistrict achievement gaps in those states by 10% within 

ten years.  


            As the authors emphasize, the majority of the variance in income is withindistricts and within

schools.   As a result, districtlevel equalization does not necessarily translate to a narrowing of income

based achievement gaps.   For instance, the authors find no impact of state SFR's on achievement gaps 

by student's free lunch status.    


            Over the same time period during which Reardon found a sharp widening in achievement by 

income, other social policy initiatives not usually seen as connected with test scores--such as the 

expansion of health coverage or the Earned Income Tax Credit-- were improving health outcomes for 

low income families and narrowing gaps in child health measures.2   Currie and Duque (2019) review the 


                                        
2
     We thank Janet Currie for pointing this out. 
literature on the impact of the Medicaid expansions, which occurred in the 1980's and 1990's on 

children's health and mortality.  For instance, Currie and Schwandt (2016) find that expansions in public 

health insurance coverage have dramatically reduced mortality among poor children.   A 2019 consensus 

report from the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering and Mathematics concluded that the Earned 

Income Tax Credit (EITC) Program have improved children's health outcomes.   The EITC was enacted in 

1975, but then sharply expanded in 1986, 1990 and 1993.   Reardon estimated a sharp steepening in 

incomebased achievement gap for those born after 1975.    If that were true, it would imply that gaps in 

children's health and educational outcomes were moving in opposite directions. 


 

III.    Empirical Strategy 


        We employ two different strategies to estimate the studentlevel relationship between income 

and achievement.   First, we use schoollevel aggregates to estimate the studentlevel relationship 

between income and achievement.   Second, as a robustness check, we use the March Current 

Population survey in each year to impute household income by students' race/ethnicity, parental 

education and geographic location.   In doing so, we essentially scale the gaps in achievement by race, 

mother's education, urbanicity and state of residence by the gaps in mean household income associated 

with those same characteristics.    We then test whether gaps in achievement grew by imputed income. 

We briefly describe each of those two approaches below. 


Using School Level Aggregates to Estimate the StudentLevel Parameters 


        Our goal is to estimate the studentlevel relationship between achievement and income: 


                                     1                               
Where   is a student's scaled test score,    is a measure of log household income and i and j are 

subscripts for the student and the student's school respectively.  ( is a descriptive relationship, not a 

causal one.) 


         It can be shown (Raudenbush and Bryk, 2002, pp. 136137) that the OLS estimator for  is a 

weighted average of the betweenschool relationship of mean achievement on mean achievement 

(            and the withinschool relationship between an individual students' household income and 

achievement (           ): 


 


                              2                                            1        


Where   is the percent of the total variance in log household income that is attributable to school


level differences in mean log income (                  ).   The statistic ICCY is the empirical analog of the 


intraclass correlation in log income by school.3  With a value between 0 and 1,  is a measure of the 

degree of income segregation by school.   That is, if all of the variation in income was by school (every 

student in a given school had the same income) and different schools had different incomes, then the 

student level relationship between achievement and income would be equal to the betweenschool 

relationship.   As implied by equation (2), the more segregated schools are by household income, the 

more the studentlevel relationship will reflect the betweenschool relationship. 




                                     
3
  Bryk and Raudenbush (1992) refer to the statistic, ICCY, as "eta squared".   In contrast to the traditional "intra
class correlation", or ICC, which uses an estimate of the variance of the true school mean incomes in the 
numerator,  , the statistic, ICCy , uses the variance in the sample means,  (which has more variance because   
is equal to   plus estimation error). In a setting with a large sample (or the entire population) for each school, the 
two measures are approximately equivalent. 
        With schoollevel measures of mean achievement and mean log income,   and  , we can 

estimate the betweenschool relationship:    


                                    3                                    


        Although we do not have the covariance of achievement and income at the student level, we 

can estimate the withinschool slope using the schoollevel variance in achievement and income,                   

and  : 


                                     4          =                       


        The basic intuition behind equation (4) is that schools with higher income variance (i.e. more 

income inequality) should have proportionally higher variance in achievement with the proportion 

determined by the square of the withinschool slope coefficient.   In other words, although we do not 

see the covariance in income and achievement within schools, we can infer the withinschool slope by 

studying the changing relationship between withinschool income variance and withinschool 

achievement variance. 


        In estimating equations (3) and (4), we weight by the number of tested students in each school.  

We also allow the errors to be clustered by the geographic primary sampling unit used by NAEP.  Given 

that the error terms,   and  , could be related, we estimate equations (3) and (4) as seemingly 

unrelated regressions (SURE), thus estimating the covariance between               and          .   Finally, as 

described in equation (2), the student level slope is a nonlinear function of the coefficients in equations 

(3) and (4),          and        .   Thus, we use the delta method to estimate a standard error for our 

estimate of the studentlevel slope (      ). 


        In equation (4), we express          as a scalar, assuming that the withinschool slope is the same 

in all schools.   However, the above model could be generalized to allow the slope to be a random 
coefficient, varying by school.    If the withinschool slope did vary by school, but was independent of log 

income, then the coefficient on   in equation (4) would be interpreted as the sum of the expected 

value of         squared and the variance in           (that is,                       .)   As long as the 

variance in          (        ) is constant or rising, then any increase in the expected value of            

should lead to an increase in the coefficient on  in equation (4).   It's only if the variance in within 

school slopes is declining that we might not detect an increase in the withinschool slope using our 

method. 


Using Imputed Household Income for Individual Students 


        As a validity check to our censusbased income measures, we produce a second set of estimates, 

using studentreported race and mother's education as well as school location (urbanicity and state) to 

impute log household income using the March Current Population Survey.   We then estimate the 

studentlevel slope, as well as the between and withinschool slopes, using imputed household income 

for each year.  (We can estimate all three directly since we have imputed household income at the 

studentlevel.)   


        Students participating in the 8th grade NAEP assessments were asked to report education levels 

for their mother as well as their father.   (The survey measures of parents' education were not 

consistently available for the 4th grade students in NAEP.)  However, the NAEP did not consistently ask 

whether either parent lives in the same household with the student--which would have been helpful in 

imputing family income from the March CPS.   Therefore, we assume that students in the NAEP lived in 

households where their mother was present in order to be able to impute household income by 

mother's education.    (We do not use information about the father's education, given that we cannot 

know whether the father is present.)   We estimate the following relationship for all households in the 

Current Population Survey with dependent children between age 5 and 18 with a mother present: 
                   5                               ,                       ,             ,     
                                 /



 


Where   is a measure of log household income,           ,              represent a full set of interactions 

between four mother's education categories and four categories for race/ethnicity,                 ,   reflects 

differences in income by four urban categories and          ,    represents fixed effects by state and year.    

We assume that the student has the same race/ethnicity as the head of household.    


        Using the parameter estimates from equation (5), we generate a predicted household income 

for each 8th grade respondent with nonmissing mother's education,  .   Since we are using imputed 

income,   , to substitute for actual household income, we would rewrite equation (1) as: 


                              (1')                                                    


Where         + .  Note that as long as   is estimated by OLS, then   and   will be orthogonal by 

construction.   In other words, as in twostage least squares, even though imputed household income is 

an imperfect measure of true household income, our estimate of   in equation (1') will not be biased 

due to measurement error (although we do not claim that it reflects a causal relationship).  Many of the 

variables being used for imputation--mother's education, race, state, urbanicity--are likely to have 

their own direct effects on achievement beyond their influence on family income (that is,    will be 

correlated with the error term from equation (1),  .)   For that reason, they are unlikely to be valid 

instruments.   However, in order to infer the change in the descriptive relationship between income and 

achievement, we must assume that the correlation between   and   is constant over time and that 

any change in   is due to the effect of income and not to changes in the direct effects of the variables 

used for the imputation.) 
        Just as with the usual 2SLS estimate, equation 1' will estimate a LATE that may differ from that 

estimated by OLS. Recall from equation 2 that        is a weighted average of the withinschool and 

betweenschool slopes, where the weight on the betweenschool slope is   (the intra class 

correlation in log income by school). Similarly, we can restate the estimate using from equation 1' using 

imputed log income (call this  ) as: 


                            2                                      1       


If we assume that    and   (the schoollevel means of    and          are orthogonal (an additional 

assumption not guaranteed by OLS), then it can be shown that                         ,                     

even when             .   In other words, if the error in equation (5) is uncorrelated with the proxy 

measure of income at both the individual level (true by construction) and at the school level (an 

assumption), then the within and between slopes are the same for the true income data as for the 

imputed, proxy income measures. In this case, our estimate of the overall relationship between scores 

and log income using actual income (equation 2) differs from our estimate using imputed income 

(equation 2') because the two estimates put different weight on the between and within slopes (since in 

general          ). 


        Therefore, although we estimate equation (1') with studentlevel data, we also estimate the 

betweenschool and withinschool relationships and the ICC using imputed student level data for 

comparison to the estimates above. We then evaluate whether any difference in our estimates of   

between our two methods are due to differences in the within and betweenschool estimates (which 

should be similar) or simply differences in the weighting places on within versus between estimates due 

to differences in the ICC (which are expected).  


        Our imputation using mother's education and race uses much of the same studentlevel 

information as that used by Hanushek et al. (2020).  There are some important differences: in addition 
to mother's education and race, Hanushek et al. use several items reflecting household possessions 

(which we exclude given their absence from the CPS), while we use urbanicity and state.   Moreover, 

while we scale the information on studentreported characteristics by the income differentials 

associated with those traits, Hanushek et al. (2020) scale the differences in student characteristics using 

loadings from a factor analysis.   In doing so, they are focused on achievement differentials by socio

economic status, a latent construct.  Because the measures of household possessions they use to 

construct the SES index varies by year, that construct will have an unknown--and potentially changing--

relationship to wealth and income over time.  Since Reardon (2011) focused on differentials in 

achievement by income, our approach presents a more direct test of his conclusions.   


IV.     Data  


        To measure student achievement over time, we use student level data from the trial state 

assessments in 1990, 1992 and 1994, and from the staterepresentative samples in subsequent years.  

Known as "the Nation's Report Card," the main NAEP assessment provides a scaled score which is 

designed to be comparable over time.  The samples are intended to provide a representative sample of 

schools and roughly 30 students in each school.  Prior to 2002, states were able to opt into participating 

and the number of participating states ranged from 38 to 46, depending upon the subject and grade.  

Since 2003, the NAEP has been administered in every state, every other year, in both reading and 

mathematics.    


        Balancing the goal of maintaining a consistent sample of states with the goal of remaining as 

close to nationally representative as possible, we included states that missed at most one year of 

assessment scores in a given gradesubject combination.   Thus, in 4th grade math and reading, that left 

us with 45 and 41 states respectively, and 40 and 46 states in 8th grade math and reading.   We report 
the number of schools and students by grade/subject and by year in Table 1.  For example, in 2015, we 

included scores from 108,290 students attending 5,250 schools in 4th grade reading.  


         To add data on household income for public schools, we use information on school locations 

from the Common Core of Data.  In 1990 and 2000, we rely on the decennial censuses.  For 2009 and 

after, we use the American Community Survey.  The NCES's Common Core of Data (CCD) provides 

student enrollments as well as the latitude and longitude for each school. Using each school's 

geographical coordinates, we rank the nearest block groups (as measured by block group centroid) by 

their distance from each school.4  The census data report the number of related children attending 

public schools in grades 14 and in grades 58 in each block group. Combining the census data on 

number of children enrolled in various grade levels with data from the CCD on the enrollment of each 

school, we identify the K nearest block groups with a sufficient number of children to "fill up" the 

school's official enrollment.    In other words, if  is the number of students enrolled in public schools 

from block group k according to the census, and  is the number of students enrolled in school j 

according to the CCD, then we associate the nearest K block groups that satisfy the inequality 

                           where block groups k are ordered in increasing distance from the school 

location.  


         In the census, detailed data on household income is only available at the census tract level--not 

the blockgroup level.   As a result, we assume that the distribution of income in each block group 

matches the distribution in its associated census tract.   We then weight the tractlevel data by the 

counts of students in each of the K block groups associated with the school.  Thus, the number of 

students in school j who come from a household with income in the   reported bin is given by 


                                     
4
 Overlaying school attendance zones and block group boundaries for a set of 21 of the largest 22 districts, Saporito 
and Sohoni (2007) found that 53 percent of census block groups in 2000 lay entirely within a school boundary in 
2007. 
                                                                   


Where  is the proportion of students in the corresponding census tract in income bin i. These counts 

can be thought of as a coarsened distribution of the household income for students in each school5. We 

merge our estimates for each school using a unique school identifier. 


        To infer the mean and variance in income from the binned income data, we assume the 

distribution of income for each school is approximately log normal.  By definition, if the log of income,  

ln(Y), is distributed normally, and   is the upper range of the lth income bin (expressed in log 2016 

dollars), then the proportion of the school enrollment with income below can be expressed as follows:  


                          (            ) 


Where   and           represent the mean and variance of log income in school j. 


        Accordingly, using for the top limit in each income bin ( , where l=1,...,15 corresponding to 16 

income bins) and the proportion of households,  ,  in the school with incomes below  , we estimate 

the following regression for each school: 


                                            ln                                     


Where j subscripts the school and l subscripts one of 15 income bins. 


        For intercensal years and for the years between 2000 and 2009 (when the American 

Community Survey became available), we use a linear interpolation of the mean and variance of income 

from 1990, 2000 and 2009.  



                                    
5
  To calculate the mean and variance of this distribution we use a method outlined by vonHippel, Scarpino, & 
Drown (2016), fitting the cumulative CDF of each school's income bins to a logNormal distribution 
        Our use of Census data to approximate the mean and variance in family income for individual 

public schools will suffer from two sources of measurement error:  First, Census block group boundaries 

will not coincide with actual school attendance zones; second, not all children in a neighborhood will be 

attending public schools.   According to the National Center for Education Statistics, 13.1 percent of 

students in grades PreK through 8 attended private schools in 1990 (the beginning of our period).   The 

percentage had declined slightly to 10.8 percent by 2016 (National Center for Education Statistics 2020). 


        Nevertheless, the method performs reasonably well in replicating administrative data on race 

and income from the Common Core of Data (CCD).   To check, we compare our Censusbased estimates 

of poverty rates and race/ethnicity to the proportion of students receiving free or reduced price lunch 

(FRPL) and each race/ethnic group in the CCD.  Those results are reported in Table 2.  Unfortunately, the 

data on students receiving free or reduced price lunch was missing for more than half of schools in 1990 

(52 percent).   As a result, the first year we report the correlation is in 2000 (when 13 percent of schools 

were missing data).    In 2000, the correlation between the poverty rates in nearby blockgroups and the 

school's reported percentage of students receiving free or reduced price lunch was .715.  By 2015, the 

correlation was roughly the same, .690. 6   The method performs even better for approximating a 

school's raceethnicity; the correlation between our estimate of the percentage of students who are 

black in each school and the CCD report was roughly .9 in all years between 1990 and 2015.   Although 

the censusbased measure of school income is subject to error, there is no evidence that the 

relationship has diminished over time or that the reliability has gotten worse. 


        In order to impute household income for various student traits, we identify a subset of variables 

available in both the NAEP and the March Current Population Survey:  mother's highest level of 

                                    
6
  The imputation performs best in suburban areas, with an R2 of approximately .75 with respect to FRPL status, but 
R2 between .6 and .65 in the urban and rural areas as well as towns.   The correlations for primary schools (those 
with 4th grade students) and middle schools (which we define as those with 8th grade students) were also similar 
and consistent over time. 
educational attainment (5 categories for less than high school, high school graduate, some college, 

college graduate and unknown), raceethnicity (6 categories for white, Black, Asian, Native American, 

Hispanic and other), urbanicity (3 categories for urban, suburban and rural schools) and state.  We limit 

the CPS sample in each year to households with a related child aged 5 through 18 and a mother present.   

Table 3 reports the R2 for each specification for each year.    Although the traits account for a small share 

of the variance in household income in each year (R2 in the combined model is approximately .22), the 

proportion of variance explained is stable over time.   


 


V.      Results Using SchoolLevel Data to Estimate StudentLevel Parameters 


        Before presenting parameter estimates, we start with a graphical summary of the between

school and withinschool relationships in various years.  Figure 1 reports the results of a locally weighted 

polynomial regression of school mean achievement on mean log income for 4th grade math and reading.   

The solid lines portray the relationship for the first year (1992) and the last year (2015) in our analyses; 

the dashed lines report the relationships for the years between 1992 and 2015.  Upon inspection, the 

relationship is roughly linear in log income.  Moreover, in both subjects--but especially in math--there 

has been a noticeable increase in the intercept and a decline in the slope.   At least in terms of the 

differences in mean achievement between schools, there is no evidence of a sharp steepening of the 

relationship between mean achievement and mean income between schools. 


        Figure 2 reports similar relationships for 8th grade math and reading.   In 4th grade and 8th grade 

math, there were sharp increases in mean achievement for schools at all levels of mean log income in 

math.  Likewise, there were increases in achievement for schools all income levels in 4th grade reading.   

However, in 8th grade reading, the shift was much smaller than in the remaining three grade/subject 
combinations.   In no subjectgrade combination is there evidence of a steepening of the relationship 

mean achievement and mean log income at the school level.   


        Figure 3 reports the trend over time in the intraclass correlation in log income by school.   Using 

the ICC metric, there's been a 20 percent increase in incomebased school segregation over time (from 

.19 to .22.)   Figure 3 is consistent with prior research on incomebased residential segregation.  Using a 

sample of the 100 largest metropolitan areas, Reardon and Bischoff (2011) find that income segregation 

grew rapidly between 1970 and 2000.   (Watson (2009) finds consistent results using a different 

measure of income segregation.)  Owens, Reardon, and Jencks (2016) find that betweendistrict income 

segregation of families with children enrolled in public school increased by over 15% from 1990 to 2010. 

They also find that withindistrict segregation based on students' freelunch status increased by over 

40% between 1990 and 2012. 


        Figure 4 uses schoollevel data to plot the relationship between the withinschool variances in 

achievement and withinschool variances in log income for grade 4 math.   Under the assumption that 

the withinschool slope is the same across schools, the slope of the relationship in Figure 4 should be 

equivalent to the square of the withinschool slope of achievement on log income.  Samplebased 

estimates of variances are inherently noisy, so to summarize the central tendency, we have calculated 

the average variance in achievement and the average variance in income for 20 equalsized bins 

arranged by variance in log income.   We have plotted the mean variance in achievement for each bin 

and then fitted a line.  The relationship does appear to be roughly linear, with an increase in 

achievement variance being approximately proportional to the rise in log income variance.   However, 

there is again no evidence of a steepening slope.   If anything, the slope appears to be declining. 
         Figures 5 through 7 report analogous figures for 4th grade reading as well as 8th grade math and 

reading.   In all cases, the relationship between the variance in achievement and the variance in income 

is either flat or declining. 


         As reported above, there is no evidence of a steepening of the betweenschool relationship 

between mean achievement and mean log income.  It would still be possible for the studentlevel slope 

to rise, if there were a sufficient increase in the ICC (increasing the weight on the betweenschool slope 

which is larger than the withinschool slope) or if the withinschool slope were rising.    However, 

equation (1) lets us bound the magnitude of the improvement one would have to see.    If there has 

been no change in the betweenschool slope and the ICC is roughly .2, a 40 percent increase in the 

overall slope that Reardon (2011) infers would have required a 50 percent increase in the withinschool 

slope. 7    Even if we cannot estimate it precisely, we see no evidence of a 50 percent increase in the 

average withinschool slope.   


         In Tables 4 through 7, we report our estimates of the betweenschool and withinschool slope 

parameters and then use the estimated ICC to reconstruct the studentlevel relationship in each year.  

Table 4 contains our estimates for 4th grade math.   As reported in column (1), between 1992 and 2015, 

our point estimates of the betweenschool slope decline from 27.9 to 20.9, approximately a 25 percent 

decline.  That is a statistically significant difference.   In column (2) we report estimates of the within

school slope parameter. The withinschool coefficient also declines from 14.7 to 7.2.  This decline too is 

statistically significant.     As reported in column (3), the intraclass correlation in ln income, which is a 

measure of incomebased segregation, rises from .19 to .23.  Because the betweenschool slope is larger 

than the withinschool slope, an increase in the ICC would have led to a small increase in the student




                                   
7
  A 50 percent increase in the withinschool slope with respect to log income would have required a more than 
doubling of the slope in Figures 4 through 7, since 1.52=2.25. 
level slope if the between and withinschool coefficients had both remained constant.    However, the 

rise in ICC was not nearly large enough to offset the declining betweenschool and withinschool slope.   


           In column 4, we combine the ICC, the betweenschool slope and the withinschool slope to 

estimate the studentlevel slope parameter.  Our results imply that the studentlevel slope declined 

from 17.2 to 10.3 between 1992 and 2015, a statistically significant difference.   In other words, a 10 

percentage point difference in family income was associated with a 1.7 point higher score in 4th grade 

math (.05 standard deviations) in 1992.8   By 2015, that had declined to 1 point or .03 standard 

deviations.  


           In the remaining columns of Table 4, we report the implied change in mean achievement at the 

10th and 90th percentile of log household income.  (Recall that we do not actually observe any individual 

student at either percentile.  Thus, we are estimating these by plugging in the relevant percentiles of 

household income from March CPS data and using our studentlevel slope and intercept parameters to 

estimate mean achievement.)  Reardon (2011) makes a distinction between the studentlevel slope with 

respect to the level of logincome and the effect of rising inequality (that is, the widening gap in real 

incomes between those at the 10th and 90th percentiles.)   He concludes that most of the change over 

time is due to a steepening in the slope rather than simply a widening gap in real incomes between 

those at the 90th and 10th percentiles.   We also find that the declining slope was a more important 

driver of widening gaps between rich and poor than the widening income distribution itself. To isolate 

these effects, we estimate gaps holding the 10th and 90th percentiles of log income constant at 1990 

levels, thus isolating the effect of the changing relationship between income and achievement. We then 

compare this to the test score gap between students at these percentiles for the year that they took the 




                                       
8
     The standard deviation in 4th grade math was 32 points in the 1992 NAEP. 
NAEP. This estimate combines the effects of the expanding income distribution and the changing 

relationship between income and test scores.   


        In column (5) we report the estimated mean achievement at the 10th percentile of family 

income in 1990. We estimate that there has been a 30.2 point increase in the mean 4th grade NAEP 

score for students from families who had incomes that placed them in 10th percentile in 1990, from 

199.7 to 229.9. This is equivalent to approximately a full standard deviation increase in 4th grade math 

achievement.  


        In column (6) we report the difference between students at the 90th and 10th percentile of 1990 

household income.  Using the estimated slope and intercept for 1992, the gap in achievement from 

students at the 90th and 10th percentile of incomes from 1990 was 35.3 points or 1.1 standard 

deviations.  By 2015, the implied gap at the 90th and 10th percentile of income in 1990 had shrunk to 

21.2 points--or .71 standard deviations.  


        In column (7) we combine the effects of the changing income distribution and the changing 

slope by allowing the 90th and 10th income percentiles to vary by year.   (The 9010 gaps in income were 

widening as incomes were becoming more unequal.)   In 2015, the gaps would have been 2.5 scaled 

score points wider using the 2015 income percentiles rather than the 1990 income percentiles.   In other 

words, the primary driver of the closing of the incomebased achievement gap has been the flattening  

relationship between income and test scores, which has only been partially offset by the widening in the 

income distribution.   


          Tables 5 through 7 report similar estimates for 4th grade reading, 8th grade math and 8th grade 

reading.   In 4th grade reading, we estimated that the variance in achievement had a small negative slope 

with respect to the variance in log incomes in the three latter years--2011, 2013 and 2015.  We 

interpret a negative slope at the boundary constraint of zero.   (Because the estimated slope was 
negative, the square root was not identified.)  However, the betweenschool slope for 4th grade reading 

declined by 7 percent between 1992 and 2015 (from 26.0 to 24.2) and by 22 percent relative to its peak 

in 2002).    As reported in column 7, the difference in predicted achievement at the 90th and 10th 

percentiles of income in each year closed from 42.5 points (1.2 standard deviations) to 12.8 points (.35 

standard deviations). 


        As reported in Table 6, the betweenschool slope with respect to log income declined by 11 

percent in 8th grade math, and the withinschool slope declined by 28 percent from 1990 to 2015.  We 

also estimate that mean 8th grade math achievement at the 10th percentile of household income from 

1990 increased by .7 standard deviations, from 240.2 to 264.5.   Moreover, as reported in column 7, the 

gap in achievement between high and low income students declined from 42.9 to 37.5 points, a 

narrowing of .15 standard deviations.   


        For the early birth cohorts, our estimates of the incomebased achievement gaps are similar in 

magnitude to those reported by Reardon.    For instance, Reardon (2011) reports that size of the 

achievement gap at the 10th and 90th percentile of income was 1 standard deviation for the 1976 cohort.   

In Table 6, we estimate the 9010 gap for the same cohort (the 8th graders in 1990) to be 42.9 scaled 

score points or 1.19 standard deviations in 8th grade math.   However, between the 1976 and 2001 birth 

cohorts, Reardon estimates that the math achievement gap at the 90th and 10th percentiles grew sharply 

from 1 to 1.4 standard deviations, while our estimates suggest that the gap in 8th grade math 

achievement declined from 1.19 standard deviations to 1.01 standard deviations (37.5 points in the 

bottom row of Table 6).   


        Our estimates of the racial achievement gaps also start out comparable:  Reardon estimates that 

the blackwhite gap was .8 standard deviations for the birth cohort of 1976; in the NAEP data, the black

white gap for  8th grade students in 1990 was scores was 34 points, or .94 standard deviations.   
However, unlike with income, our findings on the subsequent changes in the blackwhite achievement 

gap largely correspond with those reported by Reardon.   He finds that the racial achievement gap 

closed from .8 to .7 standard deviations for the birth cohorts born of 1976 and 2001, while the NAEP 

data show the gap closing from .94 to .83 standard deviations over the same period in 8th grade math. 


        Reardon highlighted his finding that gaps in achievement by income and by race appeared to be 

moving in opposite directions: widening by income and closing by race.   It was a puzzle, given the well

established relationship between household income and race.  However, while we find the same 

narrowing of the racial achievement gap, we find no such puzzle:  our results suggest that the income 

gaps were moving in the same direction.    In the next section, we explore further the change over time 

in achievement gaps with other traits correlated with income, such as mother's education.    


VI.     Results Using Imputed Household Income 


        Using the Censusbased measure of schools' mean income and variance, our results above 

suggest that incomebased achievement gaps have been narrowing or stable since 1990, even as mean 

achievement in 4th grade math and reading and 8th grade math have been rising.   In this section, we 

investigate whether there has been any change in the achievement gaps associated with studentlevel 

characteristics available in the NAEP that are correlated with income: race/ethnicity, mother's 

education, urbanicity and state of residence.   We use the March Current Population Survey to estimate 

mean family income for each combination of those traits (as described in equation (5)).    


        In Table 8, we report the coefficients on imputed income using each instrument separately 

(race/ethnicity, mother's education, urbanicity and state) and then combined (using interactions 

between race/ethnicity and mother's education.)   Essentially, by instrumenting for income with the 

student level traits, we are scaling the differentials in achievement associated with each of these traits 

by the magnitude of the associated family income differential from the March CPS.   Of course, if there is 
a direct effect of a given trait on achievement that operates outside of income, we will be overstating 

the impact of income on achievement in each year.  (We are not claiming that these are valid 

instruments without a direct effect.)  However, the trends over time should be consistent with the 

trends in underlying income effects as long as the direct effects of race, mother's education, 

urbanicity/state are constant.  The implied slope with respect to log income for 8th grade math based on 

the race differentials declined by 18 percent between 1990 and 2015, from 51.1 to 42.1.   Similarly, 

using mother's education as the instrument, the implied slope with respect to log income declined by 16 

percent.   Also, using state and urbanicity as the instruments, the implied slope declined by 30 percent, 

from 25.2 to 17.6--largely as many lowincome states closed the gap with respect to higher income 

states.   When we combine all of the measures, the implied slope declined by 13 percent, from 32.9 to 

28.6.   Recall from Table 6, the slope with respect to log income using our schoollevel measures of 

mean and variance in income, declined by 22 percent, from 20.9 to 16.4. 


        In Figure 8, we plot the mean 8th grade math score (from the NAEP) and the mean family income 

(from the March CPS) for each observed combination of race by mother's education by urbanicity by 

state.   To provide a more concrete sense of what we are doing, we call out two specific points:  children 

of Hispanic, high school dropouts from rural New Mexico and children of white collegegraduates from 

suburban New York.   We then estimate the relationship between mean achievement and mean income 

for each of those subgroups.   We report the same relationship in 1990 and 2015.  Among 8th grade 

students, mean achievement rose at all income levels, but particularly for low income groups, with the 

implied relationship between achievement and income flattening. 


        In Figure 8, we also plot the points corresponding to mean achievement and mean income for 

black and white students as a whole.   Reardon (2011) notes that the black and white achievement gap 

narrowed somewhat over the time period in which he estimated that the income slope coefficient rose 

sharply.   He reconciles the two facts by noting that many black families have incomes below the 
median.   In his estimates, the gap in achievement between the 90th and 50th percentile of income 

increased more than the gap between the 50th and 10th income percentile.   However, as we find in 

Figure 8, the narrowing of gaps also seemed to occur between the highest income groups (e.g. the 

children of white, suburban college graduates in suburban New York) and the median household, as well 

as between the lower income groups (e.g. the children of Hispanic high school dropouts in rural New 

Mexico.)  There is no evidence that the slope increased within either income range. 


        In Figure 9, we report analogous results for 8th grade reading.  The time span is somewhat 

different--the first year of 8th grade reading scores in the state trial assessment occurred in 1998.   

Nevertheless, the results are similar to those reported earlier--the slope with respect to income 

remained fairly constant, with no evidence of a sharp widening. 


VII.    Comparing the Coefficients from the Two Methods 


        In Figures 10 and 11, we report the trend in the studentlevel relationships for the two sets of 

estimates in 8th grade math and reading: using the censusderived school income measures and the 

imputed income measures, using race/ethnicity, mother's education, urbanicity and state.  (Recall that 

the imputed income measures are only available in 8th grade.)   The grey lines represent the trend in the 

overall slope (combining the within and betweenschool slopes).   The slope estimates based on imputed 

income are larger than those based on the censusderived school income measures--possibly because 

the coefficients using imputed income are not attenuated by measurement error.   However, the time 

trend is very similar:  a stable slope during much of the 1990s, with a decline starting in 2005.   Although 

the series for 8th grade reading does not start until 1998, the pattern is very similar, with the slopes 

based on imputed income exceeding those based on censusderived income, with both gradually 

declining over time. 
        Above, we highlighted the strong assumption required to estimate the withinschool slope 

coefficient with the censusderived income measure, namely that schools have the same withinschool 

slopes.   As a robustness check, we estimated the betweenschool and withinschool slope coefficients 

using the imputed family income measures.   We wanted to know if we saw the same pattern of 

flattening in both the between school and withinschool coefficients.   We find a similar time trend in 

the withinschool relationships using imputed income as we found with the variance on variance 

regressions:   the withinschool relationships between income and achievement were stable during the 

1990's and declining after 2005.          


 


VII.    Private Schools 


        Thus far, our analysis has been limited to public schools.   Yet, as reported by Murnane and 

Reardon (2018), children in families at the 90th income percentile are roughly 4 times as likely to enroll 

in a private school than students at the 10th percentile of family income (roughly 18 percent versus 4 

percent during the time period we are studying.)   So, the question is, might the rise in the gap in 

achievement by income that Reardon (2011) reported be driven by a sharp widening of the gap in 

achievement between public schools and private schools? 


        There's little reason to believe that our conclusions would be any different if we had been able 

to include studentlevel data on income and achievement from private schools.  In Figure 12, we report 

the trend in achievement for the average public school and the average private school for grade 4 

reading and math.   We also report the achievement of the 90th percentile private school, recognizing 

that highincome families are unlikely to attend the average private school.  For each gradesubject 

combination, the publicprivate gap in mean achievement has been narrowing over time.   In addition, 

the gap between the average public school and the 90th percentile private school has also been 
narrowing. Figure 13 reports similar results for 8th grade students.   Again, there is no evidence of 

widening. 


 

VIII.    Conclusion 


         The ideal data for measuring the change in incomebased achievement gaps would combine a 

consistent measure of student achievement with a reliable measure of each student's parental income 

over a long period of time.   Unfortunately, the federal government has not collected such data.  Thus 

any effort to shed light on changes in incomebased achievement gaps will necessarily involve 

compromises.      


         Reardon (2011) combined surveys from different time periods with different measures of 

academic achievement and different measures of income over time.  Although the methods he uses are 

reasonable, there are obvious hazards in trying to make comparisons over time with measures that are 

so different.  The achievement measures varied in terms of content coverage, age group and reliability.  

The income measures varied as well, containing different numbers of categories, with some reported by 

students and some reported by parents.   


         Our approach to estimating the studentlevel relationship with schoollevel aggregates has its 

own shortcomings.   For instance, we have had to rely on blockgroup boundaries and not actual school 

attendance zones to infer the mean and variance in income in each school.   Although the reliability 

seems not to have changed over time, we know that the Censusbased measures are subject to error.   

Moreover, we have assumed that the withinschool relationship between income and achievement is 
the same across schools in any given year (although our evidence would also be consistent with a 

declining mean slope with random coefficients.)9 


            However, our two sets of findings-- first, using schoollevel aggregates from the Census to 

estimate the studentlevel relationship and, second, scaling the studentlevel traits by differences in 

household income (race/ethnicity, mother's education, urbanicity and state)--are consistent.  In 

contrast, Reardon's finding of sharply widening achievement gaps must be reconciled with the 

narrowing gaps by race/ethnicity, mother's education, urbanicity and state.    


            Reardon (2011) noted the potential anomaly and offered an explanation.   He finds that the 

steepening slopes with respect to income occurred primarily at the top end, for those with above

median income.  He points out that most African American families have incomes below the median.   

However, that explanation cannot reconcile declining gaps for those with high and low levels of 

mother's education, or for those living in high and lowincome states, whose mean incomes span the 

median.    In contrast, the time trend in our estimates of the studentlevel relationships matches very 

well with the time trend for the imputed gaps by race, mother's education, urbanicity and state.  In our 

two approaches to measuring changes in incomebased achievement differentials, there is no difference 

to reconcile.   Using both methods, we find that the incomebased gaps are narrowing in three out of 

four grade/subject combinations we study.   In the remaining grade/subject, 8th grade reading, the 

incomebased gap is constant. 


            In some grades and subjects, the implied achievement gains at the 10th percentile of the family 

income distribution have been remarkable:  a full standard deviation in 4th grade math and .67 standard 

deviation in 8th grade math.   We cannot say how much of the improvement has been due to 

accountability reform, school finance reform or other changes, such as students becoming more 


                                        
9
     This would be true as long as there was not a more than offsetting decline in the variance in coefficients. 
comfortable with standardized testing.   Although the previous literature has suggested that both 

accountability and school finance reforms have had an effect, they have been separate literatures--one 

focused on the effect of accountability laws (e.g. Dee and Jacob (2011), Hanushek and Raymond (2005)) 

and another focused on school finance reforms (Lafortune, Rothstein and Schanzenbach (2018) and 

Jackson, Johnson and Persico (2016)).   However, many of the same states were implementing both 

school finance reforms and accountability at the same time.   In fact, the accountability reforms and the 

school finance reforms were often explicitly linked as a way of ensuring that the additional dollars were 

to be spent well.   In future work, we will be using the estimated shifts in intercepts and slopes of the 

student levelrelationship between achievement and income to sort out the relative effect of different 

reforms in explaining the substantial increases in achievement since 1990. 


        Despite the substantial increases in 4th and 8th grade math and in 4th grade reading achievement, 

Blagg and Chingos (2016) document that such progress has not translated into improved 12th grade 

scores for the same cohorts.   On one hand, the trend in 12th grade NAEP scores--like the trend in SAT 

scores is likely biased downward by the rise in high school graduation rates over time.   On the other 

hand, compulsory schooling laws typically require students to remain enrolled in school until age 16 

and, yet, the scores of U.S. 15 yearolds have essentially been unchanged since 2000 on the OECD's 

Programme in International Student Assessment (PISA).   It is possible that the No Child Left Behind 

Act--which focused on student achievement in grades 3 through 8 and only required schools to test in 

one grade in high school--simply shifted educational investments to earlier grades, affecting the timing 

of learning, rather than improving the stock of math and literacy skills students acquire before entering 

college or the labor market.   Thus, in future work, we will study whether improvements in mean math 

and reading scores in 4th  and 8th grade by state, gender and race/ethnicity translated into improved 

earnings among these same cohorts as adults. 
References:   

Blagg, Kristin and Matthew M. Chingos, "Varsity Blues: Are High School Students Being Left Behind?"   
        Urban Institute Research Report, May 2016 

Bryk, Anthony S., and Stephen W. Raudenbush. Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data 
        analysis methods. Sage Publications, Inc, 1992. 

Currie, Janet and Valentina Duque. "Medicaid: What Does It Do, and Can We Do It Better?" The ANNALS 
         of the American Academy of Political and Social Science (2019) 686(1), 148­179. 

Currie, Janet and Hannes Schwandt. "Inequality in mortality decreased among the young while 
         increasing for older adults, 1990­2010," Science, Vol. 352, No. 6286, April 2016, pp. 708712. 

Dee, Thomas S. and Brian Jacob. "The impact of No Child Left Behind on student achievement." Journal 
       of Policy Analysis and Management (2011) 30(3), 418446. 

Hanushek, Eric A. and Margaret E. Raymond. "Does Accountability Lead to Improved Student 
      Performance?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management (2005) 24, pp. 297327. 

Hanushek, Eric A., Paul E. Peterson, Laura Talpey and Ludger Woessmann. "The Unwavering SES 
      Achievement Gap: Trends in U.S. Student Performance." NBER Working Paper No. 25648, March 
      2019 (Updated March 2020). 

Jackson, C. Kirabo, Rucker C. Johnson and Claudia Persico. "The Effects of School Spending on 
        Educational and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Reforms." The Quarterly 
        Journal of Economics, Volume 131, Issue 1, February 2016, Pages 157­218. 

Lafortune, Julien, Jesse Rothstein and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. "School Finance Reform and the 
        Distribution of Student Achievement." American Economic Journal:  Applied Economics 2018, 
        Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 126. 

Murnane, Richard J. and Sean F. Reardon. "LongTerm Trends in Private School Enrollments by Family 
      Income" AERA Open JanuaryMarch 2018, Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 1­24. 

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. A Roadmap to Reducing Child Poverty 
       Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2019. 

National Center for Education Statistics. (2020). Digest of Education Statistics 2018: Chapter 2  
       Elementary and Secondary Education; 2020 ASI 48242.25005. 

Nielsen, Eric. "The IncomeAchievement Gap and Adult Outcome Inequality." Unpublished paper, 
        Federal Reserve Board, May 13, 2019. 

Owens, Ann, Sean F Reardon, and Christopher Jencks. "Income Segregation Between Schools and School 
       Districts." American Educational Research Journal 53, no. 4 (2016): 1159197. 

Raudenbush, Stephen W. and Anthony S. Bryk. Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data analysis 
      methods. Vol. 1. sage, 2002. 
Reardon, Sean F. "The Widening Academic Achievement Gap Between the Rich and the Poor: New 
       Evidence and Possible Explanations." in Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane (eds.)  Whither 
       Opportunity?   (New York:  Russell Sage Foundation, 2011.) 

Reardon, Sean F, and Kendra Bischoff. "Income Inequality and Income Segregation." AJS; American 
       Journal of Sociology 116, no. 4 (2011): 1092153. 

Saporito, Salvatore and Deenesh Sohoni "Mapping Educational Inequality: Concentrations of Poverty 
        among Poor and Minority Students in Public Schools" Social Forces, Volume 85, Number 3, 
        March 2007. 

Watson, Tara. "Inequality and the Measurement of Residential Segregation by Income." Review of 
       Income and Wealth 55, no. 3 (2009): 82044. 
    Table 1:  NAEP Administration Schedule and State Sample Size



              Year               Grade 4 Reading         Grade 8 Reading         Grade 4 Math            Grade 8 Math
                                Schools Students        Schools Students       Schools Students       Schools Students
              1990                                                                                     2,820     82,270
              1992               3,930        97,470                           4,200        105,030    3,170     95,240
              1994               3,560        97,060
              1996                                                             3,720        95,530    2,900        78,070
              1998               2,980        75,930    2,840        77,110
              2000                                                                                    2,560        67,170
              2002               4,060        115,560   3,840        106,270
              2003               5,000        142,310   4,580        129,690   5,500        160,720   3,920        112,840
              2005               6,280        126,340   5,280        133,870   6,880        143,100   4,570        118,330
              2007               5,280        145,490   5,280        136,790   5,810        164,140   4,500        113,540
              2009               6,460        136,640   5,330        137,730   7,080        140,560   4,500        118,800
              2011               5,580        161,910   5,470        139,260   6,120        172,100   4,610        125,820
              2013               5,500        147,070   5,160        148,880   6,050        156,990   4,410        127,630
              2015               5,250        108,290   4,730        118,870   5,780        118,070   4,010        103,580

      States in our sample               41                     46                     45                     40

    Note: School counts include District of Columbia but excludes Department of Defense Schools, as well as Bureau of 
    Indian's Affairs schools. States were included if they opted out of no more than one available NAEP administration 
    during the period between 1990 and 2002. All counts were rounded to the nearest 10, per IES reporting requirements. 
    Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Main State National Assessment of 
    Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on Mathematics and Reading Assessments.
                                                                                                                              
 
 
 
                                      
Table 2:   Correlation Between CensusDerived School Characteristics and the Common Core of Data

                                                          1990           2000           2009          2011           2013           2015
Percent of Students Receiving FRPL
    Correlation between CCD and Estimate                   N.A.         0.715          0.669          0.655          0.694         0.690
    Coefficient on Estimate in Predicting CCD              N.A.         1.042          0.938          0.890          0.926         0.918
    N                                                                  60,860         74,930         76,400         76,130        75,820

Proportion of Students Black (including BlackHispanic)
   Correlation between CCD and Estimate                 0.853           0.903          0.900          0.899          0.901         0.898
   Coefficient on Estimate in Predicting CCD            0.915           0.976          0.977          0.955          0.952         0.957
   N                                                   59,470          67,970         76,610         76,770         76,630        76,560

Proportion of Students White
   Correlation between CCD and Estimate                   0.828         0.859          0.912          0.914          0.914         0.913
   Coefficient on Estimate in Predicting CCD              1.006         1.053          0.982          0.966          0.963         0.967
   N                                                     60,796        67,972         76,607         76,773         76,630        76,564

Total # Schools in CCD                                   68,300        69,790         76,610         76,780         76,630        76,560

Note: 52% schools are missing FRPL information in the CCD in 1990, 13% are missing in 2000, and less than 2% are missing in 2009 and 
beyond. The CCD and Census handle race/ethnicity differently. For both datasets, the Black category includes both Black Hispanics and Black 
nonHispanics. In the CCD, the white category always includes both white Hispanics and white nonHispanics. The Census data codes both 
white Hispanics and white nonHispanics as "white" in 1990 and 2000. From 2009 on, our Censusbased estimates include only white non
Hispanics, but are still compared to the CCD proportions which include white Hispanics as well.
Table 3:   R2   for FirstStage Imputations of Household Income Using CPS




              Year                                R2                          CPS Sample Size
              1990                              0.268                             32,826
              1991                              0.256                             33,079
              1992                              0.267                             32,230
              1993                              0.271                             32,203
              1994                              0.287                             31,879
              1995                              0.258                             31,910
              1996                              0.250                             28,287
              1997                              0.256                             28,486
              1998                              0.259                             28,513
              1999                              0.260                             28,704
              2000                              0.255                             28,695
              2001                              0.235                             53,812
              2002                              0.246                             53,339
              2003                              0.249                             52,741
              2004                              0.243                             51,707
              2005                              0.235                             50,644
              2006                              0.247                             49,797
              2007                              0.260                             48,738
              2008                              0.256                             48,067
              2009                              0.252                             47,938
              2010                              0.261                             47,689
              2011                              0.277                             45,764
              2012                              0.261                             44,794
              2013                              0.268                             45,118
              2014                              0.243                             44,154
              2015                              0.240                             43,660

Note: In columns 2 and 3, each row presents the R2 and sample size for a separate regression 
predicting income in the CPS data in that year.
Table 4:  Reconstructing the Relationship Between Student Achievement and Income using SchoolLevel Aggregates (4 th Grade Math)

                                                                                      Using 1990 Income              Using Actual 
                                                                                          Percentiles                Percentiles
                                                                                                 Predicted            Predicted 
                 Between         Within                         Implied            Predicted  Difference at          Difference at        Difference 
                  School         School                        Student           Score at 10th  90th vs. 10th        90th vs. 10th         between 
    Year           Slope          Slope            ICCY       Level Slope            Pctile        Pctile                Pctile           (6) and (7)
                     (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)                 (5)            (6)                 (7)                  (8)

    1990

                  27.898          14.671                        17.204
    1992                                          0.191                             199.699         35.313              36.314               1.001
                  (0.616)         (1.301)                       (1.067)

    1994

                  28.579          13.525                        16.414
    1996                                          0.192                             203.824         33.693              34.760               1.068
                  (0.669)         (1.442)                       (1.184)

    1998

    2000

    2002

                  25.626          10.274                        13.517
    2003                                          0.211                             218.987         27.746              28.338               0.593
                  (0.415)         (1.043)                       (0.835)
                  23.270           9.321                        12.315
    2005                                          0.215                             223.702         25.279              26.464               1.185
                  (0.364)         (1.221)                       (0.971)
                  23.182           6.715                        10.364
    2007                                          0.222                             227.802         21.274              22.420               1.146
                  (0.364)         (1.669)                       (1.313)
                  23.240           7.925                        11.453
    2009                                          0.230                             226.626         23.508              24.827               1.319
                  (0.339)         (1.174)                       (0.911)
                  21.834           7.438                        10.736
    2011                                          0.229                             228.747         22.036              24.282               2.245
                  (0.331)         (1.152)                       (0.896)
                  21.353           6.178                         9.643
    2013                                          0.228                             231.657         19.793              22.032               2.238
                  (0.325)         (1.346)                       (1.045)
                  20.861           7.179                        10.326
    2015                                          0.230                             229.925         21.196              23.663               2.467
                  (0.370)         (1.327)                       (1.029)


Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various 
years 1990 on Mathematics and Reading Assessments. Mean and variance of income were derived from 1990 and 2000 Decennial Censuses, and the 
American Communities Survey from the Bureau of the Census. Income percentiles were calculated based on data of households with school aged 
children from IPUMSCPS, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org.
 
Table 5:  Reconstructing the Relationship Between Student Achievement and Income using SchoolLevel Aggregates (4 th Grade Reading)


                                                                                     Using 1990 Income              Using Actual 
                                                                                         Percentiles                Percentiles
                                                                                                Predicted            Predicted 
                 Between         Within                        Implied            Predicted  Difference at          Difference at        Difference 
                  School         School                        Student          Score at 10th  90th vs. 10th        90th vs. 10th         between 
    Year           Slope          Slope            ICCY       Level Slope           Pctile        Pctile                Pctile           (6) and (7)
                     (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)               (5)            (6)                 (7)                  (8)

    1990

                  26.024          18.734                          20.130
    1992                                          0.191                            192.756         41.320              42.490               1.171
                  (0.752)         (1.254)                         (1.042)
                  29.858          21.867                          23.389
    1994                                          0.190                            186.157         48.009              51.715               3.707
                  (0.858)         (1.692)                         (1.413)

    1996

                  29.774          18.770                          20.934
    1998                                          0.197                            189.906         42.970              44.751               1.780
                  (0.833)         (1.719)                         (1.431)

    2000

                  30.964          11.720                          15.753
    2002                                          0.210                            198.972         32.336              33.043               0.706
                  (0.608)         (1.919)                         (1.537)
                  29.623          13.060                          16.560
    2003                                          0.211                            197.630         33.991              34.717               0.726
                  (0.538)         (1.660)                         (1.330)
                  27.082           8.229                          12.276
    2005                                          0.215                            203.387         25.198              26.379               1.181
                  (0.461)         (2.338)                         (1.858)
                  26.603           5.576                          10.236
    2007                                          0.222                            207.934         21.011              22.142               1.132
                  (0.466)         (3.437)                         (2.698)
                  25.948           4.830                           9.695
    2009                                          0.230                            208.432         19.901              21.018               1.116
                  (0.421)         (3.523)                         (2.731)
                  24.819             0*                            5.685
    2011                                          0.229                            213.623         11.669              12.858               1.189
                  (0.415)         (0.000)                         (0.093)
                  24.960             0*                            5.700
    2013                                          0.228                            214.823         11.699              13.023               1.323
                  (0.413)         (0.000)                         (0.092)
                  24.236             0*                            5.574
    2015                                          0.230                            215.594         11.442              12.774               1.332
                  (0.435)         (0.000)                         (0.098)

*Assigned to boundary of 0 because point estimate was negative.
Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various 
years 1990 on Mathematics and Reading Assessments. Mean and variance of income were derived from 1990 and 2000 Decennial Censuses, and the 
American Communities Survey from the Bureau of the Census. Income percentiles were calculated based on data of households with school aged 
children from IPUMSCPS, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org.
                                                                                                                                                          
 
 
                                             
Table 6:  Reconstructing the Relationship Between Student Achievement and Income using SchoolLevel Aggregates (8 th Grade Math)

                                                                                     Using 1990 Income               Using Actual 
                                                                                         Percentiles                 Percentiles
                                                                                                 Predicted            Predicted 
                 Between         Within                        Implied             Predicted  Difference at          Difference at        Difference 
                  School         School                        Student           Score at 10th  90th vs. 10th        90th vs. 10th         between 
    Year           Slope          Slope            ICCY       Level Slope            Pctile        Pctile                Pctile           (6) and (7)
                     (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)                 (5)            (6)                  (7)                (8)
                  29.079          18.913                        20.890
    1990                                          0.194                             240.231         42.880               42.880              0.000
                  (0.780)         (1.500)                       (1.217)
                  32.067          20.441                        22.668
    1992                                          0.191                             242.037         46.529               47.847              1.318
                  (0.768)         (1.418)                       (1.151)
    1994
                  33.978          20.094                        22.759
    1996                                          0.192                             244.807         46.716               48.196              1.480
                  (1.035)         (1.709)                       (1.411)
    1998
                  33.439          19.709                        22.579
    2000                                          0.209                             247.418         46.347               47.201              0.853
                  (1.002)         (2.188)                       (1.778)
    2002
                  32.455          16.812                        20.117
    2003                                          0.211                             253.177         41.293               42.175              0.882
                  (0.661)         (1.448)                       (1.155)
                  30.370          18.997                        21.439
    2005                                          0.215                             253.001         44.006               46.069              2.063
                  (0.647)         (1.144)                       (0.905)
                  28.264          15.473                        18.308
    2007                                          0.222                             259.483         37.579               39.603              2.024
                  (0.609)         (1.469)                       (1.147)
                  28.728          16.170                        19.063
    2009                                          0.230                             260.268         39.129               41.324              2.195
                  (0.639)         (1.154)                       (0.895)
                  25.717          12.750                        15.720
    2011                                          0.229                             265.423         32.268               35.556              3.288
                  (0.642)         (1.381)                       (1.064)
                  25.890          13.253                        16.139
    2013                                          0.228                             266.508         33.127               36.873              3.746
                  (0.545)         (1.191)                       (0.924)
                  25.818          13.526                        16.353
    2015                                          0.230                             264.489         33.568               37.475              3.907
                  (0.588)         (1.229)                       (0.952)


Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various 
years 1990 on Mathematics and Reading Assessments. Mean and variance of income were derived from 1990 and 2000 Decennial Censuses, and the 
American Communities Survey from the Bureau of the Census. Income percentiles were calculated based on data of households with school aged 
children from IPUMSCPS, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org.
                                                                                                                                                          
Table 7:  Reconstructing the Relationship Between Student Achievement and Income using SchoolLevel Aggregates (8 th Grade Reading)

                                                                                     Using 1990 Income               Using Actual 
                                                                                         Percentiles                 Percentiles
                                                                                                 Predicted            Predicted 
                 Between         Within                        Implied             Predicted  Difference at          Difference at        Difference 
                  School         School                        Student           Score at 10th  90th vs. 10th        90th vs. 10th         between 
    Year           Slope          Slope            ICCY       Level Slope            Pctile        Pctile                Pctile           (6) and (7)
                     (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)                 (5)            (6)                  (7)                (8)
    1990

    1992

    1994

    1996
                  24.526          15.025                        16.894
    1998                                          0.197                             242.201         34.676               36.113              1.437
                  (0.861)         (2.537)                       (2.090)
    2000
                  25.457          16.583                        18.443
    2002                                          0.210                             241.614         37.857               38.685              0.827
                  (0.652)         (1.474)                       (1.182)
                  27.241          12.816                        15.864
    2003                                          0.211                             243.447         32.562               33.258              0.695
                  (0.614)         (1.885)                       (1.512)
                  24.529          14.479                        16.637
    2005                                          0.215                             241.632         34.149               35.750              1.601
                  (0.570)         (1.469)                       (1.170)
                  24.176          10.047                        13.179
    2007                                          0.222                             246.477         27.051               28.508              1.457
                  (0.552)         (2.024)                       (1.589)
                  23.661           9.975                        13.128
    2009                                          0.230                             247.881         26.947               28.459              1.512
                  (0.530)         (1.766)                       (1.367)
                  22.435           8.975                        12.058
    2011                                          0.229                             250.648         24.751               27.273              2.522
                  (0.577)         (1.756)                       (1.362)
                  22.982           8.904                        12.119
    2013                                          0.228                             253.448         24.876               27.689              2.813
                  (0.501)         (1.566)                       (1.221)
                  22.292           6.915                        10.452
    2015                                          0.230                             253.432         21.453               23.951              2.497
                  (0.525)         (2.155)                       (1.670)


Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various 
years 1990 on Mathematics and Reading Assessments. Mean and variance of income were derived from 1990 and 2000 Decennial Censuses, and the 
American Communities Survey from the Bureau of the Census. Income percentiles were calculated based on data of households with school aged 
children from IPUMSCPS, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org.
                                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 8:  The Relationship Between Achievement and Alternative Ways of
Imputing Income (8 th Grade Math)

                                    Instruments Used
                                                                Race*Moth ed, 
                                Mother's      Urbanicity and      Urbanicity, 
   Year     Race/ Ethnicity     Education         State              State
                51.091           28.458          25.156             32.883
  1990
                (0.804)          (0.518)         (1.131)            (0.459)
                51.602           26.848          28.489             33.683
  1992
                (0.892)          (0.560)         (1.607)            (0.543)

  1994

                47.946           26.010           27.243            33.778
  1996
                (1.027)          (0.602)          (1.383)           (0.544)

  1998

                50.154           25.915           20.473            33.633
  2000
                (1.446)          (1.120)          (1.607)           (0.963)

  2002

                48.341           23.664           16.696            31.144
  2003
                (0.642)          (0.453)          (1.358)           (0.362)
                47.539           24.551           14.555            32.831
  2005
                (0.569)          (0.391)          (1.123)           (0.364)
                43.961           24.093            9.497            29.417
  2007
                (0.605)          (0.382)          (1.234)           (0.352)
                44.560           23.954           14.206            28.380
  2009
                (0.617)          (0.460)          (1.053)           (0.394)
                39.734           22.796           16.332            27.399
  2011
                (0.639)          (0.433)          (1.014)           (0.370)
                40.226           23.343           13.753            27.636
  2013
                (0.532)          (0.391)          (1.061)           (0.309)
                42.141           23.999           17.552            28.606
  2015
                (0.685)          (0.389)          (1.335)           (0.356)

Note: Each column reports the slope of a regession of student test score on 
income with income imputed using the variables indicated at the top of the 
column.
Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, 
National Center for Education Statistics, Main State National Assessment of 
Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on 8th Grade Mathematics 
Assessments. Imputed income based on data from IPUMSCPS, University of 
Minnesota, www.ipums.org.                                                         
Table 9:  The Within and BetweenSchool Relationship Between Achievement and 
Imputed Income (8th Grade Math)


               Beween           Within                   Student    Number 
                School          School                    Level        of         Number 
   Year          Slope           Slope         ICCY       Slope     Students      of Schools
                37.388          27.129                   32.880
  1990                                        0.464                       
                                                                         69,000            
                                                                                          2,630
                (0.875)         (0.557)                  (0.459)
                45.851          24.050                   33.680
  1992                                        0.405                       
                                                                         73,770            
                                                                                          2,820
                (0.848)         (0.467)                  (0.543)

  1994

                46.691          23.155                   33.780
  1996                                        0.416                       
                                                                         62,380            
                                                                                          2,670
                (0.886)         (0.497)                  (0.544)

  1998

                51.261          21.826                   33.630
  2000                                        0.370                       
                                                                         55,140            
                                                                                          2,400
                (1.123)         (0.650)                  (0.963)

  2002

                52.476          21.679                   31.140
  2003                                        0.336                       
                                                                         93,250            
                                                                                          3,640
                (0.811)         (0.401)                  (0.362)
                51.602          23.066                   32.830
  2005                                        0.337                    
                                                                      104,890              
                                                                                          4,420
                (0.768)         (0.322)                  (0.364)
                44.317          21.027                   29.420
  2007                                        0.353                       
                                                                         97,470            
                                                                                          4,230
                (0.715)         (0.332)                  (0.352)
                42.768          20.763                   28.380
  2009                                        0.388                    
                                                                      100,940              
                                                                                          4,220
                (0.649)         (0.391)                  (0.394)
                42.161          19.770                   27.400
  2011                                        0.376                    
                                                                      106,690              
                                                                                          4,350
                (0.614)         (0.375)                  (0.370)
                41.857          20.120                   27.640
  2013                                        0.379                    
                                                                      106,600              
                                                                                          4,150
                (0.623)         (0.371)                  (0.309)
                43.788          19.544                   28.610
  2015                                        0.389                       
                                                                         88,690            
                                                                                          3,840
                (0.669)         (0.422)                  (0.356)


Note: Column 1 was estimated using mean achievement and mean imputed income by 
school.  Income was imputed based on the interaction between race and mother's 
education as well as dummies for urbanicity and state. Column 2 was calculated regressing 
students' NAEP score on their imputed income and including school fixed effects. Column 
3 was estimated with school random effects and imputed income as the outcome.
Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for 
Education Statistics, Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) 
various years 1990 on 8th Grade Mathematics Assessments. Imputed income based on data 
from IPUMSCPS, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org.
                                                                                                   
Table 10:  The Relationship Between Achievement and Alternative Ways of 
Imputing Income (8 th Grade Reading)


                                    Instruments Used
                                                                Race*Moth ed, 
                                Mother's      Urbanicity and      Urbanicity, 
   Year     Race/ Ethnicity     Education         State             State

  1990

  1992

  1994

  1996

                36.667           21.220           16.504            26.354
  1998
                (1.122)          (0.550)          (1.626)           (0.609)

  2000

                40.628           22.157           12.523            27.243
  2002
                (0.869)          (0.497)          (1.213)           (0.499)
                40.576           22.290           13.460            27.711
  2003
                (0.702)          (0.337)          (1.177)           (0.376)
                40.790           21.131           15.200            27.983
  2005
                (0.503)          (0.279)          (1.177)           (0.284)
                38.972           21.535            8.372            25.969
  2007
                (0.533)          (0.338)          (1.079)           (0.326)
                39.532           21.228           15.880            25.257
  2009
                (0.606)          (0.367)          (0.931)           (0.379)
                34.939           20.642           19.220            24.302
  2011
                (0.464)          (0.384)          (0.943)           (0.335)
                35.685           20.848           15.117            24.686
  2013
                (0.553)          (0.350)          (1.028)           (0.328)
                37.828           20.912           16.746            24.648
  2015
                (0.646)          (0.447)          (1.113)           (0.386)

Note: Each column reports the slope of a regession of student test score on
income with income imputed using the variables indicated at the top of the 
column.
Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, 
National Center for Education Statistics, Main State National Assessment of 
Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on 8th Grade Reading 
Assessments. Imputed income based on data from IPUMSCPS, University of 
Minnesota, www.ipums.org.                                                         
Table 11:  The Within and BetweenSchool Relationship Between Achievement and 
Imputed Income (8th Grade Reading)

               Beween             Within                    Student     Number 
                School            School                     Level         of            Number 
   Year          Slope             Slope           ICCY      Slope      Students        of Schools

  1990

  1992

  1994

  1996

                36.031             19.61                     26.354
  1998                                            0.382                          
                                                                                2,620         
                                                                                             62,270
                (0.823)           (0.466)                    (0.609)
  2000

                41.873             19.31                     27.243
  2002                                            0.332                          
                                                                                3,570         
                                                                                             87,460
                (0.780)           (0.412)                    (0.499)
                46.527             19.07                     27.711
  2003                                            0.322                          
                                                                                4,290      
                                                                                          108,230
                (0.740)           (0.367)                    (0.376)
                43.912             19.47                     27.983
  2005                                            0.324                          
                                                                                5,090      
                                                                                          117,880
                (0.695)           (0.303)                    (0.284)
                41.302             18.18                     25.969
  2007                                            0.332                          
                                                                                4,990      
                                                                                          117,510
                (0.648)           (0.301)                    (0.326)
                38.054             17.82                     25.257
  2009                                            0.375                          
                                                                                5,030      
                                                                                          116,330
                (0.558)           (0.362)                    (0.379)
                38.989             17.60                     24.302
  2011                                            0.361                          
                                                                                5,170      
                                                                                          117,460
                (0.534)           (0.341)                    (0.335)
                39.283             17.47                     24.686
  2013                                            0.364                          
                                                                                4,870      
                                                                                          123,650
                (0.530)           (0.321)                    (0.328)
                37.821             16.66                     24.648
  2015                                            0.379                          
                                                                                4,530      
                                                                                          101,040
                (0.588)           (0.365)                    (0.386)

Note: Column 1 was estimated using mean achievement and mean imputed income by school.  
Income was imputed based on the interaction between race and mother's education as well as 
dummies for urbanicity and state. Column 2 was calculated regressing students' NAEP score on 
their imputed income and including school fixed effects. Column 3 was estimated with school 
random effects and imputed income as the outcome.
Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for 
Education Statistics, Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various 
years 1990 on 8th Grade Reading Assessments. Imputed income based on data from IPUMS
CPS, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org.
                                                                                                       
Figure 1:  NonParametric Relationship Between School Mean Achievement and Mean Log Income by Year 
(4th Grade Math and Reading) 




                                                                                               




                                                                                                  
Note: Each line represents a separate lowess regression run at the school level. Schoollevel weighted averages 
are calculated using NAEP's studentlevel weights. Schools with scores or estimated income in the top or 
bottom 5% of the distribution are excluded. Schools with estimated income variance in the top 5% of the 
distribution are also excluded. Sample is limited to consistent state sample (see Data section for details). 
 

Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on Mathematics and 
Reading Assessments. Mean household income data are constructed using data from the U.S. Bureau of the 
Census. 
Figure 2:  NonParametric Relationship Between School Mean Achievement and Mean Log Income by Year 
(8th Grade Math and Reading) 




                                                                                               




                                                                                                  
Note: Each line represents a separate lowess regression run at the school level. Schoollevel weighted averages 
are calculated using NAEP's studentlevel weights. Schools with scores or estimated income in the top or 
bottom 5% of the distribution are excluded. Schools with estimated income variance in the top 5% of the 
distribution are also excluded. Sample is limited to consistent state sample (see Data section for details). 
 

Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on Mathematics and 
Reading Assessments. Mean household income data are constructed using data from the U.S. Bureau of the 
Census. 
 
 
 
Figure 3:  IntraClass Correlation in School Household Income by Year 




                                                                                                   
Note: ICC is calculated using means and variances of school household income calculated from census data. 
Schools whose variance fell above the 97th percentile were excluded from this calculation. 
 
                                 
Figure 4:  WithinSchool Variance in Achievement by Variance in Log Income by Year (Binned Averages, 4th 
Grade Math, 1992 and 2015) 




                                                                                               




                                                                                               
Note: Each point is a binned average of schoollevel data. Bin averages were weighted by the number of student 
scores in each school. Schools with estimated income variance in the top 5% of the distribution are excluded. 
Sample is limited to consistent state sample (see Data section for details). 
 

Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on Mathematics and 
Reading Assessments. The variance in ln income in each school was estimated using data from the U.S. Bureau 
of the Census. 
                                 
Figure 5:  WithinSchool Variance in Achievement by Variance in Log Income By Year (Binned Averages, 4th 
Grade Reading, 1992 and 2015) 




                                                                                               




                                                                                               
Note: Each point is a binned average of schoollevel data. Bin averages were weighted by the number of student 
scores in each school. Schools with estimated income variance in the top 5% of the distribution are excluded. 
Sample is limited to consistent state sample (see Data section for details). 
 

Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on Mathematics and 
Reading Assessments. The variance in ln income in each school was estimated using data from the U.S. Bureau 
of the Census. 
                                 
Figure 6:  WithinSchool Variance in Achievement by Variance in Log Income by Year (Binned Averages, 8th 
Grade Math, 1990 and 2015) 




                                                                                               




                                                                                               
Note: Each point is a binned average of schoollevel data. Bin averages were weighted by the number of student 
scores in each school. Schools with estimated income variance in the top 5% of the distribution are excluded. 
Sample is limited to consistent state sample (see Data section for details). 
 

Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on Mathematics and 
Reading Assessments. The variance in ln income in each school was estimated using data from the U.S. Bureau 
of the Census. 
                                 
Figure 7:  WithinSchool Variance in Achievement by Variance in Log Income by Year (Binned Averages, 8th 
Grade Reading, 1998 and 2015) 




                                                                                               




                                                                                               
Note: Each point is a binned average of schoollevel data. Bin averages were weighted by the number of student 
scores in each school. Schools with estimated income variance in the top 5% of the distribution are excluded. 
Sample is limited to consistent state sample (see Data section for details). 
 

Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on Mathematics and 
Reading Assessments. The variance in ln income in each school was estimated using data from the U.S. Bureau 
of the Census. 
                                 
Figure 8:  Mean Test Scores and Ln Incomes by Race, Mother's Education, Urbanicity and State Subgroup (8th 
grade Math) 
 




                                                                                                                  
 
Note:  Each point represents the mean NAEP score and mean ln income for a subgroup defined by race, 
mother's education, urbanicity and state, weighted by the inverse of students' probability of being selected, 
adjusted for nonresponse. 
 

Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on 8th Grade Mathematics 
Assessments. Imputed income based on data from IPUMSCPS, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org. 
 
                                 
Figure 9:  Mean Test Scores and Ln Incomes by Race, Mother's Education, Urbanicity and State Subgroup (8th 
grade Reading) 
 




                                                                                                                
 
Note: Each point represents the mean NAEP score and mean ln income for a subgroup defined by race, 
mother's education, urbanicity and state, weighted by the inverse of students' probability of being selected, 
adjusted for nonresponse. 
 
Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on 8th Grade Mathematics 
Assessments. Imputed income based on data from IPUMSCPS, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org. 
 
                                 
Figure 10:  Comparing Estimates Based on Neighborhood Incomes and Imputed StudentLevel Income (8th 
Grade Math) 




                                                                                  




                                                                                                          
 
Note: The line graphs are portraying the estimated coefficient of NAEP scaled score on log household income. 
The censusbased estimates use the mean and variance in log household income in Census tracts near the 
schools. The CPSimputed estimates use the March Current Population Survey to impute household income 
based on studentlevel characteristics found in the NAEP: race/ethnicity, mother's education, urbanicity, and 
state. 
 

Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on 8th Grade Mathematics 
Assessments. Mean household income data are constructed using data from the U.S. Bureau of the Census or 
imputed based on data from IPUMSCPS, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org. 
 
                                 
Figure 11:  Comparing Estimates Based on Neighborhood Incomes and Imputed StudentLevel Income (8th 
Grade Reading) 




                                                                                  




                                                                                                           
                                                         
Note: The line graphs are portraying the estimated coefficient of NAEP scaled score on log household income. 
The censusbased estimates use the mean and variance in log household income in Census tracts near the 
schools. The CPSimputed estimates use the March Current Population Survey to impute household income 
based on studentlevel characteristics found in the NAEP: race/ethnicity, mother's education, urbanicity, and 
state. 
 

Source: Student test score data are from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Main State National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on 8th Grade Reading 
Assessments. Mean household income data are constructed using data from the U.S. Bureau of the Census or 
imputed based on data from IPUMSCPS, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org. 
 
                                 
Figure 12:  Trend in Achievement in Private Schools (Grade 4) 




                                                                                               




                                                                                               
                                                         
Note: For each school type, schoollevel weighted averages are calculated using NAEP's studentlevel weights. 
The average and 90th percentile of these schoollevel estimates are plotted for each year where school type is 
available. 
 

Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Main State National Assessment 
of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on Reading and Mathematics Assessments. 
Figure 13:  Trend in Achievement in Private Schools (Grade 8) 




                                                                                               




                                                                                               
                                                         
Note: For each school type, schoollevel weighted averages are calculated using NAEP's studentlevel weights. 
The average and 90th percentile of these schoollevel estimates are plotted for each year where school type is 
available. 
 

Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Main State National Assessment 
of Educational Progress (NAEP) various years 1990 on Reading and Mathematics Assessments. 

 
 
