JUDGE PEER EFFECTS IN THE COURTHOUSE


             Ozkan Eren
            Naci H. Mocan

        WORKING PAPER 27713
                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     JUDGE PEER EFFECTS IN THE COURTHOUSE

                                        Ozkan Eren
                                       Naci H. Mocan

                                     Working Paper 27713
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27713


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         August 2020, Revised November 2020




Data used in this study were provided by the Louisiana Office of Juvenile Justice. Access was
provided by Louisiana State University. We thank Janet Currie, Kevin Lang, Adriana Lleras-
Muney, Bentley Macleod, Marco Gonzalez- Navarro, Isaac Sorkin and the participants of the 6th
Economics of Litigation Workshop in Granada, Spain, and the Gender and Economics Workshop
at the University of Luxembourg for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ozkan Eren and Naci H. Mocan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Judge Peer Effects in the Courthouse
Ozkan Eren and Naci H. Mocan
NBER Working Paper No. 27713
August 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. D9,D91,J16,J71,K4,K41

                                         ABSTRACT

Although there exists a large literature analyzing whether an individual's peers have an impact on
that individual's own behavior and subsequent outcomes, there is paucity of research on whether
peers influence a person's decisions and judgments regarding a third party. We investigate
whether consequential decisions made by judges are impacted by the gender composition of these
judges' peer group. We utilize the universe of decisions on juvenile defendants in each
courthouse in Louisiana between 1998 and 2012. Leveraging random assignment of cases to
judges, and variations in judge peer composition generated by elections, retirements, deaths and
resignations, we show that an increase in the proportion of female peers in the courthouse causes
a rise in individual judges' propensity to incarcerate, and an increase in the assigned sentence
length. This effect is fully driven by female judges. We also demonstrate that the impact of
proportion of female peers is not a proxy for other peer characteristics such as race and age.
Further analysis suggests that this behavior of female judges is unlikely to be a reflection of an
effort to conform to evolving norms of judicial stringency, measured by peers' harshness in
sentencing, but that it is due to the sheer exposure to female colleagues.


Ozkan Eren
Department of Economics
University of California, Riverside
Sproul Hall
Riverside, CA 92521
ozkan.eren@ucr.edu

Naci H. Mocan
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
2439 BEC
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
and NBER
mocan@lsu.edu
1        Introduction

How does the behavior of an individual change as the attributes of his/her peers are altered? This is

an important question both for scienti...c inquiry and for designing strategies to improve performance and

productivity. The analysis of peer e¤ects, however, is complicated because in most circumstances people are

not assigned to a particular group of peers, nor do they choose their peers randomly. Rather, individuals

associate themselves with their peers deliberately. Homophily, the tendency of individuals to choose their

peers who share common attributes with them, creates the well-known selection problem (Manski 1993;

Mo¢ t 2001; Sacerdote 2001). This makes it di¢ cult to identify the inuence of the group on an individual

who is associated with that group.1

        Researchers tackled this issue by exploiting circumstances in which assignment to peer groups is arguably

random. The most well-studied peer group e¤ect pertains to students because random assignment to peer

groups is a fairly common occurrence in case of students (e.g., Sacerdote 2001; Whitmore 2005; Carell et al.

2013). Recent literature expanded the analysis of peer e¤ects to other domains. For example, it has been

investigated whether exposure to more productive co-workers has an impact on workers'own productivity

(Falk and Ichino 2006; Mas and Moretti 2009; Bandiera et al. 2010; Cornelissen et al. 2017). Individuals

are shown to be more likely to take paternity leave if a co-worker was exogenously induced to take up leave

(Dahl et al. 2014). Soldiers in the U.S. Army engage in higher rates of misconduct when they are randomly

assigned to peers who have criminal backgrounds (Murphy 2019).

        It is important to investigate whether an individual'
                                                            s own behavior, such as e¤ort and productivity, as well

as the pursuing outcome (e.g., test scores and wages) are inuenced by his/her peers. It is, however, equally

important to analyze whether decisions that impact an outside party are inuenced by the composition of

decision-makers'peers. In this paper we investigate whether consequential decisions made by judges about

defendants in a courtroom are impacted by a particular attribute of these judges'peer group. Speci...cally,

    1
    The other major identi...cation issue, referred to as the endogeneity or the reection problem, stems from the fact that it is
often di¢ cult to separate the impact of the peer group on the individual from the impact of the individual on the peer group
(Manski 1993).



                                                                1
we focus on judicial decisions made about juvenile defendants, and we investigate how judges'incarceration

and sentencing decisions are impacted by the gender composition of their peers in the courthouse. The

decisions we analyze are solo-bench decisions; i.e., they are made by individual judges during bench trials in

these judges'courtrooms.2

      A line of previous research has addressed a similar question, but this research has focused on decisions

made by a panel of individuals, and reported conicting results. For example, it has been shown that

an increase in the share of female evaluators on the panel has no impact on the promotion chances to

Associate/Full Professorship of female candidates in Italy and Spain (Bagues et al. 2017). On the other

hand, De Paola and Scoppa (2017) reported that promotion of females is less likely if the panel consists

of exclusively males, but that the gender gap disappears if there is one female member of a ...ve-member

panel. Basques and Esteve-Volart (2010) analyzed the recruitment procedure to the four main Corps of the

Spanish Judiciary and found that a female candidate is less likely to be hired if the committee's share of

female evaluators gets larger. In contrast, Anwar et al. (2012) reported that in Florida black defendants are

more likely to be found guilty by a jury if the jury pool contains only white individuals.

      As summarized by Kastellec (2013), peer e¤ects on panel decisions can emerge through three primary

mechanisms. First, if a panel is composed of diverse set of individuals with di¤erent backgrounds and

experiences, each one can approach the matter in front of them di¤erently, which allows them to make

di¤erent interpretations and reach di¤erent conclusions. Deliberations during this process can allow the

numerical majority members of a panel to be persuaded by a member who is in numerical minority (e.g.

two members of the panel being persuaded by the third member). Second, voting strategy on a panel is

important because in most settings, and especially in judicial decisions, members of the panel may prefer to

avoid casting dissenting votes. This "dissent aversion" can be used by the members of the panel to bargain

and gain concession to sway the decision of the panel (Posner 1983). Third, exposure to a peer (the sheer

presence of a peer with a particular attribute) can impact the behavior of other members of the panel.

  2
      Put di¤erently, there is no involvement of a jury, or of any other judge regarding the decisions made on the case.




                                                                 2
For example, Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia said about Justice Thurgood Marshall, the ...rst black

member of the Supreme Court, that "Marshall could be a persuasive force just by sitting there. He wouldn't

have to open his mouth to a¤ect the nature of the conference and how seriously the conference would take

the matters of race." (Liptak 2009).

       It is a di¢ cult task to disentangle these various components that constitute the primary mechanism(s)

behind the peer e¤ect on decisions made by a panel. In contrast, in our study judges make solo decisions.

That is, they do not involve in deliberations about their case with their peer judges, and they carry the sole

responsibility of their decisions. Similarly, peer e¤ects stemming from voting strategy and dissent aversion

are not relevant in solo decisions. Thus, we isolate the e¤ect of similarity/diversity; i.e., the impact of

exposure to peers "who are similar or di¤erent."

       We estimate the e¤ect of peer composition o¤ of the within-judge variation over time, and exploit

movements of peers in and out of courthouse for identi...cation. The composition of judges in a courthouse

changes due to departure of judges for such reasons as retirement, resignation and death, and because of

arrivals of newly elected judges.3 Although random assignment of juvenile case ...les to judges (as discussed

in detail below) alleviates concerns about confounding factors, it does not completely eliminate it because

judges are not randomly assigned to their peers. Thus, we control for court and year ...xed e¤ects and court

speci...c trends in all speci...cations. To the extent that within-judge variation in the gender peer composition

is not systematically related to time-varying unobserved factors a¤ecting judicial decisions, the causal e¤ect

of gender peer composition in the courthouse can be uncovered. We provide several robustness checks and

falsi...cation tests supporting our identifying assumption.

       This paper makes contributions to two areas of investigation. First, it contributes to the peer e¤ect

literature by analyzing how gender diversity in peer composition impacts individual decision-making when

the decision has important consequences for another person. The second contribution of the paper is to the

literature on judicial behavior. Whether race or gender of the defendant causes bias in judicial decisions and

   3
    There are only a few judges moving from one judicial district to another during their tenure and therefore, identi...cation is
obtained from movements of peers in and out of courthouse.



                                                                3
whether judicial decisions are impacted by personal attributes of judges has received signi...cant attention

(e.g., Mustard 2001; Alesina and Ferrara 2014; Rehavi and Starr 2014; Depew et al. 2017). Along these

lines, researchers investigated if the race and gender composition of a panel of judges impacts case outcomes

(Boyd et al. 2010; Kastellec 2013; Grossman et al. 2016).

   We employ the universe of judicial decisions made about juvenile defendants in Louisiana between 1998

and 2012. Having constructed a panel containing all judges serving in each courthouse, we analyze whether

and to what extent the incarceration and sentence length decisions are inuenced by the proportion of female

peers to whom judges are exposed in the courthouse. We ...nd that an increase in the proportion of female

colleagues raises the severity of punishment assigned by judges, and that this result is driven by female

judges. We also demonstrate that the impact of proportion of female peers is not a proxy for other peer

characteristics such as race and age. We propose two mechanisms that may be responsible for this outcome

and present results that provide suggestive evidence favoring one mechanism over the other. More precisely,

our results are consistent with the "critical mass hypothesis" which postulates that individuals who are in

the numerical minority adopt the behavioral norms of those who are in the majority, but that members of

the minority group start making decisions that reect their true tendencies as the proportion of minorities

in the group rises.

   These results are consistent with experimental evidence showing that women are more likely to recip-

rocally punish unfair behavior than men (Eckel and Grossman 1996; Croson and Buchan 1999) and that

women's decisions are sensitive to the context in which they are made (Crozon and Gneezy 2009).

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the institutional settings. Section

3 presents the data. Section 4 describes the econometric methodology. Section 5 presents the results.

Conclusions are provided in Section 6.




                                                      4
2        Institutional Background

The judicial branch in Louisiana includes courts with di¤erent jurisdictions, ranging from state supreme court

to the courts of appeals, from district courts to juvenile courts. There are currently 42 judicial districts in

Louisiana. Twenty-eight of these districts cover one single parish each, and judges handle cases in their

respective courthouses in these parishes. There are 10 other judicial districts where each district covers

multiple parishes, and judges in these districts rotate between the courthouses of these parishes. Finally,

four judicial districts have their separate juvenile courts, where each of these juvenile courts serves one

parish.4

        Judges in district courts and juvenile courts are elected by voters in partisan elections, where the party

a¢ liation of each candidate is shown on the ballot.5 Candidates for judge positions compete in a primary

against other candidates, including those from their own parties, and it is common to have multiple candi-

dates from a given political party to run for the same judge position.6 District and juvenile court judges

serve six-year terms and they are eligible for re-election. Elections are spread throughout the year. For

example, elections in 2018 took place in March and November, with the runo¤ election of the latter being

held in December.

        Judge turnover, and therefore a change in the composition of judges in a courthouse can be generated

not only by elections, but also by the newly-created judgeships or by a vacancy. Vacancies can result from

a variety of reasons ranging from resignation to death, from suspension to retirement before the end of the

term.7 These vacant positions are ...lled by special elections within a year after the day the vacancy occurs.

The supreme court appoints a judge to the bench until the special election is held.8

    4
      These parishes are Caddo, East Baton Rouge, Je¤erson and Orleans.
    5
      A candidate for the district/juvenile court must satisfy the following criteria to be eligible for judgeship: (i) licensed to
practice law in the state for eight years, (ii) domiciled in the respective parish for at least one year, and (iii) be under the age
of 70.
    6
      This structure is sometimes referred to as the "jungle primary."The candidate who receives the majority vote in the primary
is elected. If no candidate receives the majority vote, a runo¤ election is held between the top two candidates in the general
election.
    7
      In Louisiana the mandatory retirement age for judges is 70.
    8
      This person is ineligible as a candidate to be elected in the special election (Article V, Louisiana Constitution of 1974).




                                                                 5
        Cases are randomly assigned to judges unless the juvenile was found guilty in a previous adjudication.9

Such repeat o¤enders are re-assigned to judges who handled the previous episode of the juvenile. At the

adjudication hearing the judge may ...nd the defendant not guilty and dismiss the case if the prosecutor is

unable to provide evidence to ...nd the youth delinquent. In this situation the juvenile is considered as not

having entered the juvenile justice system, and the case is purged.10 If the judge ...nds the defendant guilty,

the judge needs to make a disposition decision. Convicted defendants can be assigned by the judge to the

custody of the Department of Public Safety and Corrections to be con...ned in secure placement (i.e., they

are incarcerated). Instead of incarceration, the judge can assign a less severe arrangement where the juvenile

is removed from his/her home and placed in a residential non-secure placement or treatment facility such as

a group home, or foster home. Similarly, the judge can put the juvenile on probation.

        In addition, the judge has to assign a sentence length to each convicted juvenile. This is true for those

who are incarcerated and placed in secure custody, but it is also true for those who are placed on probation

or in non-secure custody. That is, each convicted juvenile is assigned a sentence length regardless of the

type of custody in which they are placed. Judges are responsible for weighing the severity of the o¤ense

committed and the prior o¤ense history of the juvenile.11 There is no mandatory sentencing guidelines and

judges exercise considerable discretion in sentencing. Additional details can be found in Eren and Mocan

(2019).



3        Data

The data are obtained from two sources. Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections, Youth

Services, O¢ ce of Juvenile Justice (OJJ) provides the universe of case ...les from 1998 to 2012. Each case ...le

contains information on the juvenile and the case, including the gender, race and the age of the juvenile, the

    9
      Under the provisions of the Louisiana juvenile justice system, a computer generated random assignment (open to public)
is implemented in each court by the Clerk'   s o¢ ce for all case ...les (Rules for Louisiana District Courts, Chapter 14, Appendix
14.0A, various years).
   10
      The potential threat of sample selection bias stemming from this data restriction is discussed in Section 5.1.
   11
      In general, the judge will impose the least restrictive disposition consistent with the circumstances of the case, the health
and safety of the child, and the best interest of the society (Louisiana Children'    s Code CHC 683).



                                                                6
statute o¤ense committed, the date the juvenile was sentenced, sentence type (secure custody, probation,

etc.), sentence length, the courthouse in which the disposition was held and the identi...er of the judge.

       The second source is the annual collections of the Supreme Court of Louisiana, the so-called The Guide

to Louisiana Courts.12 These annual periodicals feature statewide list of judges along with information on

courthouse served and judicial turnovers. Speci...cally, the annual reports allow us to track movements into

and out of courthouses (e.g., election, retirement and resignation) with exact dates. Using the Guide to

Louisiana Courts, we construct a panel containing the universe of judges serving in each courthouse. We

supplement this data by gathering information on judge attributes.13

       We impose several restrictions to our research sample. First, to be able construct the gender peer

measure, we use only those courthouses that have at least two judges in a given year. Second, we exclude

judges from the benchmark model if they had handled fewer than 25 case ...les in a courthouse over 1998-

2012. Finally, in order to avoid potential confounding e¤ects that may arise from multiple o¤enses and/or

criminal history of the juvenile, we limit our attention to ...rst-time delinquents ages 10 through 17 who were

convicted for only one statute o¤ense. Recall that repeat o¤enders are assigned to the same judge who has

handled the original case. This attribute of the juvenile justice system compromises the critical condition

of random assignment of defendants to judges. Thus, we exclude repeat o¤enders from the analysis, and

focus on delinquents who had their ...rst interaction with the juvenile justice system. Having imposed these

restrictions, we end up with a total of 20,244 juvenile case ...les handled by 138 judges in 59 courthouses.14

       Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics. The incarceration rate is about 14 percent. Recall that all

convicted juveniles are assigned a sentence length, irrespective of whether they are incarcerated. As shown

in Panel A, the average sentence length is around 507 days. Black (62 percent) and white (36 percent)

juveniles comprise approximately 98 percent of all o¤enders. About 24 percent of the sample is female. Age

  12
     These annual collections are available at http://www.lasc.org/press_room/annual_reports/default.asp.
  Although the universe of case ...les from OJJ dates back to 1996, we limit our attention to 1998 and onwards because annual
collections are available online since 1998.
  13
     We collect information on judges from variety of sources including online searches and Louisiana District Judges Association
Periodicals (1956-2000).
  14
     Fifty-three of these are district courthouses, four are juvenile courts, and two of them are city courts. The locations of city
courts are generally di¤erent from district courts. Cases handled in city courts typically involve juvenile and petty o¤enses,
ordinance and tra¢ c violations. In an overwhelming majority of city courts a single judge is in charge of adjudicating cases.


                                                                 7
at ...rst-conviction is almost 15, and 37 percent of juveniles are convicted of a felony crime.15

         Panel B of Table 1 reveals that 24 percent of judges are female and that the mean age of judges when

they made incarceration decisions is 53. There are on average 6 judges in a courthouse in a year.



4         Empirical Methodology

To evaluate the impact of judicial gender composition of the courthouse on the incarceration decision and

the sentence length assigned by judges, we estimate the following equation



                                                          0
                                =        0   +   1 ¬    +           2   +      +      +      +      +                          (1)


where  is the disposition of juvenile defendant  set by judge  in courthouse  at time . This variable

takes the value of one if juvenile had been incarcerated (placed in secure custody) following his/her conviction.

If  is zero, this indicates that he/she was not incarcerated, but instead was placed on probation or held

in non-secure custody. Alternatively,  stands for the sentence length assigned by judges. ¬  is the

proportion of female judges in the courthouse , excluding judge  , at the beginning of year . 0 is a

vector of observed juvenile characteristics (i.e., gender, race, age and its square and o¤ense type),                         ,   


and,          stand for judge, year and court ...xed e¤ects, respectively,                are court-speci...c trends to control for

linearly trending unobserved court characteristics and                      is the error term. Standard errors are clustered

at the judge level.

         Several comments are warranted about the gender composition measure. First, we use the universe of

judges in the state to construct ¬  , which allows us to measure the peer composition variable accurately.

More speci...cally, in the creation of the peer measure we utilize all judges, even those who do not enter

the analysis sample.16 Second, recall that there are 10 judicial districts where each district covers multiple

    15
     Ungovernable (11 percent), simple battery (8 percent) and simple burglary (8 percent) are the most common o¤ense types
in the data.
  16
     For example, assume that a district courthouse consists of four judges, but only one of these four judges deals with juvenile
cases, while the other three take on other types cases (e.g., commercial cases, civil cases, and adult crimes). In this case, the
judge who deals with juvenile cases is included in the analysis and because he is exposed to his peers in the courthouse, the



                                                                8
parishes, and judges in these districts rotate between the courthouses of di¤erent parishes. In these cases,

ignoring judge mobility within the judicial district (i.e., ignoring the movement of judges between courthouses

of di¤erent parishes) would prevent us from fully capturing the interactions between these judges. Thus,

for these 10 judicial districts we calculate ¬  at the district level, using all courthouses with which each

judge is a¢ liated, although we also show that the results are insensitive to the inclusion/exclusion of these

districts. Finally, using judge gender composition of the courthouse from the beginning-of-year may raise

concerns for two related reasons, both of which may bias gender peer e¤ect estimates towards zero. First,

the peer composition measure described in equation (1) may not fully reect the exposure of judges to their

peers in the courthouse because it does not take into account possible judge turnover occurring throughout

the year. Second, a change in judge behavior in response to a change in peer gender composition may take

some time to manifest itself. Therefore, we also estimate variants of equation (1) by: (i) constructing gender

peer measure at the year-by-quarter level, and (ii) including its lagged values.

    We control for judge ...xed e¤ects in all speci...cations to circumvent any potential bias from selection into

peer groups. Thus, we estimate the e¤ect of peer gender composition faced by a particular judge o¤ of the

variation in that composition over time. By relying only on within-judge variation, identi...cation is obtained

from the movements of peers in and out of courthouse.17

    Although random assignment of case ...les to judges mitigate concerns over omitted variable bias, it does

not completely eliminate it because judges are not randomly assigned to their peers. It is conceivable that

changes in the proportion of female judges are correlated with unobserved factors that also a¤ect judicial

decisions. For example, assume that state-wide awareness rises with regard to issues related to women's

well-being (e.g., Me Too movement). Such awareness may motivate voters to elect female judges as opposed

to male judges, and the same awareness may compel judges to be harsher against male defendants. In

remaining three judges in the same courthouse are used to calculate the proportion of female peers in the courthouse.
   17
      Judges, in principle, can switch peer groups if they relocate from one district to another. For example, a judge can resign
from his post in a courthouse and can subsequent be elected to a position in another courthouse. This type of mobility, however,
is extremely limited and comprises only about 2 percent of the sample. In conjunction with this, speci...cations that control for
court-by-judge ...xed e¤ects provide estimates of gender peer e¤ects that are almost identical to those presented in the paper.
These results are available upon request.




                                                                9
this case, a positive relationship may emerge between sentence severity and the proportion of female peers,

but this would be an artifact of the change in the underlying state-wide sentiment towards females. To

account for such confounders, we control for court and year ...xed e¤ects, as well as court-speci...c trends in

all speci...cations.

       The key identifying assumption underlying this framework is that time-varying unobservable variables

a¤ecting the outcome are not systematically related to within judge variation in the gender composition. To

the extent that this assumption holds, the coe¢ cient estimate                          1   can be interpreted as the causal impact

of gender peer e¤ects on judicial decisions in the courthouse. Note that our identi...cation strategy does

not rule out all potential confounding factors. For example, consider a violent crime in a particular parish

before a judicial election, in which the perpetrator is a man and the victim is a woman. This event can

lead to the election of a female judge and also to harsher sentences imposed by all judges in that parish.

In this scenario, the correlation between the behavioral response of judges and the change in gender peer

composition is not causal, but it is driven by the event preceding the election in that location. This sort of a

(court-speci...c) shock calls for conditioning on court-by-year ...xed e¤ects. Doing so, however, would result in

almost no variation to exploit for identi...cation 18 We provide robustness checks (e.g., replacing court trends

with judge-speci...c linear trends) and falsi...cation tests in Section 5.2 to provide evidence on the validity of

our identi...cation strategy.

       We ...rst examine the validity of random assignment of case ...les to judges. A typical test for this, in our

context, is to run a series of regressions where the proportion of female peers in the courthouse is regressed on

  18
       To see this, consider a simpli...ed version of equation (1)

                                                =         0   +   1 ¬     +   2    +      +   

where  is an indicator that takes the value one if judge  is female. As we demean the data at the court-by-year level, the
equation transforms into
                                ¬  = 1 (¬  ¬  ¬  ) + 2 ( ¬   ) + (  ¬  )
                                              ¬1
where  ¬  =   and ¬  ¬  ¬  =                       ( ¬   ) and  is the number of judges in a courthouse. Substituting
                                             ¬ 1
these equalities in the demeaned equation leads to
                                                        ¬1
                                    ¬  =            1        ( ¬   ) +         2 (     ¬   ) + (      ¬    )
                                                         ¬ 1
It is evident that the ...rst term varies independently only when the court size changes. See also Cornelissen et al. (2017) for an
application of this identi...cation strategy.


                                                                     10
juvenile and case characteristics, while controlling for court and year ...xed e¤ects and court-speci...c trends.

These results are reported in Table 2. Each cell represents a separate regression. The point estimates are

all small in magnitude and none of them is statistically signi...cant. We also run a single regression where

we condition on all juvenile and case characteristics. The p-value for joint signi...cance is 0.47 (reported in

the last row of Table 2).19

    Because our identi...cation hinges on within-judge variation in the proportion of female peers over time,

variation in this variable needs to be con...rmed. Table 3 presents information related to variation in the

proportion of female peers faced by each judge in each year. The mean and standard deviation in the

proportion of female peers in the courthouse are 0.20 and 0.32, respectively. The standard deviation of the

change in a judge's gender peer composition from one year to the next is 0.07, corresponding to around

23 percent of the overall variation. A simple variance decomposition exercise (sum of squares) shows that

within-judge variation accounts for around 7 percent of the total (within and between judge) variation in

the proportion of female peers. Furthermore, the share of judge-year observations experiencing any judge

turnover in courthouses is 17 percent. Thus, there is non-trivial variation in the composition of judges in

courthouses to detect meaningful gender peer e¤ects.

    Figure 1 provides additional information about the extent of the variation in the proportion of female

peers. The ...gure displays the distribution of the residuals from a regression where the proportion of female

peers is regressed on judge, year, and court ...xed e¤ects, court-speci...c trends and defendant characteristics.

Consistent with Table 3, non-negligible identifying variation is displayed in Figure1, where the standard

deviation of the residuals is 0.083. Figure A1 in the Appendix presents this information by judge gender.

    Finally, Figure 2 presents the proportion of female peers, averaged across male and female judges over

the years, and demonstrates the lack of any secular trend.

   19
      We also experimented with similar randomization tests by controlling for court-by-year ...xed e¤ects. The point estimates
from this exercise yield the same conclusion about randomization.




                                                              11
5         Results

5.1        Baseline Results

Baseline estimates of the impact of gender composition in the courthouse on judicial decisions are presented

in Table 4. Panel A reports the results of the models where the dependent variable is the incarceration

decision of judges. The outcome in Panel B is sentence length. Standard errors are clustered at the judge

level. Column (1) reports the results by controlling for judge, year, and court ...xed-e¤ects and court- speci...c

trends. Column (2) adds juvenile characteristics and o¤ense ...xed-e¤ects. The results in Panel A indicate

a statistically signi...cant point estimate of about 0.10, which implies that a 10 percentage point increase in

the proportion of female judges (e.g., a change from being exposed to 1 female and 9 male colleagues in

the courthouse to being exposed to 2 female and 8 male colleagues) leads to approximately 1.0 percentage

points increase in the probability of incarceration decision made by judges. Taking the incarceration rate

of 0.137 from Table 1 as our benchmark, this estimated impact indicates an average increase of 7.3 percent.

Panel B indicates that a 10 percentage point increase in the proportion of female judges in the courthouse

generates an increase in sentence length by about seven days (or about 1.6% from the sample mean).20

         Recall that if the judge ...nds the defendant not guilty and acquits him/her, there is no sentencing

decision to be made. In this case, the case ...le is purged and the juvenile defendant is treated as if he/she

had no contact with the juvenile justice system. This means that the data contain only those individuals

who are convicted. This particular limitation, due to institutional structure, is not a serious concern in

the interpretation of our results to the extent that gender peer composition of the courthouse impacts the

    20
    To put the estimates in perspective we compare our ...ndings to those of previous work that examined the impact of factors
unrelated to the merits of the case on judicial decisions. For example, Anwar et al. (2012) ...nd that adding 1 to 2 black jurors
to a pool of almost 30 potential jurors decreases conviction rates of black defendants more than 10 percent and increases it by a
comparable amount for white defendants. Butcher et al. (2017) show that a one standard deviation change in judge stringency
increases the probability of incarceration by 53 and 18 percent for female and male o¤enders, respectively. Philippe and Ouss
(2018) ...nd that facing a jury trial during a period after media coverage of crime incidents increases sentence lengths for juveniles
by 7 percent.
  Analyses of decisions that are in     uenced by gender exposure include Battaglini et al. (2020) who ...nd that a one-standard
deviation increase in a U.S. appellate court judge'   s exposure to female colleagues on judicial panels leads to a four percentage
point increase in the probability that the judge hires a female clerk three years later. Washington (2008) ...nds that a U.S.
congressperson'  s propensity to vote liberally, especially on issues of productive rights, goes up with parenting female children.
Each additional female child is associated with a 2-point (5 percent) increase in the score assigned to the congressperson by the
National Association of Women (NOW).


                                                                 12
conviction/acquittal decision of judges in the same way as in sentencing decision. For example, if borderline

cases (i.e., those with weak evidence) end up with guilty verdict rather than being dismissed when the

proportion of female judges goes up in the courthouse, this would generate a sample which would include

marginally guilty or "less guilty" defendants who are sentenced in courthouses with a higher percentage of

female judges. Thus, the impact we identify could be an underestimate of the true judge peer e¤ects.

    Given that the verdict on guilt vs. innocence is not a relevant margin for those who have plead guilty (or

no contest) to the charge ...led, estimating the impacts of incarceration for the plead-guilty sample provides

insights in the extent of a potential bias.21 The sample of juvenile o¤enders who plead guilty is small

(n= 7,118). In this sample the estimated coe¢ cient of the gender peer composition on the propensity of

incarceration is 0.096 (s.e=0.084) and it is 140.81 (s.e=42.74) in the sentence length regression.


5.2    Robustness Checks

We implement several sensitivity checks to examine the robustness of our results. The ...rst column of

Table 5 presents the results from a speci...cation where the measure of gender peer composition (¬  ) is

constructed at the year-by-quarter level.22 In this model, the proportion of female peers of each judge in a

given courthouse is allowed to vary from quarter-to-quarter, but the coe¢ cient estimates from this exercise

for both the incarceration and the sentence length regressions are almost identical to those obtained from

the baseline model of Table 4. Second, the turmoil during and after hurricanes Katrina and Rita may have

impacted peer group composition and judicial decisions. To investigate this hypothesis, we exclude parishes

that are known to be most a¤ected from these natural disasters.23 As shown in column (2) of Table 5, doing

so provides a larger e¤ect on incarceration, while the point estimate for sentence length is almost identical to

those reported in Table 4. Third, recall that we calculate gender composition at the judicial district level in

  21
     Prior to the adjudication hearing in which the judge makes a decision on guilt-vs-innocence, a petition hearing takes place.
At this petition hearing the district attorney charges the juvenile with a crime. If the defendant pleads not guilty, the case goes
to the trial, which takes place at a later date. In this case, the date of the adjudication hearing is later than the date of the
petition hearing. If, on the other hand, the petition and adjudication dates are the same, this means that the judge has not
made a guilty/not guilty decision; instead, the juvenile has pleaded guilty or no contest to the charge ...led (Depew et al. 2017).
  22
     We control for quarter ...xed e¤ects in this speci...cation.
  23
     These parishes are Je¤erson, Lafourche, Orleans, Plaquemines, St. Bernard, St. Tammany, and Terrebonne.



                                                                13
jurisdictions where judges rotate between di¤erent parish courthouses. Dropping these parishes in column

(3) reduces the sample size to 12,500, and lowers the precision of the estimates, but it does not alter the

point estimates.

       Fourth, recall that in the main analysis we exclude judges if they handled fewer than 25 case ...les in a

given courthouse over the course of the analysis period. Including all judges with any number of dispositions,

or restricting the sample to judges who handled at least 150 cases produce almost identical results. (columns

4 and 5 of Table 5, respectively). Fifth, adding ...rst-time juvenile o¤enders with multiple convictions back

to the sample reveal that the results are not very sensitive to this sample restriction either (column 6).

Sixth, recognizing that juvenile sex o¤enders may be treated di¤erently by judges and that the change in the

gender peer composition may impact judicial decisions on sex o¤enders di¤erently in comparison to other

juvenile defendants, we dropped these cases from the sample, but the results remained intact (column 7).

       Finally, we replace court trends with judge-speci...c linear trends under the identifying assumption that

unobservable variables related to judicial outcomes do not deviate from an individual judge'
                                                                                           s trend when

within-judge variation in the gender composition deviates from trend. The estimated e¤ects, reported in the

last column of Table 5, are very similar in magnitude to those presented in Table 4.24

       The magnitude of the gender peer e¤ect is similar between severe and less severe crimes. The coe¢ cients

of the proportion of female peers in incarceration regressions are 0.124 (s.e=0.088) and 0.058 (s.e=0.043)

for felony and non-felony o¤enses, respectively. The e¤ects on sentence length are 86.113 (s.e=35.748) and

53.983 (s.e=49.712). The e¤ect sizes on incarceration and sentence length for felony ad non-felony o¤enses

are similar when they are benchmarked relative to their own sample means.

       To investigate whether the results are driven by the decisions of a particular judge, we estimated equation

(1) repeatedly, each time removing dispositions handed down by a di¤erent judge. Figures A2 and A3 in

the Appendix plot the distribution of the coe¢ cient estimates for the gender peer e¤ect from a total of 138

regressions. The average of the coe¢ cient estimates for incarceration is 0.098 (s.d=0.005), while it is 67.80

  24
    We also experimented with our analysis by using the logarithm of sentence length as the dependent variable. The results
from this exercise provided the same inference and they are available upon request.



                                                            14
(s.d=3.13) for sentence length, indicating that the results are not driven by a particular judge.

   It is plausible for the proportion of female peers to be correlated with some average judge attribute.

Thus, any reaction to a variation in the proportion of female peers may reect the impact of that attribute.

For example, female judges may more likely be black (or white), and it could be the race of the peers rather

than their gender that may be the driver of harshness. Column (1) of Table 6, however, shows that adding

the proportion of black peers in the incarceration regression has no impact on the coe¢ cient of female peers,

and that the coe¢ cient of black peers itself is not signi...cantly di¤erent from zero. It can also be argued

that female judges may be younger (or older), and that peers'average age and not their gender composition

may be related to judicial decisions. Column (2) of table 6 refutes this conjecture. The average age of peers

has no impact on the incarceration decision and adding average peer age to the model does not impact the

coe¢ cient of the proportion of female peers. Finally, column (3) demonstrates that inclusion of peers'race

and age to the model jointly does not alter the inference. Columns (4) to (6) present the results of the same

exercise, where the outcome is the sentence length. Once again, adding to the model peers'race and their

average age does not eliminate the gender peer e¤ect.

   We analyzed the timing of the gender peer e¤ects by augmenting the model with the lags and leads of

the gender composition measure. Table 7 presents the results obtained from three di¤erent speci...cations.

Columns (1), (2), (4) and (5) serve as falsi...cation exercises as they investigate whether judicial decisions

in a given year are inuenced by the gender peer composition in the following year(s). Variations in the

future values of the peer composition should not inuence current decisions of judges, and as Table 7 reveals,

the coe¢ cient estimates of the leads of the proportion of female peers in courthouse are small and never

statistically di¤erent from zero. This means that future values of the proportion of female peers have no

impact on judges' current decisions on incarceration or sentence length. Columns (3) and (6) present the

result from the models that investigate the existence of path-dependence in peer e¤ects by regressing judicial

decisions on current and lagged values of the gender peer composition measure. Overall, gender peer e¤ects

do not appear to exhibit a persistent pattern over time.



                                                      15
   Finally, we estimate the models under placebo values of female peers. Speci...cally, we consider actual

values of the proportion of female peers in each court house in each year (pertaining to both female and

male judges) and randomly assign these values to di¤erent years for the same courthouse. We then run

equation (1) and obtain the coe¢ cient estimates of the proportion of female peers, and repeat this exercise

for 1,000 times. Figures A4 and A5 in the Appendix display the distribution of the coe¢ cient estimates

obtained from this exercise. The vertical line depicts the actual point estimates from column (2) of Table 4.

Only 3 of the 1,000 placebo regressions produce e¤ects that are larger than the actual value in Figure A4

(p-value=0.00), and only 14 placebo estimates in Figure A5 are greater than the corresponding estimate in

Table 4 (p-value=0.01).


5.3   Unbundling the Impact

In this section we investigate whether the peer e¤ect results reported earlier mask a more complicated

relationship regarding potentially heterogeneous gender-speci...c impacts. More speci...cally, to unbundle the

overall gender peer e¤ect we analyze whether the estimated e¤ect is sensitive to judge-defendant gender

match. To that end, we investigate whether variations in the proportion of female peers in the courthouse

has a di¤erential e¤ect on the decisions made by male/female judges on male/female defendants. For this

purpose, we estimate the following equation




             =        0   +   1 ¬     +   2             ¬  +                          3         dg ¬ 

        +   4              dg +                                   5                 dg ¬                                (2)

                                       0
                                      +       6   +      +        +        +      +   




   In equation (2), the impact on the outcome of the change in the proportion of female peers in case of

male judge-male defendants is    1.   The impact is (    1   +        2)   in case of male judge-female defendant pairs. If

the judge is female and the defendant is male, the impact of a change in the proportion of female peers is

                                                             16
(   1   +   3 ),   and the impact is (      1   +   2   +   3   +       5)   for female judge-female defendant pairs.25

        Table 8 presents the results. Estimated                     1   and     2    are not signi...cantly di¤erent from zero (in rows one

and two) in either the incarceration or the sentence length regressions. Similarly, as shown at the bottom

section of the table, (        1   +   2)   is not signi...cantly di¤erent from zero in either regression. This means that

male judges are not inuenced by the gender peer composition. More speci...cally, the incarceration decision

and the assigned sentence length by male judges do not react to a change in the proportion of their female

peers in the courthouse, regardless of whether the defendant is male or female.

        The gender peer e¤ect on judicial decisions made by female judges on male defendants is (                           1 + 3 ),   which

is equal to 0.240 in the incarceration equation. It is 128.0 in case of the sentence length, and both sums are

statistically signi...cantly di¤erent from zero (with p-values of 0.00 and 0.00, respectively). This indicates an

increase in the proportion of female peers in the courthouse makes female judges more likely to incarcerate

male defendants and also causes female judges to assign longer sentences on male defendants.

        The impact of an increase in the proportion of female peers on female judges'propensity to incarcerate

female defendants is 0.173 (           1 + 2 + 3 + 5 ),             and it is signi...cantly di¤erent from zero with a p-value of 0.00,

as displayed at the bottom part of Table 8. This magnitude implies that if the proportion female peers faced

by female judges goes up by 10 percentage points, this generates an increase in female judges'propensity to

incarcerate female defendants by 1.7 percentage points. Finally, the impact on sentence length assigned by

female judges on female defendants, induced by a change in gender peer composition in the courthouse, is

small in magnitude (-33 days) and is not statistically di¤erent from zero.

        Table 9 summarizes these results in the context of a courthouse consisting of 10 judges, two of whom

are female. If the gender composition of judges changes so that the courthouse now has 3 female and 7

male judges, this event increases the proportion of female peers for female judges by 0.11.26 Male judges

  25
     These speci...cations control for interactions of juvenile's gender with individual characteristics, o¤ense and judge ...xed e¤ects
as well as interactions between judge'    s gender and individual characteristics and o¤ense ...xed e¤ects.
  26
     Note that in a courthouse with 2 female and 8 male judges, the proportion of female peers is 0.22 (2/9) for each male judge,
and the proportion of female judges is 0.11 (1/9) for each female judge. If a male judge of the courthouse is replaced by a female
judge (e.g. through an election), then the courthouse contains 3 female and 7 male judges; and this particular event increases
the proportion of female peers to 0.33 (3/9) for male judges and to 0.22 (2/9) for female judges.




                                                                                17
do not react to the variation in the gender composition of their peers. This is true regardless of the gender

of the defendant and both for the incarceration decision and the sentence length decision. On the other

hand, an increase in the proportion of female peers in the courthouse by 0.11 prompts female judges to be

tougher. They become 2.6 percentage points more likely to incarcerate male defendants and they assign two

weeks longer sentences to males. The same increase in the proportion of female peers triggers an increase in

female judges'proclivity to incarcerate female defendants as well (by 1.9 percentage points), but it has no

signi...cant impact on sentence lengths received by female juveniles.

   To put gender peer e¤ect in perspective, we provide some back-of-the-envelope calculations by randomly

adding one more female judge in one-quarter of all courthouses in Louisiana. We repeat this exercise 1,000

times, each time calculating the di¤erence between simulated and actual average gender peer measures. The

mean of the di¤erences from 1,000 simulations indicates a 5.5 percentage points increase in the average

proportion of female peers. Using this change along with the estimates reported in Table 9 and the number

of case ...les handled by female judges indicates that such an increase in female peers leads to ...ve additional

juveniles incarcerated and an additional 3,022 days of prison time imposed by female judges per year.


5.4   Potential Mechanisms

Although it is not possible to determine with certainty the mechanism behind the peer e¤ect identi...ed in

the paper, we propose two potential avenues, and test their validity. The analysis, described below, compels

us to choose one of these mechanisms as the more relevant one over the other. Recall that incarceration rate

is higher and sentence length is longer if cases are handled by female judges. As displayed at the bottom of

Table 9, the incarceration rate of female judges is twice as high as that of male judges (0.205 vs. 0.104) and

female judges assign sentences that are about one month longer on average (about 526 days vs. 498 days).

To the extent that female judges are harsher, an increase in the proportion of female judges in a courthouse

is likely associated with a rise in average strictness in judicial decisions in that courthouse. If female judges

have the inclination to conform to the norms and customary standards of judicial decision-making, they

would become harsher in their own judicial decisions as the average harshness goes up in their environment.

                                                       18
Consequently, the ...rst hypothesis is that female judges adjust their decisions to conform to evolving judicial

stringency, generated by an increase in the proportion of female judges.

    The second hypothesis postulates that female judges do not try and adjust to the changing norms of

stringency per se. Instead, female judges are inuenced by the sheer presence of their female peers. In other

words, female judges alter their behavior simply because they are exposed to more female peers. This second

channel resembles the "critical mass" hypothesis, which posits that individuals who are in the minority of

a group conform to the behavioral norms of the majority. As the share of minorities in the group goes up,

members of the minority group start making decisions that reect their true tendencies. Examples include

females on corporate world, in politics, and in science (Kanter 1977, Dahlerup 1988, Etzkowitz et al. 1994).

In our context because female judges are in the minority in a courthouse, they may feel pressure to adopt

the incarceration and sentencing behavior of their male peers. When the number of female judges in the

group (in the courthouse) goes up, the decision-making of female judges would start reecting their true

personal inclinations in incarceration and sentencing.

    We calculated the incarceration rate and the sentence length at the judge-by-year level. Table 10 displays

the means, weighted by total number of cases in each judge-by-year cell. Column (1) shows that average

sentence length is about the same between female and male judges (550 days vs. 544 days), but that female

judges are harsher than their male peers in incarceration tendency. The mean incarceration rate of female

judges is almost twice that of male judges (0.22 vs. 0.13).27 Columns (2) and (3) of Table (10), however,

indicate that the averages reported in column (1) mask a more subtle picture. Speci...cally, we divided judges

into two groups in each year: those judges who made decisions while facing a proportion of female peers

which is lower than the average in that year, and judges whose female peers'proportion was greater than

the average of that year. Columns (2) and (3) of Table 10 present the means in judges'incarceration rate

and in assigned sentence length for male and female judges and by their exposure to their female peers.

Column (2) shows that when the proportion of female peers is low (below the sample mean), female judges

  27
     The signi...cant di¤erence in harshness in incarceration is con...rmed by a regression where judge-by-year level incarceration
rate is regressed on court-by-year ...xed e¤ects and an indicator for female judge. The estimated e¤ect of female judge is a 4.3
percentage point increase in the incarceration rate (s.e=0.029).


                                                                19
are more lenient than male judges. The incarceration rate of female judges is 9 percent, in comparison to

the 12 percent incarceration of male judges, and average sentence length of female judges is about 494 days,

as opposed to the average of 560 days assigned by male judges. On the other hand, as shown in column (3),

the picture is reversed when female judges face a high proportion (above average) of female peers. In this

situation, female judges are signi...cantly harsher than their male peers. The incarceration rate of female

judges is almost two-and-a-half times higher (34 percent vs. 14 percent) and the average sentence length

assigned by female judges 92 days longer (602 days vs. 510 days) than their male counterparts. To put

di¤erently, Panel (B) and columns (2) and (3) show that male judges' assigned sentence length and their

incarceration rate do not change appreciably regardless of whether they face low or high proportion of female

peers. On the other hand, as shown in Panel (A) and columns (2) and (3), when female judges are exposed

to a larger proportion of female peers, their average incarceration rate quadruples from about 9 percent to

34 percent, and their average assigned sentence length goes up from 494 days to 602 days.

       The information presented in Table 10 is consistent with both of the hypotheses described above. To

test the validity of these hypotheses, we calculated average peer harshness in incarceration and in sentencing

for each judge, in addition to the proportion of their female peers.28 We analyzed the extent to which an

increase in average peer harshness and an increase in the proportion of female peers are related to a change

in judicial decisions. Table 11 presents the results. Columns (1) to (3) pertain to incarceration decision

and columns (4) to (6) display the results related to assigned sentence length. Column (1) shows that a 10

percentage point increase in the proportion of female judges increases the propensity to incarcerate by 0.9

percentage points, which is the same magnitude obtained from the benchmark sample of Table 4. Column

(2), on the other hand, reveals that an increase in average incarceration rate of peers is not strongly related

to the incarceration propensity of judges. Speci...cally, a 10 percentage point increase in average incarceration

rate of judge's peers is associated with a statistically insigni...cant 0.7 percentage point decrease in judges'

  28
    The calculation of peer harshness in incarceration and sentencing requires the courthouse to have at least two judges who
handled juvenile cases. Thus, those judges who are the only ones in a courthouse who handle juveniles cases cannot be included
in this particular analysis. Average peer harshness in incarceration and in sentence length are calculated in the same manner
as the calculation of the proportion of female peers, as described in Section 4.



                                                              20
propensity to incarcerate. Column (3) presents the results obtained from the speci...cation that accounts for

both the proportion of female peers and average peer harshness in incarceration. The point estimate of the

proportion of female peers is not impacted. The coe¢ cient of average peer harshness switches from negative

to positive but it is still negligible and statistically insigni...cant.

       Column (4) of Table 11 shows that an increase in the proportion of female peers brings out a statistically

signi...cant increase in sentence lengths assigned by judges, with a magnitude similar to that reported in the

benchmark model. In contrast, column (5) reveals that average sentence length assigned by peers is not

associated with sentence lengths assigned by individual judges. Speci...cally, a 10 day increase in average

sentence length assigned by the peers of the judge is associated with a statistically insigni...cant 1.4 day

increase in judge's sentence assignment. Finally, column (6) shows that when peers'harshness in sentencing

and the proportion of female peers are jointly included in the model, the impact of female peers remains

about the same in magnitude and signi...cance, and the inuence of average peer harshness is smaller and

indistinguishable from zero.

       The coe¢ cients reported in Table 11 should be interpreted with caution because of the reection problem

(Manski 1993), as average harshness of a judge's peers is likely to be endogenous because it could be impacted

by the behavior of the judge. With this proviso, it is important to note that the coe¢ cients of peer harshness

variables are small in magnitude and never statistically signi...cant. More importantly, inclusion of peer

harshness has no discernable e¤ect on the estimated coe¢ cients of the proportion of female peers.

       Panel B of Table 11 presents the same information using only female judges. The sample size goes down

to 5,356 but the results are similar to those reported in Panel A, indicating that the e¤ects are driven by

female judges. Again, harshness of peers has no meaningful association with the incarceration and sentencing

decisions of female judges. On the other hand, holding constant peers' harshness in judicial decisions, an

increase in the proportion of female peers has a positive e¤ect on female judges' decisions.29 Thus, the

  29
    The coe¢ cient of female peers is not statistically signi...cant in the sentence length regressions, although the magnitude
(about 56 days) is still sizable. The loss of statistical signi...cance is likely the result of both the reduced sample size and also
the re ection that a rise in the proportion of female peers prompts female judges to assign harsher sentences in case of male
defendants only (See Table 8), whereas the sample in Panel B includes both male and female defendants. When we estimate
these models using female judges and male defendants, the sample size goes further down to 4,210. The estimated coe¢ cients


                                                                 21
results displayed in Table 11 support the hypothesis that it is the exposure to female peers which has an

impact on judicial decisions, and not exposure to the leniency/harshness of peers.30



6     Conclusion

There is a large and growing body of research on peer e¤ects, investigating in a variety of settings the

impact of peers on one'
                      s own behavior or own outcomes. Examples include the impact of peers on student

achievement, the e¤ect of fellow employees on worker productivity, the inuence of colleagues on paternity

leave take-up, and the impact of peers in the army on soldiers'propensity to misconduct. In this paper we

focus on judges who made decisions on juvenile defendants, and analyze the extent to which variation in

the gender composition of judges in a courthouse has an impact on judicial decisions regarding incarceration

and sentence length of defendants. The paper has aspects that are distinct from the existing literature.

Most notably, while the majority of the peer e¤ect literature is concerned with the e¤ect of peers on one's

own behavior, our paper analyzes the impact of peers on decisions made about another person (juvenile

defendants).

    A related, but separate line of research has investigated how peer interactions in a group-setting inuence

the decisions made by that group. More speci...cally, this strand of research has focused on the impact of

race- or gender composition of a group of individuals on the decisions made by that group. Examples of this

genre include the investigation of how the collective actions of a panel of judges, a group of jurors, or hiring

and promotion committees change in response to variations in racial or gender composition of the members

of the group. In contrast, the judicial decisions we analyze are not the result of a group deliberation. Rather,

they are solo-decisions made by individual judges in their own courtrooms. All judges, however, are exposed

for female peers becomes 102.97 (s.e=80.18) in column (4), and the coe¢ cient of average sentence length assigned by peers in
column (5) is 25.98 (s.e=68.43). Inclusion of both variables (column 6) produces these coe¢ cients as 102.84 (s.e=79.48) and
25.68 (s.e=67.22), respectively.
  30
     This ...nding provides support to the critical mass hypothesis, although we do not take it literally. More speci...cally, we do
not attempt to identify the location of a "critical proportion of female peers" where the leniency/harshness of female judges are
turned on and o¤. This is because, the response of female judges could be gradual around a critical mass point, rather than
exhibiting a discrete jump. Furthermore, even if such a unique threshold existed, its location could depend on the context (e.g.,
rural vs. urban courthouses and small vs. large courthouses) and it could also depend on judge attributes (e.g., younger judges
vs. older judges).


                                                                22
to their peers in the courthouses with which they are a¢ liated.

   We use the universe of all case ...les from Louisiana juvenile courts from 1998 to 2012. We exploit random

assignment of defendant case ...les to judges, and leverage turnover of judges in courthouses generated

by such events as retirement, resignation, or death of judges, and by departure and arrival of judges to

courthouses through elections. Our speci...cations control for judge, court and year ...xed e¤ects, as well

as court-speci...c trends. Under the assumption that within-judge variation in the gender peer composition

is not systematically related to time-varying unobserved factors a¤ecting individual judicial decisions, one

can uncover the causal e¤ect of gender peer composition in the courthouse. Several robustness checks and

falsi...cation tests support our identi...cation strategy.

   We ...nd that an increase in the proportion of female peers faced by each judge generates an increase in

the severity of punishment. That is, judges are more likely to incarcerate and they assign longer sentence

terms when the proportion of their female peers in the courthouse goes up. Further analyses to unbundle

this e¤ect reveal that it is driven solely by the reaction of female judges. Put di¤erently, male judges do not

respond to a change in the proportion of their female peers. Female judges, on the other hand, increase their

stringency of punishment in response to an increase in the proportion of their female peers in the courthouse.

We show that the proportion of female peers is not a proxy for exposure to the racial composition of peers

or for the average age of peers. Adding to the model the proportion of black peers and the average age of

peers reveals that they have no inuence on the estimated impact of peer gender composition.

   Female judges, on average, are more likely to incarcerate than male judges, indicating that an increase in

the proportion of female judges in the courthouse is associated with increased average judicial harshness. This

suggests that female judges might be reacting to the changing judicial norms of punishment by adopting to

the enhanced severity of their environment. We present evidence, however, which suggests that the dominant

force behind the increase in strictness of female judges is the sheer exposure to female colleagues, rather than

a change in the leniency/harshness standards. This ...nding is consistent with the critical mass hypothesis,

which would posit that female judges, who are in the numerical minority among all judges in a courthouse,



                                                             23
would conform to the behavioral norms of the majority (male judges). As their share rises, female judges

would start making decisions that reect their true inclinations, which in this case translate into harsher

punishment.

   There is a sizable experimental literature investigating gender di¤erences in such dimensions as risk

aversion, altruism and fairness (Bertrand 2011; Croson and Gneezy 2009). Particularly relevant for our

paper is research on reciprocity. For example, Eckel and Grossman (1996) ...nd that women are more

likely to reciprocally punish unfair behavior in comparison to men. Similarly, Croson and Buchan (1999)

provide evidence for women's higher propensity for reciprocity. It has been also documented that women's

decisions are less individually-oriented and more socially-oriented in comparison to those of men (Eckel and

Grossman 2008). These results suggest that if female judges are more likely to consider the o¤enses of

convicted defendants as transgressions towards society, female judges would be more likely to reciprocate

on behalf of the society and impose harsher punishment. Equally important, female behavior is found to

be more sensitive to context (Ben-Ner et al. 2004; Eckel and Grosman 1996). As explained in detail by

Croson and Gneezy (2009), women are sensitive to the environment in which they make decisions, and the

responsiveness of women to the context explains some seemingly contraditory results about gender di¤erences

in experimental research. Our results are consistent with this observation because we ...nd that female judges'

judicial decisions respond to the changing proportion of peers'gender in which these decisions are made.

   The welfare implications of our ...ndings are not straightforward for two reasons. First, it is unclear

what the optimal level of punishment is. While we report that female judges are harsher than their male

counterparts, this information in-and-of itself does not imply that male judges provide sub-optimal level of

punishment or that female judges provide excessive punishment. Therefore, that the stringency of female

judges goes up as they are exposed to more female peers may be bene...cial or detrimental for social wel-

fare. Second, and related to the previous point, it is complicated to address all potential dimensions of

social welfare that can be impacted by judicial decisions. Furthermore, judicial decisions regarding juvenile




                                                      24
punishment have context-speci...c impacts in some of these dimensions.31 Notwithstanding, our results from

a simulation exercise indicate an additional ...ve juvenile incarcerations and 3,022 extra days of prion time

imposed on juveniles per year.




  31
    For example, while Aizer and Doyle (2015) report that the severity of juvenile punishment increases the propensity of further
criminal activity as an adult (adult recidivism) in Cook County/Chicago, Eren and Mocan (2019) show that incarceration as
a juvenile in Louisiana has no impact on the propensity to commit a violent crime, but that it increases the propensity of
being convicted for a drug crime as an adult. Hjalmarsson (2009) analyzes data from the state of Washington and reports that
incarceration in juvenile facilities reduces recidivism.


                                                               25
References
Aizer, A. and J. J. Doyle Jr. (2015). Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Future Crime: Evidence
  from Randomly Assigned Judges. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (2), 759­803.

Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2014). A Test of Racial Bias in Capital Sentencing. American Economic
  Review 104 (11), 3397­3433.

Anwar, S., P. Bayer, and R. Hjalmarsson (2012). The Impact of Jury Race in Criminal Trials. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 127 (2), 1017­1055.

Bagues, M., M. Sylos-Labini, and N. Zinovyeva (2017). Does the Gender Composition of Scienti...c
  Committees Matter? American Economic Review 107 (4), 1207­1238.

Bagues, M. F. and B. Esteve-Volart (2010). Can Gender Parity Break the Glass Ceiling? Evidence from
  a Repeated Randomized Experiment. Review of Economic Studies 77 (4), 1301­1328.

Bandiera, O., I. Barankay, and I. Rasul (2010). Social Incentives in the Workplace. Review of Economic
  Studies 77 (2), 417­458.

Battaglini, M., J. M. Harris, and E. Patacchini (2020). Professional Interactions and Hiring Decisions:
  Evidence from the Federal Judiciary. NBER Working Paper 26726 .

Ben-Ner, A., L. Putterman, F. Kong, and D. Magan (2004). Reciprocity in a Two-Part Dictator Game.
  Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 53 (3), 333­352.

Bertrand, M. (2011). New Perspectives on Gender. In Handbook of Labor Economics, eds. Orley Ashen-
  felter and David Card, Volume 4B, pp. 1543­1590. Elsevier.

Boyd, C. L., L. Epstein, and A. D. Martin (2010). Untangling the Causal E¤ects of Sex on Judging.
  American Journal of Political Science 54 (2), 389­411.

Carrell, S. E., B. I. Sacerdote, and J. E. West (2013). From Natural Variation to Optimal Policy? The
  Importance of Endogenous Peer Group Formation. Econometrica 81 (3), 855­882.

Cornelissen, T., C. Dustmann, and U. Schönberg (2017). Peer E¤ects in the Workplace. American
  Economic Review 107 (2), 425­456.

Croson, R. and N. Buchan (1999). Gender and Culture: International Experimental Evidence from Trust
  Games. American Economic Review 89 (2), 386­391.

Croson, R. and U. Gneezy (2009). Gender Di¤erences in Preferences. Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture 47 (2), 448­474.

Dahl, G. B., K. V. Løken, and M. Mogstad (2014). Peer E¤ects in Program Participation. American
  Economic Review 104 (7), 2049­2074.

Dahlerup, D. (1988). From a Small to a Large Minority: Women in Scandinavian Politics. Scandinavian
  Political Studies 11 (4), 275­298.

                                                  26
De Paola, M. and V. Scoppa (2015). Gender Discrimination and Evaluators' Gender: Evidence from
  Italian Academia. Economica 82 (325), 162­188.

Depew, B., O. Eren, and N. Mocan (2017). Judges, Juveniles, and In-Group Bias. Journal of Law and
  Economics 62 (2), 209­239.

Eckel, C. C. and P. J. Grossman (1996). The Relative Price of Fairness: Gender Di¤erences in a Punish-
  ment Game. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 30 (2), 143­158.

Eckel, C. C. and P. J. Grossman (2008). Di¤erences in the Economic Decisions of Men and Women:
  Experimental Evidence. In Handbook of Experimental Economics Results, eds. Charles R. Plott and
  Vernon L. Smith, Volume 1, Chapter 57, pp. 509­519. Elsevier.

Eren, O. and N. Mocan (2019). Juvenile Punishment, High School Graduation and Adult Crime: Evidence
  from Idiosyncratic Judge Harshness. Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming .

Etzkowitz, H., C. Kemelgor, M. Neuschatz, B. Uzzi, and J. Alonzo (1994). The Paradox of Critical Mass
  for Women in Science. Science 266 (5182), 51 ­54.

Falk, A. and A. Ichino (2006). Clean Evidence on Peer E¤ects. Journal of Labor Economics 24 (1), 39­57.

Grossman, G., O. Gazal-Ayal, S. D. Pimentel, and J. M. Weinstein (2016). Descriptive Representation
  and Judicial Outcomes in Multiethnic Societies. American Journal of Political Science 60 (1), 44­69.

Hjalmarsson, R. (2009). Juvenile Jails: A Path to the Straight and Narrow or to Hardened Criminality?
  Journal of Law and Economics 52 (4), 779­809.

Kanter, R. M. (1977). Some E¤ects of Proportions on Group Life: Skewed Sex Ratios and Responses to
  Token Women. American Journal of Sociology 82 (5), 965­990.

Kastellec, J. P. (2013). Racial Diversity and Judicial Inuence on Appellate Courts. American Journal
  of Political Science 57 (1), 167­183.

Liptak, A. (2009). The Waves Minority Judges Always Make. New York Times (May 31).

Louisiana Children's Code (2012). Louisiana State Legislature-Various Chapters (1998-2012).

Louisiana District Judges Association Periodicals (2000). Guide to the Louisiana Judiciary (1956-2000).

Manski, C. F. (1993). Identi...cation of Endogenous Social E¤ects: The Reection Problem. Review of
  Economic Studies 60 (3), 531­542.

Mas, A. and E. Moretti (2009). Peers at Work. American Economic Review 99 (1), 112­145.

Mo¢ tt, R. (2001). Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria, and Social Interactions. In Social Dynam-
  ics, eds. Steven N. Durlauf and H. Peyton Young, pp. 45­82. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Murphy, F. X. (2019). Does Increased Exposure to Peers with Adverse Characteristics Reduce Work-
  place Performance? Evidence from a Natural Experiment in the US Army. Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 37 (2), 435­466.

                                                   27
Mustard, D. B. (2001). Racial, Ethnic, and Gender Disparities in Sentencing: Evidence from the U.S.
  Federal Courts. Journal of Law and Economics 44 (1), 285­314.

Philippe, A. and A. Ouss (2018). No Hatred or Malice, Fear or A¤ection: Media and Sentencing. Journal
  of Political Economy 126 (5), 2134­2178.

Posner, R. A. (1983). The Economics of Justice. Harvard University Press. Cambridge MA.

Rehavi, M. M. and S. B. Starr (2014). Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Sentences. Journal of Political
  Economy 122 (6), 1320­1354.

Sacerdote, B. (2001). Peer E¤ects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 116 (2), 681­704.

The Supreme Court of Louisiana (2012). Annual Reports (1998-2012).

Washington, E. L. (2008). Female Socialization: How Daughters A¤ect Their Legislator Fathers. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 98 (1), 311­332.

Whitmore, D. (2005). Resource and Peer Impacts on Girls' Academic Achievement: Evidence from a
  Randomized Experiment. American Economic Review 95 (2), 199­203.




                                                    28
Table 1: Summary Statistics for Juveniles and Judges

                                                                                Mean                         SD


Panel A: Juvenile Characteristics

 Incarceration (Secure Custody)                                                 0.137                     0.344
 Sentence Length                                                                507.16                    298.01
 Black                                                                          0.621                     0.485
 White                                                                          0.363                     0.481
 Female                                                                         0.236                     0.425
 Age                                                                            14.75                      1.45
 Committed a Felony                                                             0.369                     0.483

 Sample Size                                                                    20,244

Panel B: Judge Characteristics

 Female                                                                         0.239                      0.428
 Age at Disposition                                                             53.09                      8.63
 Average Number of Judges in the Court                                          5.57                       3.32

 Number of Judges                                                                138

NOTES: The statistics above reflect our research sample, which consists of first-time juvenile offenders over the period from
1998 to 2012. The sample is restricted to juveniles whose disposition decisions were made in courts where there were at least
two regular judges in the beginning-of-year.




                                                                  29
Table 2: Randomization Tests for Judge Peer Effects



Dependent Variable:                                                    Coefficient
(Proportion of Female Peers in the Courthouse)                      (Standard Error)



 Female                                                                    0.003
                                                                          (0.003)
 White                                                                     0.000
                                                                          (0.002)
 Juvenile Age                                                             -0.000
                                                                          (0.001)
Offense Types:
 Violent                                                                  -0.007
                                                                          (0.005)
 Property                                                                 -0.002
                                                                          (0.004)
 Drug                                                                      0.000
                                                                          (0.003)
 Felony                                                                   -0.004
                                                                          (0.004)

 Joint Significance (p-value )                                             0.47

 Sample Size                                                              20,244

NOTES: Standard errors are clustered at the court level. The sample consists of courts where
there were at least two judges in the beginning-of-year (1998-2012). Each cell represents a
separate regression of the proportion of female peers on juvenile characteristics and offense
types. Randomization regressions control for court and year fixed effects and court-specific
trends. See text for further details.




                                             30
Table 3: Variation Analysis for Identification

                                                                                                                       Value


Variation in Peer Measure
 (Unit of Analysis: Judge-by-Year)
 Mean of the Proportion of Female Peers in the Courthouse                                                              0.204
 Standard Deviation of the Proportion of Female Peers in the Courthouse                                                0.324
 Standard Deviation Change of the Proportion of Female Peers in the Courthouse from t-1 to t                           0.074
 Sum of Squares within Judges of the Proportion of Female Peers in the Courthouse (%)                                   6.89
 Sum of Squares across Judges of the Proportion of Female Peers in the Courthouse (%)                                  93.11

 Share of Judge-Year Observations in Courts with Turnover (%)                                                          17.05

NOTES: The statistics above describe the variation in the proportion of female peers in the courthouse which we exploit in subsequent
estimations.




                                                                 31
Table 4: Estimates of Judge Peer Effects on Incarceration and Sentence Length Imposed
by Judges

                                                                                  Coefficient
                                                                               (Standard Error)
                                                                         (1)                      (2)

Panel A: Incarceration
 Proportion of Female Peers in the Court                               0.087*                 0.098**
                                                                       (0.050)                (0.048)

Panel B: Sentence Length
 Proportion of Female Peers in the Court                              62.530*                67.802**
                                                                      (36.707)               (33.707)

Sample Size                                                            20,244                  20,244

Controls:
Court and Year Fixed Effects                                             Yes                     Yes
Court-Specific Trends                                                    Yes                     Yes
Judge Fixed Effects                                                      Yes                     Yes
Juvenile Characteristics                                                 No                      Yes
Offense Fixed Effects                                                    No                      Yes

NOTES: The sample consists of courts where there were at least two judges in the beginning-of-year (1998-2012).
Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the judge level. Juvenile controls include
indicators for juvenile's gender and race and juvenile's age and its square. Offense fixed effects include indicators
for type of offense a juvenile was convicted for (violent, property, drug-related and other offenses).
*significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                             32
     Table 5: Robustness Checks-Judge Peer Effects

                                                           Alternative      Drop      Judicial Districts All Judges    Case Files Judge Juvenile Offenders                                         Drop Sex             Control
                                                         Peer Measure     Hurricane    Serving Single (Case Files Judge Handled>=150      with Multiple                                            Offenses          Judge-Specific
                                                         Using Quarterly Katrina/Rita     Parishes       Handled>0)      in the Same    Convictions Added                                                               Trends
                                                            Variation     Regions      (Courthouses)                         Court

                                                                                                                                        Coefficient
                                                                                                                                     (Standard Error)
                                                                  (1)                (2)                  (3)                    (4)                (5)                        (6)                      (7)                  (8)

     Panel A: Incarceration
      Proportion of Female Peers in the Court                 0.098**            0.160***               0.095                0.094**                 0.096*                 0.108**                 0.100**               0.096*
                                                              (0.050)             (0.049)              (0.063)               (0.045)                 (0.050)                (0.052)                 (0.045)               (0.055)

     Mean of Outcome                                            0.137              0.122                0.168                  0.137                  0.141                   0.148                   0.133                0.137

     Panel B: Sentence Length




33
      Proportion of Female Peers in the Court                 58.173*             66.854               55.314                67.679**               66.958*                 48.489*                 77.931**             65.569*
                                                              (32.063)           (43.402)             (46.734)               (34.234)               (35.113)                (28.013)                (35.160)             (38.830)

     Mean of Outcome                                           507.07             494.36               516.51                 506.14                 510.08                  517.63                  497.38               507.16

     Sample Size                                               20,216             15,212               12,755                 20,647                 18,020                  23,063                  19,561               20,244

     Controls:
     Court and Year Fixed Effects                                Yes                Yes                  Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                  Yes
     Court-Specific Trends                                       Yes                Yes                  Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                  No
     Judge Fixed Effects                                         Yes                Yes                  Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                  Yes
     Juvenile Characteristics                                    Yes                Yes                  Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                  Yes
     Offense Fixed Effects                                       Yes                Yes                  Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                  Yes

     NOTES: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the judge level. Peer measure in Column 1 is constructed using quarterly variation in the proportion of female peers. Column 2 excludes parishes which
     were affected from the Hurricane Katrina/Rita (Orleans, Jefferson, St. Tammany, Plaquemines, St. Bernard, Lafourche, and Terrebonne). Column 3 excludes judicial districts presiding over multiple parishes (courthouses). Column 4
     extends the effective sample to include juveniles without imposing any restrictions on the number of dispositions made by judges, while Column 5 limits the effective sample to include juveniles whose dispositions were made
     by judges with at least 150 cases in the same courthouse over the period from 1998 to 2012. Column 6 includes first-time offenders who were convicted for more than one statute offenses and Column 7 excludes sex offenses. The
     last column replaces court trends with judge-specific linear trends.
     *significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
     Table 6: Estimates of Judge Peer Effects-Controlling for Proportion of Black Judges and Average Age of Peers

                                                                                           Incarceration                                             Sentence Length
                                                                                                                            Coefficient
                                                                                                                         (Standard Error)
                                                                             (1)                  (2)                  (3)              (4)                (5)           (6)

     Proportion of Female Peers in the Court                              0.089**              0.090**              0.084**              64.365*        70.256**       66.911*
                                                                          (0.042)              (0.041)              (0.036)              (38.372)       (33.315)       (37.423)
     Proportion of Black Peers in the Court                                0.047                                      0.038               17.653                        22.214
                                                                          (0.074)                                   (0.075)              (59.275)                      (63.407)
     Average Age of Peers in the Court                                                         -0.001                -0.001                               0.352          0.492
                                                                                               (0.002)              (0.002)                              (2.202)        (2.318)




34
     Mean of the Proportion of Black Peers in the Court                    0.136
     Mean of the Average Age of Peers                                      53.96

     Sample Size                                                          20,244                                                          20,244

     Controls:
     Court and Year Fixed Effects                                           Yes                   Yes                  Yes                     Yes         Yes           Yes
     Court-Specific Trends                                                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                     Yes         Yes           Yes
     Judge Fixed Effects                                                    Yes                   Yes                  Yes                     Yes         Yes           Yes
     Juvenile Characteristics                                               Yes                   Yes                  Yes                     Yes         Yes           Yes
     Offense Fixed Effects                                                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                     Yes         Yes           Yes

     NOTES: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the judge level. See Tables 4 and the text for further details.
     *significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
Table 7: Timing of Judge Peer Effects and Falsification Test

                                                                                    Incarceration                                  Sentence Length
                                                                                                             Coefficient
                                                                                                          (Standard Error)
                                                                        (1)               (2)              (3)           (4)               (5)         (6)

Proportion of Female Peers in the Court                              0.117**           0.112*            0.075           91.368*         94.155*     -41.037
                                                                     (0.055)           (0.064)          (0.051)          (49.075)        (50.349)    (37.149)
Proportion of Female Peers in the Court (t+1)                         0.017            -0.024                             30.939          27.314
                                                                     (0.023)           (0.030)                           (47.385)        (41.351)
Proportion of Female Peers in the Court (t+2)                                           0.027                                             20.128
                                                                                       (0.037)                                           (61.751)
Proportion of Female Peers in the Court (t-1)                                                           -0.002                                      108.54**
                                                                                                        (0.044)                                     (50.610)
Proportion of Female Peers in the Court (t-2)                                                            0.014                                       -25.957
                                                                                                        (0.038)                                     (42.982)

Mean of Outcome                                                        0.140            0.143            0.130            512.15         518.31      505.54

Sample Size                                                           19,049            17,638           15,931           19,049         17,638      15,931

Controls:
Court and Year Fixed Effects                                            Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes         Yes
Court-Specific Trends                                                   Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes         Yes
Judge Fixed Effects                                                     Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes         Yes
Juvenile Characteristics                                                Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes         Yes
Offense Fixed Effects                                                   Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes         Yes

NOTES: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the judge level. See Table 4 and the text for further details.
*significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                                               35
Table 8: Estimates of Judge Peer Effects-Judge and Defendant Gender Interactions

                                                                                                         Incarceration                  Sentence
                                                                                                                                         Length
                                                                                                                         Coefficient
                                                                                                                      (Standard Error)
                                                                                                                (1)                        (2)

Proportion of Female Peers in the Court ( 1 )                                                                 0.026                       65.030
                                                                                                             (0.039)                     (43.529)
Proportion of Female Peers in the Court*Juvenile is Female ( 2 )                                             -0.003                      -25.929
                                                                                                             (0.034)                     (35.814)
Proportion of Female Peers in the Court*Judge is Female ( 3 )                                               0.214***                      63.105
                                                                                                             (0.064)                     (61.028)
Proportion of Female Peers in the Court*Juvenile is Female*Judge is Female ( 5 )                             -0.064                     -136.117
                                                                                                             (0.087)                    (153.763)

p-value ( 1 + 2 )                                                                                              0.62                       0.38
p-value ( 1 + 3 )                                                                                              0.00                       0.00
p-value ( 1 + 2 + 3 + 5 )                                                                                      0.00                       0.85

Sample Size                                                                                                  20,244                      20,244

Controls:
Court and Year Fixed Effects                                                                                   Yes                        Yes
Court-Specific Trends                                                                                          Yes                        Yes
Judge Fixed Effects                                                                                            Yes                        Yes
Juvenile Characteristics                                                                                       Yes                        Yes
Offense Fixed Effects                                                                                          Yes                        Yes

NOTES: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the judge level. For each juvenile control, offense and judge fixed
effects, the level term and its interaction with the focal variable (juvenile and judge's gender) are included in the specifications.
*significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.




                                                                           36
Table 9: Simulation Exercise-The Impact of Replacing One Male Judge with One Female Judge in a
Courthouse of Two Female and Eight Male Judges (10 Judges in total)

                                                                                    The Impact on              The Impact on
Judge-Juvenile Defendant:                                                           Incarceration             Sentence Length

Female Judge-Female Juvenile Defendant (N=1,555)                                    1.9 pp. (9.3%)                insignificant

Female Judge-Male Juvenile Defendant (N=5,068)                                      2.6 pp. (12.7%)           14 days (2.68 %)

Male Judge-Female Juvenile Defendant (N=3,230)                                         insignificant              insignificant

Male Judge-Male Juvenile Defendant (N=10,391)                                          insignificant              insignificant



Female Judge's Incarceration Rate/ Average Sentencing                                     0.205                     525.72
Male Judge's Incarceration Rate/Average Sentencing                                        0.104                     498.13

NOTES: The percentages in parentheses represent changes relative to the average judge-gender specific dispositions. N represents the
sample sizes. See Table 8 the text for further details.




                                                                 37
Table 10: Distribution of Judge Harshness in Incarceration and Sentence Length by Judge's Gender
                                                                                 Full Sample          Proportion of Female      Proportion of Female
                                                                                                        Peers <=Sample             Peers>Sample
                                                                                                             Mean                        Mean
                                                                                       (1)                    (2)                          (3)

Panel A: Female Judges (Judge-by-Year)
 Mean of Judge Harshness in Incarceration                                           0.220                   0.090                       0.343
 Mean of Judge Harshness in Sentence Length                                         549.88                  494.16                      602.63

Panel B: Male Judges (Judge-by-Year)
 Mean of Judge Harshness in Incarceration                                           0.129                   0.122                       0.141
 Mean of Judge Harshness in Sentence Length                                         544.43                  560.58                      510.03

NOTES: The entries represent weighted means, where the weights are based on judges' total number of dispositions in each year. The mean proportion of
females that are used in columns (2) and (3) are calculated separately for each year in the sample.




                                                                           38
     Table 11: Estimates of Judge Peer Effects-Controlling for Average Peer Harshness of Judges Handling Juvenile Cases

                                                                                                    Incarceration                                         Sentence Length
                                                                                                                                  Coefficient
                                                                                                                               (Standard Error)
                                                                                       (1)                (2)                (3)             (4)                  (5)            (6)

     Panel A: Full Sample (N=17,395)
     Proportion of Female Peers in the Court                                         0.090*                               0.092*           75.053**                            72.960**
                                                                                     (0.053)                              (0.056)          (34.991)                            (34.924)
     Average Judge Peer Harshness in Incarceration                                                     -0.071              0.033
                                                                                                       (0.141)            (0.172)
     Average Judge Peer Harshness in Sentence Length/100                                                                                                        13.667          11.001
                                                                                                                                                               (20.368)        (17.087)

     Panel B: Female Judge Sample (N=5,356)




39
     Proportion of Female Peers in the Court                                       0.392***                              0.394***            55.852                             56.047
                                                                                    (0.043)                               (0.042)           (86.286)                           (86.393)
     Average Judge Peer Harshness in Incarceration                                                     -0.043             -0.157
                                                                                                       (0.219)            (0.261)
     Average Judge Peer Harshness in Sentence Length/100                                                                                                        14.590          14.983
                                                                                                                                                               (64.952)        (64.295)

     Controls:
     Court and Year Fixed Effects                                                      Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes             Yes
     Court-Specific Trends                                                             Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes             Yes
     Judge Fixed Effects                                                               Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes             Yes
     Juvenile Characteristics                                                          Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes             Yes
     Offense Fixed Effects                                                             Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes             Yes

     NOTES: Standard errors are reported in parentheses re clustered at the judge level. N represents the sample sizes. See Tables 4 and 7 and the text for further details.
     *significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.
           4000
           3000
       Frequency
         2000
           1000
           0




                   -.5                     0               .5
                             Proportion of Female Judges


Figure 1: Distribution of Proportion of Female Peers-Residualized
NOTES: The residuals are obtained from a regression of proportion of female peers on judge, year and court ...xed e¤ects,
court-speci...c trends and juvenile characteristics.




                                                            40
                                           .5
                                                                                          Female Judges
                                                                                          Male Judges
      Average Proportion of Female Peers
                                           .4



                                           .3



                                           .2



                                           .1



                                           0
                                                1998   2000   2002   2004   2006   2008     2010     2012


Figure 2: Average Proportion of Female Peers by Judge'
                                                     s Gender
NOTES: The analysis sample consists of courts where there were at least two judges in the beginning-of-year (1998 to 2012).




                                                                                                          41
                                                           Appendix:
    Panel A: Female Judges                                          Panel B: Male Judges




                                                                            2500
           800




                                                                            2000
           600




                                                                              1500
       Frequency




                                                                        Frequency
         400




                                                                      1000
           200




                                                                            500
           0




                                                                            0
                   -.4       -.2                      0       .2                     -.5                 0               .5
                             Proportion of Female Judges                                   Proportion of Female Judges


Figure A1: Distribution of Proportion of Female Peers-by Judge's Race-Residualized
NOTES: The residuals are obtained from a regression of proportion of female peers on judge, year and court ...xed e¤ects,
court-speci...c trends and juvenile characteristics.




                                                               42
                   150
                   100
       Frequency
                   50
                   0




                         .06     .08                 .1                .12       .14
                               Coefficient Estimates-Incarceration Probability


Figure A2: Distribution of Leave-One Judge Out Estimates of the Gender Peer E¤ects in the Courthouse
on Incarceration
NOTES: The distribution of the coe¢ cient estimates of the proportion of female peers in the courthouse on incarceration decision
set by the judges. The baseline speci...cation is estimated repeatedly, each time removing dispositions set by a di¤erent judge.
There are 138 judges in the e¤ective sample.




                                                                                  43
                   150
                   100
       Frequency
                   50
                   0




                         40         60                     80         100
                              Coefficient Estimates-Sentence Length


Figure A3: Distribution of Leave-One Judge Out Estimates of the Gender Peer E¤ects in the Courthouse
on Sentence Length
NOTES: The distribution of the coe¢ cient estimates of the proportion of female peers in the courthouse on sentence length
set by the judges. The baseline speci...cation is estimated repeatedly, each time removing dispositions set by a di¤erent judge.
There are 138 judges in the e¤ective sample.




                                                                       44
                  15
                  10
      Frequency
                  5
                  0




                       -.15   -.1       -.05           0         .05        .1   .15
                                    Coefficients from Placebo Regressions


Figure A4: Placebo Coe¢ cients of the Proportion of Female Peers in Incarceration Regression
NOTES: The ...gure displays the distribution of placebo coe¢ cients of the proportion of female peers, where the proportions of
female peers of a courthouse are randomly assigned to di¤erent years of the same courthouse. The vertical line represents the
actual point estimate reported in Column 2 of Table 4.




                                                                                   45
                  .015
                  .01
      Frequency
                  .005
                  0




                         -100   -50                 0               50   100
                                Coefficients from Placebo Regressions


Figure A5: Placebo Coe¢ cients of the Proportion of Female Peers in Sentence Length Regression
NOTES: The ...gure displays the distribution of placebo coe¢ cients of the proportion of female peers, where the proportions of
female peers of a courthouse are randomly assigned to di¤erent years of the same courthouse. The vertical line represents the
actual point estimate reported in Column 2 of Table 4.




                                                                           46
