                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF MIGRANTS FROM HURRICANE MARIA

                                         Giovanni Peri
                                          Derek Rury
                                       Justin C. Wiltshire

                                      Working Paper 27718
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27718


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




Derek Rury and Justin Wiltshire gratefully acknowledge financial support for this project from
the Center for Growth and Opportunity. We thank seminar participants at UC Davis and the 2019
EEA Annual Conference for useful comments on early versions of this paper, and particularly
thank Marianne Bitler, Brendan Price, and Geoffrey Schnorr for helpful comments. Any errors or
omissions are the sole responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Giovanni Peri, Derek Rury, and Justin C. Wiltshire. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economic Impact of Migrants from Hurricane Maria
Giovanni Peri, Derek Rury, and Justin C. Wiltshire
NBER Working Paper No. 27718
August 2020
JEL No. F22,J15,J21,J61

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine the economic impact of the large migration of Puerto Ricans to Orlando after
Hurricane Maria. Using a synthetic control approach, we find that employment in Orlando
increased, especially in construction and retail, and find positive aggregate labor market effects
for non-Hispanic and less-educated workers. While we find that earnings for these workers
decreased slightly in construction, this was balanced by earnings growth in retail and hospitality.
These results are consistent with small negative impacts on earnings in sectors exposed to a labor
supply shock, offset by positive effects in sectors impacted by an associated positive consumer
demand shock.

Giovanni Peri                                    Justin C. Wiltshire
Department of Economics                          University of California, Davis
University of California, Davis                  justinwiltshire@gmail.com
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

Derek Rury
University of California, Davis
derekrury@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27718
An online appendix available at: is available at https://justinwiltshire.com/research-1
                                                                                                           2


                                           I.   Introduction

In September 2017 Hurricanes Irma and Maria struck Puerto Rico in rapid succession,
bringing catastrophic loss in property and lives to hundreds of thousands of families. In the
months following the hurricane, over 120,000 individuals and families rapidly fled Puerto
Rico for the U.S. mainland. This paper examines the short-run economic impact of this
sudden migration event on Orlando, the city which received a plurality of these refugees.
Along with studying the impact of this event on the broader labor market, we examine
whether there is evidence of effects on employment and earnings for incumbent workers,
as well as which sectors were affected and whether there was a firm-creation response. To
do so, we employ a synthetic control approach using a data source that provides virtually-
complete coverage of county-level employment outcomes at a high frequency throughout
our study period. Our results are consistent with a story in which migrants place modest
downward pressure on earnings for natives in sectors most exposed to the new migrant
labor, while having positive effects on employment and earnings for workers in sectors
which meet the consumer demand of migrants.
    Measuring the impact of immigrants on local economies has been a focus of economists
for decades. Several papers have analyzed the local labor market effects of sudden waves
of immigration. Examples include the analysis of the inflow of Soviet Jews to Israel during
the 1990s (Cohen-Goldner and Paserman, 2011); the inflow of Syrians to Turkey in 2013-
15 (Ceritoglu et al., 2017); and the inflow of Algerians to France in the 1950's (Hunt,
1992)). The only case studied in the U.S.--potentially over-studied, given the limited
amount of data available and the fact that the event now happened forty years ago--is the
Mariel Boatlift.1 This was an episode in which approximately 100,000 people fled from
Cuba, mainly relocating to Miami. While early studies established that this large inflow
had no impact on local wages even in the short run Card (1990), recent re-analyses of
the event have generated some disagreement on the effects, especially with respect to the
impact on the small subgroup of male, less-educated, native workers (Borjas, 2017; Peri
and Yasenov, 2019; Clemens and Hunt, 2019). The details of the controversy are centered
on measurement, sample choice, and methods used.
    For several reasons, the event we study here is much more relevant than the Mariel
Boatlift for informing our current understanding of the local labor market impact of im-
migration in the U.S. First, the episode we study is much more recent, and the economy
   1 Another weather event similar to Maria, Hurricane Katrina, has also been studied quite substantially,
although most of the papers focus on the impact on the out-migrants who fled New Orleans and the sur-
rounding area (rather than on people in the receiving communities). De Silva et al. (2010) look at the impact
on wages of a large relocation of evacuees on Houston, and find that there was an aggregate, small wage
depression of 0.7 percent in low-skill industries. Compared to De Silva et al. (2010), our paper uses a more
recently developed and, we argue, more appropriate estimation strategy to test a similar set of outcomes.
                                                                                                        3


of Orlando in 2018 is more comparable to current U.S. metropolitan areas than was the
economy of Miami in 1980. Second, the impact of this episode is a consequence of mi-
gration in response to an extreme weather event--an occurrence likely to become more
frequent in the future. Third, the case of immigration from Puerto Rico involves people
who have similar levels of education to native mainland U.S. workers, while the Cubans
in the Mariel Boatlift (Marielitos) had much lower levels of education. This means that
the Hurricane Maria migration closely resembled the sort of immigration the U.S. has
received in the last 20 years (i.e. 2000-2018)--which included a large share of college-
educated immigrants--while the low-skilled immigration of Marielitos was more similar
to the immigration of the 1990s. We also note that, similarly to the Cuban Marielitos,
immigrants from Puerto Rico had immediate access to the U.S. labor market and other
benefits available to U.S. citizens. This implies that their potential crowding-out impact
on native workers would be at a maximum. Hence our findings of no crowding-out and of
small overall wage effects, positive in certain sectors and negative in others, are particu-
larly compelling.
    Fourth, we employ the more current `synthetic control' estimating strategy (similarly
to Peri and Yasenov (2019)) first proposed by Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and further
developed in Abadie et al. (2010, 2015), and subject to recent important improvements.2
A fifth advantage of our study, relative to the Mariel Boatlift literature--which relies on
small, weighted samples of survey data from the Current Population Survey (CPS)--is
that we use data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) and the
Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI). These are county-by-industry-level administrative
data covering 95+% of all workers, observed on a quarterly basis.3 The detail and pre-
cision of our analysis is therefore significantly greater than in those studies. Sixth, we
also analyze the impact on number of firms--an important and under-researched margin
of adjustment to immigration (recently, Beerli et al. (2018) show the importance of firms'
response to increased availability of immigrants for understanding labor market impacts).
Seventh, and finally, we analyze a potential positive labor demand effect generated by lo-
cal consumption of the immigrants, analyzed through different impacts across sectors (the
previous standard for this type of analysis was Bodvarsson et al. (2008)).
    Using data from FEMA applications for assistance related to the hurricanes, and with
reference to other analyses examining social media usage and air travel of Puerto Ri-
cans in the months after Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico, we establish that the Orlando
Metropolitan Area almost certainly received people from the Island than any other city.4
   2 Readers  are pointed to Abadie (Forthcoming) for an excellent current review of the synthetic control
literature, which is continually expanding.
    3 Employment is observed on a monthly basis in the QCEW. The other variables are observed quarterly.
    4 We take Orlando to be the five counties which comprise the Orlando Commuting Zone: Lake, Orange,
                                                                                           4


Over 120,000 people left Puerto Rico for the U.S. mainland in the months from September
2017 to March 2018, 24,000 of whom we estimate ended up in Orlando. This represents
around 1 percent of Orlando's pre-hurricane population and around 2 percent of its pre-
hurricane total employment. Both in levels and as a percentage of the population, Orlando
received many more refugees than even the next most-impacted metropolitan areas (New
York and Miami). We therefore consider it as the treated unit in our analysis. This sudden
out-migration of Puerto Ricans from the Island and into Orlando, as a result of Hurricane
Maria, constitutes a good approximation to a natural experiment--namely a sudden and
unexpected event, uncorrelated with conditions in the Orlando local economy.
     We analyze the impact of this migration event between September 2017 and Septem-
ber 2018 on employment and earnings in the Orlando area. We look first at aggregate
effects, then shift our focus to specific sectors--namely the construction, retail trade, and
accommodations & food services sectors (hereafter, hospitality). We do this first for all
workers, then specifically for non-Hispanic and less-educated subgroups (those with a
high-school degree or less education) as proximate measures, respectively, of the incum-
bent native-worker population (Orlando non-Hispanic residents are likely to be U.S.-born,
i.e. natives) and of those who may be in competition with the new Puerto Rican arrivals if
they took manual and less-skilled jobs.
     Sector-specific analysis in the short-run helps us to identify potential effects of the
shock on labor demand and labor supply. We demonstrate that the construction sector was
the most likely to experience a sudden increase in labor supply in the short run. A large
share of Hispanics were already employed in the construction sector before the hurricane,
and most construction jobs require limited use of the English language--which less than
40% of Puerto Rican residents speak "well". Moreover, while increased demand for new
buildings may eventually follow the arrival of immigrants, we see no evidence the housing
market was affected in the short run. On the other hand, the retail and hospitality sectors
were likely to experience positive demand shocks in the short run, as new additions to
a local population require accommodations, retail goods, and food services. While some
immigrants were employed in these sectors, the short-run impact of the new arrivals should
mainly reflect an increase in demand for retail and hospitality workers, resulting from the
increased consumer demand in those sectors. By quantifying the effect on employment
and wages in each sector, we learn about the potential labor supply and labor demand
shifts as a consequence of immigration.
     Additionally, we consider the response of establishments in the area. The speed and
magnitude of the response by firms to this expansion is important for understanding the
mechanisms through which the labor supply shock was absorbed by the local economy in
the short run. While our estimated effects are all positive, their pre-treatment trends are
Osceola, and Seminole--which comprise the Orlando Metropolitan Area--plus Sumter County.
                                                                                                       5


noisy enough that none of them reach a conventional level of significance according to our
test statistics.5 The overall evidence is suggestive of a positive firm-creation response, but
not large enough to be significant in the short-run.
    Broadly, our results are consistent with a story in which Puerto Rican refugees in Or-
lando constituted a labor supply shock concentrated in the construction sector, as well as
a local demand shock for goods and services in the retail and hospitality sectors which
resulted in increased labor demand in those sectors. While we do find evidence of a nega-
tive impact on construction sector wages of natives and less-educated workers 12 months
after the migration event (-2.5% and -1.5%, respectively), we also find evidence that retail
earnings increased for natives and less-educated workers (+2.1% and +1.2%, respectively)
over that same period.6 Looking across all sectors and all workers, despite the large and
sudden influx of thousands of new workers into the region, we find no evidence of any
negative impact on wages (the point estimates are, in fact, positive yet not robustly signif-
icant), suggesting that the sector-specific positive wage effects at least offset the negative
ones in the aggregate. This aggregate balancing effect holds for native and less-educated
workers as well. In fact, we also estimate a 0.8% increase in aggregate employment for
each of those groups 12 months after the hurricane. These results are broadly robust to sev-
eral controls and specifications, and suggest that this large inflow of workers was quickly
absorbed into and grew the local economy.
    The rest of this paper proceeds as follows: Section II. describes the demographic and
employment trends of immigrants from Puerto Rico in the mainland United States, and
justifies focusing on Orlando as (most intensely) treated unit. Section III. describes our
data and empirical methodology. Section IV. describes the results from our analyses, and
presents a series of robustness checks--including a test for whether our results were im-
pacted by Hurricane Irma's effects on Orlando, and an analysis of housing market condi-
tions before the migrants' arrival. Section V. concludes.

             II.   Characteristics and Trends of Puerto-Rican Immigration

                   A.   Historical Migration and Characteristics of Migrants
During the first half of the 20th century and for several decades thereafter, rates of mi-
gration from Puerto Rico to the mainland remained low. The Puerto Rican population on
the mainland was an estimated 1,513 in 1910 and 226,110 in 1950, respectively consti-
tuting 0.002 percent and 0.15 percent of the total population in those years. During the
   5 Our   12-month estimate of the impact on construction establishments is significant according to our
moving block p-value, but not according to our more conservative test statistics.
    6 The construction sector employed between 5 and 6.5% of Orlando workers over the period, while the

retail sector typically employed between 12 and 13%.
                                                                                                             6


later half of the 20th century and continuing into the 21st, however, Puerto Rican migra-
tion to the mainland United States increased significantly. As of 2015 an estimated 5.4
million Puerto Ricans resided in the mainland U.S. (constituting 1.6 percent of the U.S
population). This number is particularly striking when compared to the total population of
3.5 million people residing in Puerto Rico as of 2018 (Whalen and Vazquez-Hernandez,
2005). During these years, large Puerto Rican communities formed in New York City and
the surrounding areas, in Philadelphia and Chicago, and in parts of Florida. Migration fol-
lowed the usual pattern, with new immigrants settling in areas with relatively large Puerto
Rican communities.
    In recent decades, the most significant concentrations of Puerto Ricans developed in
the New York area and in the Orlando area (see online Appendix Figure A17 ) with Or-
lando becoming a particularly popular destination in the years leading up to 2017. Puerto
Ricans' full access to labor opportunities in the mainland United States suggests that the
availability of jobs in the U.S. may have been the largest driver of mobility from the island
to the mainland.
    Table 1 shows differences in average characteristics of Puerto Rican migrants who ar-
rived in the year preceding Hurricane Maria, compared to reference groups.8 The first
column shows the difference with US natives, the second with residents of Puerto Rico,
the third with US natives in Florida.9 . The largest difference between recent Puerto Rican
immigrants and US natives is in their average age, as Puerto Rico immigrants are signif-
icantly younger and less likely to be married than natives. They are also more likely to
be male. On the other hand, education levels are similar. While the difference in average
years of schooling compared to U.S. natives is statistically significant, compared to the
average Florida native it is not significant and it is small--equal to 0.38 and 0.13 years of
schooling, respectively. There is no significant difference in the share of college-educated
immigrants from Puerto Rico and natives in the U.S. or in Florida. The inflow can there-
fore be characterized as mostly young, with an education composition similar to that of
natives.
   7 The  figures are constructed using American Community Survey from 2005 to 2017
   7 Migrants   coming to the United States are often positively "selected" from their country in terms of
education, mainly because of the large skill premium paid in the U.S. relative to countries of origin (Grog-
ger and Hanson, 2011). Borjas (2008), however, documented negative selection of pre-2000 Puerto-rican
immigrants, in terms of education.
    8 Individuals are restricted to those who are in the labor force.
    9 A negative value implies that the Puerto Rico migrants have a smaller value for that variable relative to

the comparison group.
                                                                                         7


                          B.   Migration After Hurricane Maria
Early estimates put the number of Puerto Ricans who fled to Florida alone in the early
months after September 2017 at over 200,000 people. Later estimates, based on Facebook
data, substantially revised this number down, to 44,000 people who moved from Puerto
Rico to Florida and stayed there until at least March 2018 (Alexander et al., 2019). Es-
timates based on flight passenger lists confirm between 30,000 and 50,000 people moved
out of Puerto Rico to Florida in the months after the hurricane (Rayer, 2018). Meanwhile,
an analysis of ACS/PRCS data from the U.S. Census Bureau puts the number of net out-
migrants from Puerto Rico between July 2017 and July 2018 at 123,399 (U.S. Census
Bureau, 2018), and the Center for Puerto Rican Studies estimates this number to be more
than 135,000 (Centro, 2018). We complement these estimates with additional evidence
to get an idea of the distribution of those evacuees across the US. Data from applications
for disaster relief from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) are useful
to gather a geographic distribution of evacuees. These application data, obtained through
a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request, represent claims made to FEMA to obtain
disaster relief funds, filed by people who had a home in Puerto Rico which was damaged
by Hurricanes Irma and/or Maria. By looking at the ZIP code of residence before the
hurricane and the ZIP code at the time of filing (after Hurricane Maria occurred), we can
identify the likely residence of these Puerto Ricans on the mainland in the months after
the hurricane. The distribution of these applications (aggregated to commuting zones and
shown in Figure A2 in the online Appendix, in both level and per capita terms) reveals that
these FEMA applications were heavily concentrated in relatively few areas. Especially in
per capita terms, the Orlando area exhibits by far the largest concentrations: with nearly
4,000 applications, Orlando had more than two-and-a-half times as many applications as
the next most heavily affected commuting zones (Fort Lauderdale-Miami and New York-
Nassau-Suffolk). These FEMA applications in the Orlando area represent 20 percent of
the total received.
    Combining the U.S. Census Bureau estimate of 123,399 net out-migrants from Puerto
Rico between July 2017 and July 2018 with the FEMA application data as an approxi-
mate estimate of the geographic relocation of these migrants, we conservatively estimate
that around 24,000 Puerto Ricans relocated to the Orlando area in the months following
the hurricanes. This represents over 1 percent of Orlando's population, 1.5 percent of its
working-age population (aged 16-64), and around 2 percent of its pre-hurricane total em-
ployment. We conservatively estimate that at least half of these migrations are directly
attributable to the hurricanes (based on out-migration trends from Puerto Rico in the years
prior). This inflow was smaller than that of Cubans arriving in Miami after the Boatlift
(which equaled 5-6% of the Miami labor force). Nevertheless, the post-Maria Puerto Ri-
                                                                                                           8


can refugee flows provided a significant shock to Orlando's population and labor force,
especially as the large majority of this inflow took place within a relatively short period
of 1-3 months. To put this in context, an inflow of immigrants equal to one percent of the
labor force is larger than the annual inflow of Mexicans during the 1990s, when Mexican
immigration into the US was highest. This inflow as a percent of Orlando's labor force is
thus comparable to or higher than immigration inflows in the peak years for the US as a
whole, and it was concentrated in the months between September 2017 and March 2018.
To compare this inflow to another well-known international event, the inflow of Syrian
refugees in Turkey was comparable to our setting, at 2.5 percent of the local population
over the course of a couple of years (see Tumen (2015)).

                        C.    Sector Distribution of Puerto Rican Migrants
Before the hurricanes the distribution of Puerto Rican migrants across sectors of employ-
ment in Orlando was not very different from that of natives (online Appendix Table A1).
As of 2016, Puerto Rican natives were slightly more concentrated in local services such as
transportation and retail, and slightly less concentrated in education and management.10 .
However, when we consider the sector distribution of all Hispanics and of Hispanics
born abroad, (columns 3 and 4 of online Appendix Table A1) we see a significant over-
representation in the construction sector. Because of language and cultural commonalities,
this extended group (and not just Puerto Ricans) can be a very important network to find
jobs. Moreover the construction sector may have been a particularly industry for those
workers in the short run, as a larger share of construction workers in Orlando who do not
speak English well than is the case in any other sector (11.8% do not speak English or
do not speak it well). The majority of Puerto Rican residents are not fluent in English
(only about a third speak English "well" according to the Puerto Rico ACS), hence a job
in construction would have been more attainable in the short run. We also note the Bureau
of Labor Statistics (2015) also shows that in 2014 Hispanic workers in the U.S. were more
likely to work in the construction sector than any other sector in the economy. Finally, we
use the QWI to look at employment in Orlando and demonstrate that construction saw sub-
stantially larger growth in the Hispanic share of employment between Q2 2017 (before the
hurricane hit), and Q2 2018 compared to other industries (online Appendix Figure A3).11
  10 It is difficult to use the 2017 or 2018 ACS to calculate the sector composition of Puerto Rican migrants
in Orlando after Maria, as this group is very small in the ACS and as sampling variation can be quite large.
Additionally, because the month of interview is uncertain, it is hard to tell who, among those who arrived in
a given year, is an evacuee in the 2017 or the 2018 ACS samples. In our analysis we use the QWI data to
identify non-Hispanics, allowing us to study the native response to immigrants
   11 There was growth in the Hispanic employment share in all sectors, as Orlando has in general been

experiencing higher growth in its Hispanic population than in its population as a whole
                                                                                                       9


Combining these pieces of information, it is reasonable to think that the evacuees from
Maria found in Orlando's construction sector a quickly accessible and attractive source of
jobs, at least in the short run, relative to other sectors.

                                  III.   Data and Methodology

                                           A.    Overview
The migration push out of Puerto Rico was very sudden and, as triggered by the hurri-
canes, fully uncorrelated with economic fundamentals in Orlando. It was the presence
of a large community and network of Puerto Ricans already in Orlando that attracted the
migrants there much more than to other cities. Taken together, these features constitute
a natural experiment and make this event a good candidate to estimate the causal effects
on Orlando's economic outcomes, by comparing them to those of similar and unaffected
cities. We focus on the Orlando-area labor market captured by its commuting zone (CZ)--
an aggregation of counties constituting the Orlando labor market--to internalize most of
the effects.12
    We call the Orlando CZ our "treated unit" and we adopt a synthetic control approach
to estimate the effects on local (log) employment, compensation per worker, and establish-
ment counts. We analyze the local economy in aggregate, and also focus on three sectors:
the construction sector (NAICS 23) which, as argued in the previous section, received po-
tentially the largest labor supply increase from the migrants' arrival; the retail trade sector
(NAICS 44-45) and the accommodation & food services, or hospitality, sector (NAICS
72). Retail and hospitality are non-tradable sectors most likely to have experienced a labor
demand shock associated with the increased demand for local accommodations, hospital-
ity services and goods for purchase which the migrants would have wanted. While some
immigrants may have worked in these sectors, Puerto Rican employment does not appear
to have disproportionately concentrated here. Therefore, while any effects on construction
employment and wages are primarily the result of a labor supply shock in that sector, the
effects on retail and hospitality should primarily be the result of a labor demand shock
(with a possible small labor supply increase). The aggregate effects, then, are a combi-
nation of both the supply of new workers and the expenditures of new consumers in the
Orlando economy.
    After analyzing overall employment and average wage effects, we turn our attention
to a second group of outcomes which approximate the effects on native workers (as done
  12 These have become the standard units of analysis when considering labor market impacts (see, for
instance, Autor et al. (2013); Autor and Dorn (2013)). On a county basis (i.e. prior to cross-walking our
QCEW and QWI data into 1990 CZs), we combine the five boroughs of New York City, and individually
combine Virginia's independent cities with their surrounding counties.
                                                                                        10


in in Card (1990); Borjas (2017); Peri and Yasenov (2019)). To do this we analyze the
employment and wages of non-Hispanic workers, who are very likely to be U.S. born,
both in the overall economy and in the specific sectors where separate labor demand and
supply effects should be more visible.
    We also try to identify effects on the group of workers that is more vulnerable and in
the short-run may be more affected by labor market competition from immigrants--who
may take jobs that do not require sophisticated language skills and are disproportionately
concentrated in the construction sector. These are typically workers with low levels of ed-
ucation (high school or less) and who often receive relatively low pay (on average). While
immigrants from Puerto Rico did not have levels of schooling significantly lower than na-
tives, in the short run they may have been willing to "downgrade" their job expectations
in order to find work (e.g. if their English language skills were not particularly strong).
In such a case, even with a similar education distribution among immigrants and natives,
there may still have been stronger competition for less-skilled jobs in the short run.
    Finally, we look at changes in the number of local establishments as a proxy of the
response of local investment, at least in the short-term. Firm-creation is an important
mechanism of adjustment to immigration in the long run, but there has been very little
work done studying the rapidity of its response in a local economy.

                                        B.   Data
Our primary analysis is conducted using data from the Quarterly Census of Employment
and Wages (QCEW), published by the U.S. Census Bureau. The QCEW is derived from
the Unemployment Insurance (UI) accounting system in each state, and effectively covers
95%+ of all employed individuals from UI-reporting establishments. The data are avail-
able at the industry-by-county level down to the 6-digit NAICS level definition, and are
observed monthly for employment and quarterly for earnings and establishments. For cells
that are particularly small there may be "suppression" of data due to privacy reasons, but
there are almost no suppressions at the 2-digit NAICS level. This provides complete cov-
erage of employment and earnings, and the availability of these data each month or quarter
(depending on the variable) allow us to conduct a reliable short-run analysis along several
dimensions. The complete coverage and high reliability are also substantial advantages
relative to studies of the Mariel Boatlift, which are all based on small, weighted samples
from the Current Population Survey. Of our variables of interest, employment is observed
monthly while compensation, establishments, and the derived compensation-per-worker
variables are observed on a quarterly basis. We focus on the period 2014 Q1 - 2018 Q3
for the quarterly-observed variables, and January 2014 - August 2018 for employment.
This allows us to include three and a half year of pre-Hurricane data and one year of
post-Hurricane data.
                                                                                                       11


    Additional analysis is conducted using data from the Quarterly Workforce Indicators
(QWI). A product of the U.S. Census Bureau, the QWI data are the result of the Longitu-
dinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) program, which (as with the QCEW) uses
data from state UI accounting systems, as well as other sources. The QWI data report em-
ployment and earnings of employees at the industry-by-county level, and they also break
the data down by education level and by ethnicity. This, as mentioned above, allows us to
measure labor market outcomes for a subset of workers who are likely to be natives in the
Orlando labor market (non-Hispanic workers), as well as for workers with a high school
degree or less education, who could face more precarious employment. There are some
issues with the QWI data relative to the QCEW: all variables including employment are
only observed on a quarterly basis; for less-educated workers, only non-youth individuals
(aged 25+) are observed; a few states are missing observations for some quarters of inter-
est; and the available data series do not cover all counties in all states for a full year after
Hurricane Maria.13 This final issue somewhat restricts the number of commuting zones
that can be used as control in the post-Hurricane Maria period.

                                       C.   Empirical Approach
                                C.1.    Synthetic Control Estimator
Our main econometric analysis follows the synthetic control estimator approach intro-
duced by Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and further refined by Abadie et al. (2010, 2015).
This method is most often utilized with a single observed unit which experienced a treat-
ment beginning at a single point in time, while a `donor pool' of potential `control' units
did not receive such a treatment.14 In our case, treatment is the inflow of Puerto Ricans
to the city of Orlando, which began immediately after the sudden and unanticipated Hur-
ricanes Irma and Maria devastated Puerto Rico. The innovation of this estimating strategy
is that it identifies an appropriate control unit--the synthetic control--as a weighted av-
erage of a subset of units in the "donor pool" (an appropriate set of untreated units) that
best match the pre-treatment values of a set of predictors of the outcome, including linear
combinations of the period-specific pre-treatment outcomes. The path of synthetic control
outcomes after treatment represents the path of counterfactual outcomes for the Orlando
commuting zone, had it not been treated. The difference between the observed value in
Orlando and the value for the corresponding synthetic control is the causal estimate of the
treatment effect on the outcome of interest .
  13 Statesmissing observations for some or all counties include Arkansas, Maine, Minnesota, Mississippi,
Missouri, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Virginia, and Washington.
  14 Recently the method has been extended to deal with multiple treated units e.g. Cavallo et al. (2013);

Abadie and L'Hour (2019); Ben-Michael et al. (2019).
                                                                                                         12


     Formally, we observe N = J + 1 units (commuting zones), indexed by j, where j = 1
is the single treated unit (Orlando, in our case) and the remaining J units are the untreated
units in the donor pool. Each unit is observed T total periods, indexed by t , with T0 total
pre-treatment periods and T - T0 > 0 treated periods. Y jN       ,t is the potential outcome observed
                                             I
in { j, t } if j is not treated at t , and Y j,t is the potential outcome observed in { j, t } if j is
treated at t . The treatment effect (also often referred to as the "gap") can be defined as:

                                              j,t = Y jI,t - Y jN
                                                                ,t                                       (1)

The observed outcome in j, t is: Y j,t = Y jN
                                            ,t +  j,t D j,t . As only j = 1 is treated, we have:


                                              1 if j = 1 and t > T0
                                  D jt =
                                              0            otherwise

    The goal is to estimate the dynamic path of treatment effects, 1 = (1,T0 +1 , ..., 1,T ).
As Y1I,t is observable  t > T0 , we need only estimate Y1N
                                                         ,t . The synthetic control estimator
     N
for Y1,t is a weighted sum of the same outcomes for the non-treated units:

                                                    J +1
                                           ^1N
                                           Y ,t =   ^ jY j,t
                                                    w              t                                     (2)
                                                    j=2

The weights are obtained by minimizing the distance, between the treated unit and the J
non treated ones in the donor pool, of a set of k predictor variables plus M linear com-
binations of the outcomes before the treatment year. Specifically the synthetic control
                                     ^ = (w
method selects the vector of weights W      ^ 2 ...w          ^ (V
                                                   ^ J +1 ) = W  ^ ) on the J units in the donor
                       ^ of weights on the K predictor variables15 that solve the following
pool, given the matrix V
problem:
                                                                  J +1
^ = arg min
W                 (X1 - X0W ) V (X1 - X0W )                s.t.    w j = 1, w j  0        j  {2, ..., J + 1}
           W
                                                                  j=2
                                                                                     (3)
where X1 of dimension K × 1 includes the values of the r selected covariates in the pre-
treatment period plus the M linear combinations of the pre-treatment period observations
of the outcome variable, while matrix X0 includes in each row k the vector of values for
  15 Given the relatively small number of pre-treatment periods, we follow the advice of Abadie et al. (2015)

and estimate V using the regression-based method adopted as the default in the synth command for Stata
Abadie et al. (2011) described in detail in Kaul et al. (2015)
                                                                                                              13


the same variables and time periods as in X1 but for untreated units j  {2, ..., J + 1} in the
donor pool.16
    These estimated weights are used to calculate Y ^ N , and finally our estimated elements
                                                     1,t
of 1 :
                                         ^1N
                          ^ 1,t = Y1,t - Y
                                           ,t  t  {T0 + 1, ..., T }
    As it is important that units in the donor pool are not affected by the treatment (see e.g.
Cao and Dowd (2019)) we restrict the donor pool by excluding any CZs that received any
significant number of Puerto Rican evacuees (10 or more Puerto Rican Irma- or Maria-
associated FEMA applications per 100,000 population). When analyzing sector-specific
outcomes, to reduce the possibility of interpolation bias (i.e. including in the synthetic
control some units which may match well on certain important variables but poorly on
others), we further restrict the donor pool to include only those CZs at or above the 75th
percentile of sector-specific employment levels. This ensures we are only allowing the
synthetic Orlando (for each sector of focus) be comprised of other CZs with large pools
of workers in the same sector.17 For each outcome variable we also drop any commuting
zone for which the outcome is not observed in every period.
    This yields the group of 148-170 commuting zones18 (depending on the sector of fo-
cus, and including Orlando) in the United States for which data is consistently available
at monthly or quarterly frequency for the time period before and after Hurricane Maria
(September 2017) and which meets our qualification thresholds for inclusion (see Fig-
ure 4). These criteria exclude every commuting zone which borders Orlando, and nearly
every CZ in Florida, which also minimizes the risk of any treatment spillover on the con-
trol group. Finally in order to increase homogeneity and comparability across commuting
zones, for each outcome we cleaned each series of seasonal variation.19
  16 Our  estimator imposes the No-intercept, Adding-up, Non-negativity and Exact-balance constraints con-
sidered by Doudchenko and Imbens (2016). These constraints are commonly imposed on synthetic control
estimators. Abadie et al. (2015) emphasize the value of the non-negativity condition, in particular, as it
ensures estimates are not subject to potential extrapolation bias and helps preserve interpretability (see, also,
Abadie and L'Hour (2019)).
   17 As Abadie (forthcoming) notes, "Including in the donor pool units that are regarded by the analyst to be

unsuitable controls because of large discrepancies in the values of their observed attributes... or because of
suspected large differences in the values of the unobserved attributes... relative to the treated unit is a recipe
for bias."
   18 128-137 CZs for the 12-month QWI estimates
   19 For each observed outcome of interest, Y  ~ j(,s  )
                                                      t , s  {1, ..., S}, in each CZ j and each period t , our LHS
                                        (s)    ~ j(,s )    ^
                                                           ~ (s)
values are the residualized outcomes Y j,t = Y      t - Y j,t . This is obtained from J individual OLS regressions
           ~ j(,s
of a model Y
                  )  (s)  (s)     (s)
                t =  j +  j, p +  j,t , estimated separately for each j and each s, where p is the quarter (or
month) associated with each t , as appropriate for each Y ~ j(,s )                       (s)
                                                               t given the data source.  j is the local intercept
                                                                                                                      14


    September 2017 is the first treated period, T0 + 1, for employment (observed monthly);
quarter Q3 in 2017 is the first treated period for variables observed on a quarterly basis.
The pre-treatment period starts at the beginning of 2014, when the recovery from the Great
Recession had firmly taken root. This avoids heterogeneous, short-run local labor market
dynamics that occurred after the Great Recession.20 In the analysis using the QCEW data,
we have T0 = 44 pre-treatment periods (months) and consider T - T0  {6, 12} treated
periods corresponding to half a year and one year after the hurricanes hit Puerto Rico,
for our outcomes observed on a monthly basis (namely employment). For the quarterly-
observed outcomes (earnings and establishments), and when using the QWI data, we have
T0 = 14 pre-treatment periods and consider T - T0  {2, 4} treated periods.
    The predictor variables included in matrix X0 are: average quarterly local construction
and hospitality employment, each as proportions of aggregate local employment;21 and the
pre-treatment values of the outcomes at 6-month intervals from 2014 to 2015, and at quar-
terly intervals from 2016 through Q2 2017.22 In total we have K = 11 predictor variables
in our primary specifications. 23 ). Figure 4 shows the commuting zones included in the
donor pool when analyzing employment in aggregate and in the construction, retail and
hospitality sectors. Figure 5 shows those CZs that receive positive weight in the synthetic
control for the employment and earnings outcomes, in aggregate and in the construction
sector. Note that the Las Vegas, NV commuting zone, the Reno, NV commuting zone,
and some commuting zones in the Los Angeles area often receive large positive weights.
This is reasonable as their economies, which strongly rely on tourism and construction,
and have large numbers of Hispanic workers, each resemble the economy of Orlando.24

for each Y ~ j(,s )                               (s)                            ~ (s)
                t in commuting zone j , and  j, p is the seasonal element of Y j,t in j associated with t . That is,
  (s)                                                                                  ~ j(,s )      ^
                                                                                                     ~ (s) ^ (s) ^ (s)
 j, p is the quarterly (or monthly) fixed effect associated with t in j, for each Y         t . Then Y j,t =  j +  j, p is
the sum of the values of the associated coefficient estimates.
   20 One of our robustness checks extends the pre-treatment period back to the beginning of 2013.
   21 To match the economy of the synthetic Orlando with that of the actual Orlando
   22 Kaul et al. (2015) argue that including the full set of pre-treatment outcomes as predictors will result in

certain zero v      ^k weights for some covariates which may actually be important for predicting future values of
the outcome variables. This can bias estimated treatment effects; thus we ensure a number are excluded.
   23 For each specification of interest and given V   ^ , the existence of sparse solutions to (3) with no more than
K + 1 strictly positive weights w      ^ j follows from Carath´ eodory's theorem, while uniqueness obtains with a
maximum of K strictly positive weights provided Orlando does not fall within the convex hull of the donor
pool units, and provided the columns of the predictor matrix X0 are in general position (see Abadie and
L'Hour (2019)
   24 The list of those positively-weighted CZs is also reported for these outcome in online Appendix Table

A2.
                                                                                                         15


                                            C.2.    Inference
Once we have estimated the treatment effects Y1,t - Y            ^ N  t  {1, ...T } a key question is
                                                                   1,t
whether they are significantly different from 0. Hypothesis testing using a synthetic con-
trol approach comes with challenges, as this method does not produce standard errors, and
large-sample inferential approaches are not appropriate. Most of the proposed approaches
involve the construction of a test statistic based on some form of falsification test.25 The
one proposed in Abadie et al. (2015) and endorsed in Firpo and Possebom (2018) as the
uniformly most powerful is the ratio of the treated-period mean squared prediction er-
ror (MSPE) to the pre-treatment-period MSPE, referred to as the RMSPE. A substantial
benefit of a test statistic based on the RMSPE is that, by construction, post-treatment devi-
ations from the null are normalized by the pre-treatment fit, such that large post-treatment
deviations are not attributed undue significance if the pre-treatment fit is poor.
    Alternatives to the RMPSE are proposed by Hahn and Shi (2017), who argue that
permutation tests of this sort may suffer from incorrect statistical size and suggest the
Andrews (2003) end-of-sample instability test, and by Chernozhukov et al. (2017), who
propose an alternative moving block permutation test which may be ideal but is not the
current standard. We thus apply all three tests to our estimates and present the corre-
sponding p-values in Table 2. We also present the Andrews and moving block p-values
for our secondary estimates in Table A3 in the online Appendix.26 As the RMPSE test
is the most conservative of these three (as can generally be seen in Table 2) and is the
current standard for synthetic control inference, we generally base our claims of statisti-
cally significant treatment effects on RMSPE tests and report the results of that test for our
secondary estimates in Table 3 and for our robustness checks in online Appendix Tables
A4-A6.
    The RMSPE p-value is constructed by repeating the synthetic control estimation pro-
cedure for each commuting zone in our donor pool, effectively conducting falsification or
`placebo' tests by reassigning treatment to each of the j  {2, ..., J + 1} untreated CZs
in our donor pool to estimate Y   ^ jN
                                     ,t  t . For each j  {1, ..., J + 1} we then calculate the
summary statistic:
                                        tT=T0 +1 (Y j,t - Y   ^ jN   2
                                                                 ,t ) /(T - T0 )
                           RMSPE j =            T0
                                                                                                  (4)
                                              t =    (Y j ,t -  Y^ N )2 /T0
                                                   1               j,t
Our test statistic is then constructed as a p-value based on the empirical distribution of
  25 The literature on conducting inference with synthetic control estimators is relatively young and rapidly
evolving. See for instance Abadie et al. (2015); Doudchenko and Imbens (2016); Hahn and Shi (2017);
Ferman and Pinto (2017); Chernozhukov et al. (2017); Firpo and Possebom (2018); Abadie and L'Hour
(2019)
  26 Andrews p-values and moving block p-values for our other estimates are available upon request.
                                                                                              16


these RMSPE j :
                                     j=1 1[RMSPE j  RMSPE1 ]
                                      +1
                                   J
                              p=                                                          (5)
                                                N
N = J + 1 is the total number of units and our actual treated unit (Orlando) is j = 1.
Thus if the deviations between observed post-treatment outcomes and the synthetic control
relative to the pre-treatment fit are large enough in Orlando relative to the distribution of
differences from our placebo tests, our p-values will be small and we will reject our null
hypothesis of no effect.

                                         IV.   Results

                                 A.   Effects on All Workers
Our primary synthetic control estimates are for all workers. Results for employment are
illustrated in the four panels of Figure 1. Each panel of the figure plots the observed (de-
seasonalized, logarithm of) employment in Orlando against that of its synthetic control,
first in aggregate (Panel A) then for the construction (Panel B), retail (Panel C), and hos-
pitality (Panel D) sectors. We set the value to zero at the beginning of our pre-treatment
period, which is January 2014. The month in which the hurricane hit (the initial period
of treatment), September 2017, is the shaded area. The six months following the shaded
area are those in which Orlando experienced the largest inflow of people from Puerto Rico
fleeing Hurricane Maria. If they caused any significant effect on Orlando's labor market
relative to the synthetic control, it should be visible in the portion to the right of the shaded
area. The distance--or "gap"--between the line representing Orlando and that of its syn-
thetic control, after September 2017 represents our estimates of the causal effect of the
inflow of Puerto Ricans as a result of the Hurricane. These gaps are shown as percentages
in Figure 3, as the solid black line in each panel.
     Three facts emerge from inspection of Figure 1. First, for each of our outcomes, the
pre-Hurricane match between Orlando and its synthetic control is remarkably good. This
implies that the commuting zones constituting our synthetic controls mimic quite well the
short run fluctuations and long run trends in Orlando employment before September 2017.
Figure 5 shows the commuting zones included in each particular donor pool. In particular,
nine donor pool CZs were assigned positive weights for Orlando's aggregate deseason-
alized log employment synthetic control. These donor CZs are, in ascending order of
weights: Fort Walton Beach-Pensacola, FL (2.7%); Fresno-Visalia-Tulare-Parterville, CA
(5.3%); Las Vegas, NV-AZ (6.5%); Boise City, ID (6.7%); El Paso, TX-Las Cruces, NM
(7%); Nashville, TN (11%); Provo-Orem, UT (15.3%); Fayetteville-Springdale-Rogers,
                                                                                                       17


AR (18.6%); and Gainesville, GA (26.9%)27 Second, Figure 1 shows that, for aggregate
as well as sector-specific employment, Orlando realized positive employment effects as
a result of the migration event.28 Third, this positive employment effect is largest and
most clearly seen in the construction sector. One year after the hurricane hit Puerto Rico,
Orlando's construction employment was about four log points (4 percent) larger than its
synthetic control.
    Treatment effects (the post-treatment gaps) from Figure 1 are quantified in the first
two columns of Table 2. The entries are the treatment effects 6 months (column 1) and
12 months (column 2) after September 2017. The table also shows the RMSPE statistics
and their p-values, as well as the Andrews and the moving block p-values described in
Section C.2.. These statistics indicate the significance of the treatment effect in Orlando
by conducting numerous "placebo" tests in which each CZ in our donor pool is assigned
treatment status (none of which were exposed to the inflow of Puerto-Ricans). High posi-
tive estimated treatment effects and low p-values imply that the treatment effect is positive
and significant relative to the placebos.
    The treatment effect on aggregate employment 12 months after the hurricane is posi-
tive and significant at the 5% level using any of our three p-value calculation procedures.
Despite the seemingly small effect size, this result is consistent with most evacuees finding
jobs in Orlando, and corroborates estimates of the number of evacuees that, at least in the
year after the hurricane, remained on the mainland. Specifically, this effect is about 0.4
percent of aggregate employment in Orlando. Approximately 24,000 Puerto Ricans ar-
rived in Orlando over the 6 months following the hurricanes, at least 11,000 of whom can
be attributed to the hurricanes, constituting 0.65 percent of the pre-treatment working-age
population. In the years preceding the hurricanes, around 75 percent of Puerto Ricans in
Orlando (and more widely) were aged 16 and over, around 60 percent of whom were em-
ployed (U.S. Census Bureau, 2017). If these patterns held among the 11,000 refugees, this
would amount to about a 0.3 percent increase in the local labor force. That is, three-fourths
of Orlando's post-treatment growth in aggregate employment (relative to the synthetic con-
trol) was due to the new arrivals, with no evidence that local workers were displaced.
    The construction sector experienced the largest and most significant increase in em-
ployment, perfectly in line with the idea that this sector received a supply "shock" from
the inflow. We estimate a 1.5 percent increase in construction employment 6 months into
the treated period, although this estimate is not quite significant at the 10 percent level us-
ing our most conservative p-value calculation. Our estimated treatment effect 12 months
  27 online Appendix Table A2 provides these lists for a broader set of synthetic controls. Comparing this
map with Figure A2 in the online Appendix, we can see that none of the donor CZs received any meaningful
number of evacuees
  28 This is more obviously shown by the black lines in Figure 3.
                                                                                                   18


into the treated period, however, corresponds to 4 percent increase in construction em-
ployment and is highly significant (RMSPE p-value of 0.01). This growth in construction
employment would account for a full 80 percent of the employed refugees if their age and
employment patterns were similar to those of the Puerto Ricans who preceded them. re-
tail and hospitality employment show a more modest treatment effect equal to about one
percent of their employment. We have argued above that the construction sector was most
likely to absorb the immigrants, many of whom were unlikely to be fluent in English.
     The retail and hospitality sectors, on the other hand, were much more likely to be af-
fected by this migration event through increased demand for consumer goods and services,
which could translate through to increased labor demand. Looking at the retail sector, em-
ployment did significantly increase--slowly at first, with a 0.3 percent increase seen after
6 months (RMSPE p-value of 0.04) and then a 0.9 percent increase seen after 12 months
(RMSPE p-value of 0.06). We also estimate a 1.2 percent increase in hospitality sector
employment 12 months after treatment, though here significance is only seen using the
Andrews and moving block p-values (0.02 and 0.05, respectively).
     To visualize the significance of the treatment effects on aggregate employment in Or-
lando and on each sector--especially construction--Figure 3 shows the estimated (treatment-
synthetic control) gap for Orlando together with the same gap calculated for all of the other
(non-treated) commuting zones in the donor pool. As in Figure 1, Panel A is relative to
(residualized logarithm of) aggregate employment, Panel B represents employment in the
construction Sector, Panel C employment in retail, and Panel D employment in hospital-
ity. The gaps for the other commuting zones are shown as light grey lines. Additionally,
the dark dashed line shows the gap for Los Angeles--a tourism-based, Latino-dense large
metropolitan area that provides a useful reference.29 Note that for aggregate and retail
employment and, much more clearly, for construction employment, the Orlando-synthetic
control gap in the post-Hurricane period is in the top part of the grey trajectories, while it is
not far from the average in the pre-Hurricane period. This means that Orlando had an un-
usual increase in aggregate and especially construction employment in the post-Hurricane
period. We also observe a one-month dip in employment in every sector, but especially
construction, exactly in September 2017, before the increases occurred. We will show that
this was likely the impact of Hurricane Irma, causing a temporary slow-down in economic
activity when it hit Orlando. In section D., below, we consider the possible confounding
effects of this event and show that our estimates are likely free of associated bias.
     Focusing on earnings, the panels of Figure2 show the plots relative to (de-seasonalized,
natural logarithm of) earnings per worker for Orlando relative to synthetic control, and fol-
lows a similar structure to Figure 1. The impact on earnings per worker was a combination
  29 L.A.and some surrounding CZs, along with Reno, NV and Las Vegas, NV typically receive substantial
weighting in the synthetic controls. See Figure 5 as well as Table A2 in the online Appendix.
                                                                                                         19


of the increased labor supply and increased local demand produced by the new arrivals.
Our estimates of treatment effects on earnings are reported, 6 and 12 months after the
hurricane, in columns 3 and 4 of Table 2. The table also shows the significance of the
estimates from each of our three p-values.
    Interestingly, in spite of the significant increase in aggregate employment driven by
the evacuees inflow, earnings per worker was stable in aggregate over the first 6 and 12
months of treatment. Provided labor demand is not perfectly elastic, this implies that labor
demand grew along with labor supply. When looking at the sector-level, we do not find
any negative treatment effect on earnings per worker in the sectors considered above. In
the construction sector, compensation per worker actually grew by 3.3 percent (RMSPE
p-value of 0.05). Thus the large increase in the construction-sector workforce did not
have a negative effect overall on construction sector earnings per worker. This may have
been a mixture of composition effects, as more people became employed with different
effects on incumbent workers of different skills, depending on their complementarity and
substitutability with evacuees. We investigate this further in the next section.
    The hospitality sector, on the other hand, experienced the most significant effect on
earnings per worker (according to the RMPSE p-value, and due especially to the particu-
larly good fit in the pre-treatment period). Wages were a significant 1.4 percent higher 12
months after the migration event (RMSPE p-value of 0.03).30 The retail sector estimated
effects on earnings per worker are positive but small and not significant. Together with the
employment effects on these sectors, these patterns may have emerged because the arrival
of the refugees constituted a shock to local demand for consumer goods and services. Em-
ployers in the hospitality sector would then have had to raise wages to compete with other
sectors to maintain staffing levels as demand increased. While this story is plausible and
consistent with the patterns of our estimated treatment effects, our data do not allow us to
test it directly. Overall, however, the results suggest a significant labor demand increase,
particularly in hospitality and retail, and a labor supply increase in construction that was
matched by increased aggregate demand such that aggregate earnings per worker did not
decline.
    Finally, columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 show the estimated treatment effects on numbers
of establishments. In aggregate, the treatment effect on the number of establishments
amounted to a positive, though not statistically significant, increase of 0.5 to 0.6 percent.
Similarly, for each of our sectors of interest we have positive effects around 1 percent, but
no statistical significance. This is suggestive (but not conclusive) evidence that even as
quickly as a few months after the arrival of the evacuees, firms may have started to open
new local establishments to take advantage of higher labor supply and consumer demand.
  30 We estimate earnings per worker grew by a statistically significant 0.1 percent 6 months after treatment
began, but view this estimate as too small to be considered economically significant.
                                                                                        20


The noise in the data--there is a notable dip in Orlando establishments in mid-2015 (see,
for example, the Orlando trend in Panels B and D of Figure 6 which eliminates our RMPSE
p-value significance. If we instead consider the moving block p-value for construction, the
treatment effect of around 1% is significant (p-value of 0.06)--and the short period of
time, however, do not allow us to produce robust and conservative statistically significant
results on this outcome.
    Overall, Table 2 paints a picture of a significant wave of Puerto Rican evacuees being
absorbed into the Orlando labor market, with positive effects on employment and per-
worker earnings. The estimates suggests significant positive effects even on employment
and earnings per worker in sectors which likely did not absorb these new arrivals as work-
ers, but may have been affected by their demand for goods and services. The employment
effects of the labor supply shock were particularly large in the construction sector which,
as argued earlier, was the most likely place for the refugees to find work. The effects of
the consumer demand shock were clear increases in retail employment and in hospitality
earnings per worker, and possibly in hospitality employment as well. We find no conclu-
sive evidence of significant changes in the numbers of local establishments--though the
point estimates are all positive--and thus cannot draw any conclusions about the impact of
this migration event on local investment. We find no evidence of displacement or decline
in aggregate wages or in sector wages overall.

               B.   Effects on Non-Hispanic and Less-Educated Workers
One common question addressed in the economics of immigration literature is how mi-
grants impact the wages of natives and of other groups against whom immigrants are
thought to compete in the labor market. In order to study this set of questions in our set-
ting, we require data not found in the QCEW, which measure employment and wages of
sub-groups of workers in the local economy. We thus turn to the Quarterly Workforce
Indicators (QWI), which allow us to view the same labor market outcomes as the QCEW
but for various subgroups of workers stratified by ethnicity and educational attainment.
Similar to the QCEW data used in our previous analyses, the QWI collects information on
employment and wages for each industry and county and offers the same geographical cov-
erage as the QCEW, although all variables are observed at quarterly frequencies. One cost
of using the QWI for these analyses is that we lose about 20 percent of our sample when
looking one full year after the hurricane, primarily due to issues around data-reporting
from particular states.
    While we are not able to observe nativity of workers directly, we can approximate
the group of native workers quite well by focusing on ethnicity. Using ACS data we
calculate that, five years prior to the hurricane, 88 percent of "non-Hispanic" workers
were "native", meaning they were born in one of the 50 states in the U.S. We also observe
                                                                                            21


that the overwhelming majority of people from Puerto Rico (99%) identify as Hispanic.
Hence the subgroup of non-Hispanic workers serves as a good proxy for natives, and we
can be certain that group will not include the evacuees when observed in the period after
the Hurricane.
     We thus repeat the analysis performed in the previous section, but using the QWI data
and focusing on non-Hispanic workers. The estimates of the treatment effects on log em-
ployment (columns 1 and 2) and on log compensation per worker (columns 3 and 4), 6 and
12 months after the Hurricane, are presented in Table 3. We do not find any evidence of a
negative effect on non-Hispanic employment either in the aggregate nor in any of the sec-
tors we consider. Rather, the point estimates of the employment effects on non-Hispanic
workers are positive and, though not statistically significant in our sectoral analyses, they
are significant for the aggregate analysis (the construction employment effect of +0.7 per-
cent is significant according to the moving block p-value only). We estimate an increase
of 0.8 percent in non-Hispanic employment 12 months after the Hurricane. This may rep-
resent some "crowding in" driven by complementarities between immigrants and natives
(as in Ottaviano and Peri (2012)). However, given how large this effect is relative to the
overall employment increase estimated in the previous section, we should remain cautious
when interpreting this result. We also fail to find an effect, either positive or negative,
on employment of non-Hispanic workers in the construction, retail, or hospitality sectors.
Small positive and non-significant point estimates suggest, again, no crowding out of non-
Hispanic workers.
     Focusing on earnings per worker of non-Hispanics, we estimate a very small and non-
significant increase in the aggregate, both six and 12 months after the hurricane. This null
aggregate effect seems to average a significant negative 2.5 percent impact on construc-
tion and a positive 2 percent impact on retail sector earnings. The retail sector result is not
significant according to the RMSPE p-value, but is significant according to the Andrews
and moving block p-values (0.07 and 0.00, respectively, identical to those for the construc-
tion estimate) reported in Table A3 in the online Appendix. While a short-run decrease
in non-Hispanic construction wages of 2.5 percent in response to a 4 percent increase in
construction employment is not impossible, and would imply an elasticity of -0.6, which
is certainly plausible, the fact that we do not find any effect on aggregate wages for all
workers in Table 2 (which include Hispanics, who should experience the strongest compe-
tition effect) casts some doubt on this estimate. It seems unlikely that non-Hispanic wages
are more responsive than Hispanic wages to competition from Puerto-Ricans. In general,
however, for non-Hispanics there may have been small negative effects on construction
wages and small positive effects on retail wages which balanced out in the non-Hispanic
aggregate, and the retail effect would be consistent with a positive labor demand shock.
     A second group that is often the focus within the immigration-labor literature are
                                                                                            22


those individuals with a high school degree or less, as their wages have declined in re-
cent decades (Autor et al., 2008) and as competition with immigrants in relatively low
skilled jobs may hurt their opportunities Borjas (2003). This group of workers constituted
about 40 percent of the US labor force in 2016. In the retail and hospitality sectors in Or-
lando, 49 percent of workers had a high school degree or less as of 2016 (the year before
Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico). In the construction sector this share was 60 percent.
We repeat our primary analysis using the QWI data, limited to workers with high school
degree or less. As noted earlier, the education levels of workers under age 25 are not ob-
served, meaning this part of our analysis is limited to non-youth workers. Columns 5-8 in
Table 3 present our results. We find no evidence of a significant impact on overall employ-
ment or compensation per worker in this group 6 months after the hurricane. However, 12
months after the Hurricane we see a significant 0.8 percent increase in aggregate employ-
ment for this subgroup (p-value of 0.04) and a 1.9 percent, significant decrease in their
per-worker earnings. We view this latter result with some skepticism, however, as there
is nothing to suggest that aggregate per-worker earnings decreased either for all workers
or for non-Hispanic workers, and also because that estimate is not particularly precise.
The +1.7 percent effect on construction employment is only significant according to the
Andrews and moving block p-values. Interestingly, the wage effects for less-educated
workers in specific sectors range from a positive 1.2 percent effect for retail workers (p-
value of 0.02. Positive and significant effects in this sector are already evident 6 months
after the Hurricane hit) to a 1.5 percent decline in the construction sector (p-value of 0.06).
The estimate on hospitality earnings is positive 1.3 percent after 12 months, but this is not
even close to significant according to the RMSPE or the Andrews p-values. These results
are again consistent with the idea that retail and hospitality received a positive labor de-
mand shock that put upward pressure on their workers' employment and compensation,
while the construction sector received a supply shock which increased employment but
possibly reduced wages for incumbent workers.
    Putting together the results for all workers (Table 2), and for non-Hispanics and less-
educated workers (Table 3), as well as the sector-specific analyses we perform, we are left
with three significant findings. First, during the post-Hurricane period the large inflow
of evacuees from Puerto Rico led to an increase in total employment and also employ-
ment of both non-Hispanic and less-educated workers in Orlando. Second, the retail and
hospitality sectors experienced not only employment growth, but also positive growth of
compensation per worker, both overall and within the non-Hispanic and less educated sub-
groups (although this last effect was not significant). We see this as clear evidence of a
labor demand increase in those sectors, likely as a consequence of new demand for local
goods and services from the evacuees. Finally, the construction sector saw the most sig-
nificant increase in employment due to the evacuees and potentially also due to increases
                                                                                                          23


in non-Hispanic and less-educated employment. While this increase in labor supply did
not seem to produce a depressive wage effect on the average worker in that sector, it may
have hurt the earnings of non-Hispanic and less educated construction workers. We inter-
pret these results as evidence that, even in the very short run, this large inflow of migrants
likely had an overall positive impact on native and less-educated workers' employment
and wages, though native and less-educated workers in the sector most heavily exposed to
the labor supply shock did face some downward pressure on earnings.

                                  C.    Regression-based Estimates
An alternative method to conduct inference, adopted in Peri and Yasenov (2019), is to
use the synthetic control method to identify the control units (i.e. those getting positive
weight in the distance-minimization problem) and then perform difference-in-differences
regression-based estimates considering Orlando as the only treated unit and the other units
as control(s). Abadie et al. (2015) note how regression-based estimates implicitly weight
the control units in a way similar to how a synthetic control estimator does.31 While this
method allows a very simple and straightforward check of our estimates and is intuitive,
the standard errors may not be quite correct, especially when we consider the "synthetic
Orlando" as the only control unit in the regression. Moreover, any simple regression model
with a single post-treatment period fails to capture any trend-changes post-treatment. For
these reasons, we view our regression-based DD estimates with a deal of caution and only
as additional evidence on the qualitative findings of our synthetic control approach.
    For each regression-based DD model we consider two ways of constructing the control
groups. In Table 4, columns (1) and (2), we include in the control group all commuting
zones that are positively weighted in the synthetic control unit. In column (3), we instead
only include the constructed synthetic control (the weighted composite) as the `control
group'.32 To implement the difference-in-differences estimate, we regress the outcome
variable (alternatively [deseasonalized] log employment, log compensation per worker and
log establishments) on a treatment dummy which equals to one for Orlando after Septem-
ber 2017 and zero otherwise, and on time fixed effects (column (1) of Table 4) or on time
and unit fixed effects (column (2)). For column (3), where we have only a single treatment
and a single control unit, we can include only include time effects. In Table 5, instead
  31 The  regression approach, however, does not constrain the weights to be non-negative; thus a regression-
based approach allows extrapolation outside the support of the data. Additionally, failing to restrict the
sample of donor pool units to match the pre-treatment characteristics of the treated unit (conditional on
included covariates) increases the probability that the "parallel trends" condition will be violated.
   32 Thus the estimates in columns (1) and (2) of Table 4 more likely suffer from bias realized through

interpolation and extrapolation, while those in column (3) are free from extrapolation bias and less-likely to
suffer from interpolation bias.
                                                                                           24


of one single `post-Hurricane' Orlando treatment dummy, we include an Orlando dummy
interacted with each half-year period, both before and after the hurricanes, and estimate
against the composite synthetic control (showing results for employment and earnings).
This serves to test whether there are deviations from zero in the pre-hurricane period,
which would imply non-similar trends between Orlando and the control group. The latter
half of 2017 is the period of the "treatment" (when the hurricanes hit Puerto Rico and the
migration occurred) and is therefore treated as the reference period in the analysis.
    The estimates in Table 4 mostly confirm the synthetic control results. Because the es-
timates in column (3) are most likely to be free of extrapolation and interpolation bias (see
above), we focus primarily on these. First, aggregate employment exhibits a positive and
significant treatment effect of 0.3 percent, and the construction sector shows the largest
positive employment effect, although now it is only 1.5 percent rather than 4 percent (as
this is an average over the entire post-hurricane period). Second, log earnings per worker
show extremely small effects, usually non-significant, that vary between positive and neg-
ative depending on which control group (column) one chooses. Third, these estimates
show significantly positive effects on establishments, especially in aggregate and in the
construction sector. In Tables 5 and ?? we show the estimates of the Orlando dummy inter-
acted with each half-year period, showing employment (columns 1-4) and compensation
per worker (columns 5-8). The four columns for each outcome variable correspond, left
to right, to the aggregate economy, and to the construction, retail, and hospitality sectors.
In general, the deviations of Orlando from control, both in employment and per-worker
earnings, are small in the pre-Hurricane period. However, there are small but significant
deviations which may suggest modest negative pre-trends for construction and hospitality
employment and for aggregate and hospitality earnings per worker, and possibly a modest
positive pre-trend for retail employment. It is also clear that the post-Hurricane employ-
ment and earnings effects are positive and significant, especially by Q3 of 2018 (one year
after the hurricanes). In general the regression results confirm the findings of the synthetic
control method and, while they reveal a certain variability of the pre-Hurricane differences
between Orlando and its control, they do not show systematic and significant departures.

                                  D.   Robustness Checks
In addition to our difference-in-differences estimates, we conduct several robustness checks
to address three concerns. First, we both use an alternative inference procedure as well as
extend the pre-period in our analysis to test the stability of our results. Second, we check
whether the impact of Hurricane Irma (which hit Orlando a few weeks before Maria) might
have biased our estimates. Finally, we look at housing prices in Orlando to test whether
there was a booming real estate market before the migrants arrived which may have driven
labor demand in the construction sector. As we show below, our results are robust to each
                                                                                            25


of these tests.
       Our alternative hypothesis testing procedure implies that in our RSMPE and relative
p-value calculations we correct for possible deviations between treatment and synthetic
control at the time of the treatment. Specifically, we define our treatment effects as the
difference between observed outcomes and synthetic control outcomes minus that dif-
ference in the period immediately prior to treatment. This has essentially the flavor of
a difference-in-differences estimator on the treated and synthetic control units. That is,
we define f0 = Y j,T0 - Y  ^ jN
                              ,T0  j and our alternative estimated treatment effects are then
                ^ - f0  t . This subtracts from any estimated treatment the gap in T0 , defin-
 ^ 1,t = Y1,t - Y N
                 1,t
ing the relevant statistic as the change in the gap between T0 and T . Using this statistic and
evaluating the corresponding p-value (Table A4 in the online Appendix) shows very simi-
lar significance levels as with the usual method. This indicates that there was no significant
deviation between Orlando and control at the time of the shock.
       Our second robustness check extends the length of the pre-treatment period. In our
primary specification, the pre-treatment period begins in the first period of 2014 (quarter
or month, as appropriate) and continues through to the period immediately prior to the
hurricane. The reason we begin in 2014 involved concerns that the impact and duration
of the recovery from the Great Recession was heterogeneous across commuting zones and
could pollute pre-2014 data. Still, extending the pre-treatment period to the beginning of
2013 helps test the stability of our results. We conduct this robustness check by extending
the pre-treatment period to the beginning of 2013, de-seasonalizing the raw data over this
period, and then implementing our estimating strategy as before. The results are presented
in online Appendix Table A5 and confirm our primary findings from Table 2, showing
very similar treatment effects for all variables considered.
       We then consider the role of Hurricane Irma, which hit Florida in September 2017,
downing trees and power lines and causing other damage (although the damage was much
less severe than either Irma or Maria did in Puerto Rico). The immediate local economic
impact was almost certainly negative as a result of Irma and is likely captured in the sig-
nificant dip in Orlando's employment in September 2017, evident in Figures 1, 2, and 3.
It is theoretically possible that the aftermath would yield movement in economic activity
in either direction (e.g. Groen et al. (2020)). Damage to infrastructure, for example, could
hamper economic activity for months, or there could be a boost to the economy as the
result of rebuilding efforts. This motivates our attempt to isolate potential consequences
of exposure to Irma. To do this, we consider a large commuting zone which received very
few Puerto Rican refugees but which lay approximately the same distance from the path
taken by Irma's eye as did Orlando: Jacksonville, FL.
       Compared to the 3,972 relevant FEMA applications filed in Orlando, Jacksonville saw
fewer than one-seventeenth (221) relevant FEMA applications. On a per-capita basis
                                                                                                           26


(around 17 applications per 100,000 population), Jacksonville saw less than a tenth of
those seen in Orlando, which saw 178 applications per 100,000 population.33 Any robust
estimated labor market treatment effect in Jacksonville--particularly in the construction
sector, which we view as the most likely to demonstrate any positive post-hurricane impact
as a result of reconstruction efforts--is thus much more likely to measure the lingering im-
pact of exposure to Irma rather than the impact of an inflow of Puerto Rican evacuees.
    The gap for aggregate employment and for construction employment between treat-
ment and synthetic control for Orlando and Jacksonville, respectively, is shown in Figure
6, Panels A and C (the results are quantified in Table A6 in the online Appendix). The
panels also include also the other placebo gaps for all the donor units. Two things clearly
emerge from this figures. First, the gaps (vs synthetic control) in Jacksonville experienced
very similar dips to those seen in Orlando in September 2017, when both labor markets
were directly exposed to Hurricane Irma, both in aggregate employment and in construc-
tion sector employment. This confirms the similarity of potential effects of Irma. Second,
the employment gaps--both in aggregate and in the construction sector--6 and 12 months
after the Hurricane hit are significantly larger for Orlando than for Jacksonville. While we
observe some ups and down in the gap for construction employment in Jacksonville before
and after Irma, we do not see anything comparable to the significant increase in Orlando
(which also has more stable paths of gaps in the pre-Hurricane period). In Jacksonville
the estimated treatment effect on construction employment 12 months after Irma is 2.5
percent, but the RMSPE is quite small (1.01), reflecting the substantial amount of noise
in the period before the Hurricane relative to the period afterward. The associated RM-
SPE p-value, at 0.81, makes clear this point estimate is not in any way significant when
compared to the associated placebo tests (nearly 81 percent of the placebo runs yielded a
larger RMSPE).
    Overall, Jacksonville seems a valid counterfactual observation of the impact of Irma
on Orlando in the absence of the Puerto Rican migrant inflow. These results show that
the one-month dip in employment can be attributed to that event, while the one-year surge
in employment in Orlando, especially in construction, should be attributed to the impact
of the migrants 34 We also plot the results for establishments in Orlando and Jacksonville
in Panels B and D. While none of our synthetic control estimates on Orlando establish-
  33 We  note this number of applications still disqualified Jacksonville from inclusion in our donor pools for
the analyses above.
   34 We note that Jacksonville may be less of a good counterfactual for the retail or hospitality sectors

because several large retailers started operations here in the treatment period. Amazon opened a distribution
center in September 2017 and another in October 2017, both of which were around 1,000,000 square feet,
and opened a sorting center in September 2018; Ikea opened a store in November 2017; and Walmart opened
a new Supercenter in June 2018 and began hiring in August 2018 for another new store which opened in
November 2018.
                                                                                       27


ment numbers were significant, they were all positive (around 1 percent) and these Panels
demonstrate how the DD estimates (averaged over the whole post-treatment period) were
significant. They also show that Jacksonville did not have any apparent establishment
response post-Irma, further supporting our claim of no positive bias from Irma in our Or-
lando estimates.
    Finally, to address the possibility that Orlando experienced a housing boom before
September 2017, continuing into the treatment period, and whether such a boom might be
driving our construction employment results, we conduct two checks. First, in Figure 7
we plot the (log) Zillow Home Value Index of all homes in Orlando and any of the MSAs
approximately corresponding to commuting zones which receive positive weights in our
construction employment synthetic control unit. We normalize this value to be equal to
one in September 2017 for all units and plot the values through May 2020. We see that
during the pre- and post- Hurricane periods, Orlando's trend appears to be rather average
and is in no way indicative of a housing price boom relative to the control units. We also
estimate a difference-in-difference model similar to those mentioned in Section C., using
as the outcome the same (log) Zillow Home Value Index but restricting the treatment pe-
riod through September 2018 for consistency with our 12-month estimates. The regression
results confirm the visual inspection and do not show any evidence that Orlando experi-
enced a housing price boom in the periods before or after September 2017. These results
give us confidence that there were no secular trends or trend breaks in housing prices in
the Orlando area, relative to cities in the construction employment synthetic control, be-
fore or around the period of Hurricane Maria. More broadly, the combined results of our
robustness checks give us confidence that our estimates reflect the un-confounded causal
impacts of the inflow of Puerto Rican migrants.

                                            V.    Conclusions

We use various sources, including data from FEMA disaster relief applications, to show
that a sudden wave of evacuees from Puerto Rico relocated to Orlando after Hurricane
Maria struck in September 2017. This provides a unique opportunity to measure with some
precision the short-run impact of a sudden, sizeable increase in predominantly Spanish-
speaking labor supply on the local labor market outcomes of Orlando--specifically on
aggregate and sector-specific employment and wages for all workers, and also for natives
and less-educated workers.
    We use the QCEW data aggregated by commuting zone, and implement a synthetic
control estimation strategy to measure the impact of these migrant inflows on outcomes
in Orlando relative to a synthetic control. We find that overall employment in Orlando
  34 Results   can be found in Table A7 of the online Appendix.
                                                                                         28


increased by 0.4 percent one year after the inflow began, and increased by 4 percent in the
construction sector. The quantitative increase in employment compared to the estimated
arrival of evacuees is consistent with absorption of this wave with no crowding out effects,
and with a large share finding employment in the construction sector. We also find that,
one year after the inflow began, retail-sector employment rose by nearly 1 percent and
earnings per worker in the hospitality sector grew by 1.4 percent. We view these as the re-
sults of employers responding to growth in local demand for consumer goods and services
which itself resulted from the consumer demand of these new arrivals. These results are
broadly robust to a series of checks. We perform additional analysis with the QWI data
and find that, when focusing on subgroups like non-Hispanic or less-educated workers, the
migration event increased their employment by 0.8 percent with little effect on aggregate
earnings per worker for those groups, and with increased earnings for them in the retail
sector. We also see a decrease in earnings for likely-native and less-educated workers in
the construction sector, which absorbed the majority of the labor supply shock.
    Our results support a story in which immigration brought both a positive shock in la-
bor supply and consumer demand shock which spurred greater labor demand in the local
economy. Orlando's construction sector, in particular, was exposed to the labor supply
shock, while the retail and hospitality portions of the Orlando economy were primarily ex-
posed to the consumer demand shock. The new workers were fully absorbed by the local
economy without displacing native workers and without any significant overall negative
effect on earnings, though there was some downward pressure on construction earnings
for natives and less-educated workers, specifically. However, retail employment and hos-
pitality earnings were both positively impacted, such that the overall effect on natives was
to increase their employment without any clear impact on their earnings.
                                                                                      29


                                      References

Abadie, A. and J. L'Hour. 2019. A Penalized Synthetic Control Estimator for Disaggre-
  gated Data. Working Paper.

Abadie, Alberto. Forthcoming. Using Synthetic Controls: Feasibility, Data Requirements,
  and Methodological Aspects. Journal of Economic Literature .

Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. Synthetic Control Meth-
  ods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Con-
  trol Program. Journal of the American Statistical Association 105 (490):493­505.

------. 2011. SYNTH: Stata module to implement Synthetic Control Methods for Com-
  parative Case Studies. Statistical Software Components S457334 .

------. 2015. Comparative Politics and the Synthetic Control Method. American Journal
  of Political Science 59 (2):495­510.

Abadie, Alberto and Javier Gardeazabal. 2003. The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case
  Study of the Basque Country. American Economic Review 93 (1):113­132.

Alexander, Monica, Emilio Zagheni, and Kivan Polimis. 2019. The impact of Hurricane
  Maria on out-migration from Puerto Rico: Evidence from Facebook data. Working
  Paper, arXiv.

Andrews, Donald W.K. 2003.          End-of-Sample Instability Tests.       Econometrica
  71 (6):1661­1694.

Autor, David H. and David Dorn. 2013. The Growth of Low-skill Service Jobs and the
  Polarization of the US Labor Market. American Economic Review 103 (5):1553­97.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. The China Syndrome: Local
  Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States. American Economic
  Review 103 (6):2121­2168.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. Trends in US Wage In-
  equality: Revising the Revisionists. The Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2):300­
  323.

Beerli, Andreas, Jan Ruffner, Michael Siegenthaler, and Giovanni Peri. 2018. The Aboli-
  tion of Immigration Restrictions and the Performance of Firms and Workers: Evidence
  from Switzerland. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                                     30


Ben-Michael, Eli, Avi Feller, and Jesse Rothstein. 2019. Synthetic Controls and Weighted
  Event Studies with Staggered Adoption. Working Paper, arXiv:1912.03290.
             ¨ B., Hendrik F. Van den Berg, and Joshua J Lewer. 2008. Measuring Im-
Bodvarsson, Orn
  migration's Effects on Labor Demand: A Reexamination of the Mariel Boatlift. Labour
  Economics 15 (4):560­574.

Borjas, George J. 2003. The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining
  the Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  118 (4):1335­1374.

------. 2008. Labor Outflows and Labor Inflows in Puerto Rico. Journal of Human
  Capital 2 (1):32­68.

------. 2017. The Wage Impact of the Marielitos: A Reappraisal.             ILR Review
  70 (5):1077­1110.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2015.     Hispanics and Latinos in indus-
  tries  and   occupations.        https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2015/
  hispanics-and-latinos-in-industries-and-occupations.htm.

Cao, Jianfei and Connor Dowd. 2019. Estimation and Inference for Synthetic Control
  Methods with Spillover Effects. Working Paper, arXiv:1902.07343.

Card, David. 1990. The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market. ILR
  Review 43 (2):245­257.

Cavallo, Eduardo, Sebastian Galiani, Ilan Noy, and Juan Pantano. 2013. Catastrophic Nat-
  ural Disasters and Economic Growth. Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (5):1549­
  1561.

Centro. 2018. New Estimates: 135,000+ Post-Maria Puerto Ricans Relocated to Stateside.
  Tech. rep.

Ceritoglu, Evren, H. Burcu Gurcihan Yunculer, Huzeyfe Torun, and Semih Tumen. 2017.
  The Impact of Syrian Refugees on Natives' Labor Market Outcomes in Turkey: Evi-
  dence from a Quasi-Experimental Design. IZA Journal of Labor Policy 6 (1):5.

Chernozhukov, Victor, Kaspar Wuthrich, and Yinchu Zhu. 2017. An Exact and Robust
  Conformal Inference Method for Counterfactual and Synthetic Controls. Working Pa-
  per, arXiv:1712.09089.
                                                                                     31


Clemens, Michael A. and Jennifer Hunt. 2019. The Labor Market Effects of Refugee
  Waves: Reconciling Conflicting Results. ILR Review 72 (4):818­857.

Cohen-Goldner, Sarit and M. Daniele Paserman. 2011. The Dynamic Impact of Immigra-
  tion on Natives' Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from Israel. European Economic
  Review 55 (8):1027­1045.

De Silva, Dakshina G., Robert P. McComb, Young-Kyu Moh, Anita R. Schiller, and An-
  dres J. Vargas. 2010. The Effect of Migration on Wages: Evidence from a Natural
  Experiment. American Economic Review 100 (2):321­26.

Doudchenko, Nikolay and Guido W. Imbens. 2016. Balancing, Regression, Difference-
  in-Differences and Synthetic Control Methods: A Synthesis. Working Paper, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Ferman, Bruno and Cristine Pinto. 2017. Placebo Tests for Synthetic Controls. Working
  Paper.

Firpo, Sergio and Vitor Possebom. 2018. Synthetic Control Method: Inference, Sensitivity
  Analysis and Confidence Sets. Journal of Causal Inference 6 (2).

Groen, Jeffrey A., Mark J. Kutzbach, and Anne E. Polivka. 2020. Storms and Jobs: The
  Effect of Hurricanes on Individuals Employment and Earnings over the Long Term.
  Journal of Labor Economics 38 (3):653­685.

Grogger, Jeffrey and Gordon H. Hanson. 2011. Income Maximization and the Selection
  and Sorting of International Migrants. Journal of Development Economics 95 (1):42­
  57.

Hahn, Jinyong and Ruoyao Shi. 2017. Synthetic Control and Inference. Econometrics
  5 (4):52.

Hunt, Jennifer. 1992. The Impact of the 1962 Repatriates from Algeria on the French
  Labor Market. ILR Review 45 (3):556­572.

Kaul, Ashok, Stefan Kl¨
                      oßner, Gregor Pfeifer, and Manuel Schieler. 2015. Synthetic con-
  trol methods: Never Use All Pre-Intervention Outcomes Together With Covariates.
  Working Paper, MPRA:83790.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco I.P. and Giovanni Peri. 2012. Rethinking the Effect of Immigration
  on Wages. Journal of the European Economic Association 10 (1):152­197.
                                                                                   32


Peri, Giovanni and Vasil Yasenov. 2019. The Labor Market Effects of a Refugee Wave:
  Synthetic Control Method Meets the Mariel Boatlift. Journal of Human Resources
  54 (2):267­309.

Rayer, Stefan. 2018. Estimating the Migration of Puerto Ricans to Florida Using Flight
  Passenger Data. Tech. rep., Bureau of Economics and Business Research.

Tumen, Semih. 2015. The Use of Natural Experiments in Migration Research. IZA World
  of Labor .

U.S. Census Bureau. 2017. EMPLOYMENT STATUS, 2017 American Community
  Survey 1-Year Estimates. https://data.census.gov/cedsci/deeplinks?url=
  https%3A%2F%2Ffactfinder.census.gov%2Ffaces%2Ftableservices%2Fjsf%
  2Fpages%2Fproductview.xhtml%3Fpid%3DACS_17_1YR_S2301&prodType=table.

------. 2018. Estimates of the Components of Resident Population Change: April 1, 2010
  to July 1, 2018. https://data.census.gov/cedsci/deeplinks?url=https%3A%
  2F%2Ffactfinder.census.gov%2Ffaces%2Ftableservices%2Fjsf%2Fpages%
  2Fproductview.xhtml%3Fpid%3DPEP_2018_PEPTCOMP&prodType=table.

Whalen, Carmen and V. Vazquez-Hernandez. 2005. Puerto Rican Diaspora: Historical
 Perspectives. Temple University Press.
                                                                                                                  33


                                                Figures and Tables




           Panel A: Aggregate                                       Panel B: Construction
   .4                                                       .4


   .3                                                       .3


   .2                                                       .2


   .1                                                       .1


    0                                                       0

           Panel C: Retail                                          Panel D: Hospitality
   .4                                                       .4

   .3                                                       .3

   .2                                                       .2

   .1                                                       .1

    0                                                       0
        2014m1



                   2015m1



                             2016m1



                                       2017m1



                                                   2018m1




                                                                 2014m1



                                                                             2015m1



                                                                                       2016m1



                                                                                                2017m1



                                                                                                         2018m1
                                      Orlando               Synthetic Orlando

   FIG. 1.--Log Employment, Orlando vs Synthetic Orlando. Each panel represents the residualized (after
accounting for seasonal component and intercept) logarithm of employment in aggregate (Panel A), in con-
struction (Panel B), retail (Panel C) and hospitality (Panel D) for Orlando and its synthetic control. The data,
from the QCEW, are at a monthly frequency. The shaded period is September 2017, when Hurricane Maria
hit Puerto Rico.
                                                                                                                  34




             Panel A: Aggregate                                      Panel B: Construction
    .15                                                    .15


     .1                                                      .1


    .05                                                    .05


      0                                                      0


   -.05                                                    -.05
             Panel C: Retail                                         Panel D: Hospitality
    .15                                                    .15

     .1                                                      .1

    .05                                                    .05

      0                                                      0

   -.05                                                    -.05
          2014m1



                     2015m1



                               2016m1



                                         2017m1



                                                  2018m1




                                                                  2014m1



                                                                             2015m1



                                                                                       2016m1



                                                                                                2017m1



                                                                                                         2018m1
                                        Orlando            Synthetic Orlando

  FIG. 2.--Log Earnings per Worker, Orlando vs Synthetic Control. Each panel represents the residualized
(after accounting for seasonal component and intercept) logarithm of earnings per worker in aggregate (Panel
A), in construction (Panel B), retail (Panel C) and hospitality (Panel D) for Orlando and its synthetic control.
The data, from the QCEW, are at quarterly frequency. The shaded period is Q3 2017, when Hurricane Maria
hit Puerto Rico.
                                                                                                               35




            Panel A: Aggregate                                    Panel B: Construction
    10                                                   10

     6                                                    6

     2                                                    2

    -2                                                    -2

    -6                                                    -6

   -10                                                   -10
            Panel C: Retail                                       Panel D: Hospitality
    10                                                   10
     6                                                    6
     2                                                    2
    -2                                                    -2
    -6                                                    -6
   -10                                                   -10
         2014m1



                    2015m1



                              2016m1



                                       2017m1



                                                2018m1




                                                               2014m1



                                                                          2015m1



                                                                                    2016m1



                                                                                             2017m1



                                                                                                      2018m1
                                          Orlando                 Los Angeles

  FIG. 3.--Placebo Test Gaps for Employment, Orlando and Donor Pool. Each panel represents the %
gap between the `treated' unit and its control, for Orlando and for each commuting zone in the donor
pool (placebo treatments), for each outcome's synthetic control. The variable plotted is 100× the gap in
residualized (after accounting for seasonal component and intercept) logarithm of employment in aggregate
(Panel A, N = 165), in construction (Panel B, N = 149), retail (Panel C, N = 170) and hospitality (Panel D,
N = 148). The data, from the QCEW, are at a monthly frequency. The shaded period is September 2017,
when Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico. The dark line represents Orlando, the dashed dark line represents
Los Angeles
   Panel A: Aggregate                                              Panel B: Construction




        In donor pool                                                    In donor pool
        Not in donor pool                                                Not in donor pool

   Panel C: Retail                                                 Panel D: Hospitality




        In donor pool                                                    In donor pool
        Not in donor pool                                                Not in donor pool

  FIG. 4.--Synthetic Control Donor Pools, by Sector. Each panel represents the entire donor pool of commuting zones for the synthetic
Orlando, for the indicated outcome. The donor pools are restricted to exclude CZs which received more than .0001 FEMA applications per
capita or were below the 75th percentile of industry-specific employment levels.




                                                                                                                                         36
   Panel A: Aggregate Employment                                  Panel B: Construction Employment




       26.9%                                                          24.3%
       10 - 20%                                                       10 - 21%
       < 10%                                                          < 10%
       0%                                                             0%
       Not in donor pool                                              Not in donor pool


   Panel C: Aggregate Earnings per Worker                         Panel D: Construction Earnings per Worker




       24.3%                                                          33.6%
       10 - 20%                                                       10 - 20%
       < 10%                                                          < 10%
       0%                                                             0%
       Not in donor pool                                              Not in donor pool


  FIG. 5.--Synthetic Control Donor Pools, by Weight. Each panel represents the donor pool of the synthetic Orlando for the indicated
outcome by its assigned weight. Shown for aggregate and construction-sector employment and earnings. The data, from the QCEW, are at
a monthly frequency for employment and a quarterly frequency for earnings.




                                                                                                                                       37
                                                                                                                 38




            Panel A: Aggregate Employment                        Panel B: Aggregate Establishments
    10                                                  10

     6                                                   6

     2                                                   2

    -2                                                   -2

    -6                                                   -6

   -10                                                  -10
            Panel C: Construction Employment                     Panel D: Construction Establishments
    10                                                  10
     6                                                   6
     2                                                   2
    -2                                                   -2
    -6                                                   -6
   -10                                                  -10
         2014m1



                   2015m1



                            2016m1



                                     2017m1



                                               2018m1




                                                              2014m1



                                                                         2015m1



                                                                                  2016m1



                                                                                            2017m1



                                                                                                        2018m1
                                        Orlando                  Jacksonville

   FIG. 6.--Test for Impact of Hurricane Irma on Orlando Treating Jacksonville as Counterfactual Orlando.
Each panel represents the gap between treated unit and control for Jacksonville and for each commuting
zone in the Jacksonville donor pool, for each outcome's synthetic Jacksonville. The gap for Orlando vs the
outcome's synthetic Orlando is also plotted for comparison. The variable plotted is the gap in residualized
(after accounting for seasonal component and intercept) logarithm of aggregate employment (Panel A),
aggregate establishments (Panel B), construction employment (Panel C) and construction establishments
(Panel D). The data, from the QCEW, are at a monthly frequency for employment and a quarterly frequency
for establishments. The shaded period is September 2017 for employment and Q3 2017 for establishments,
when Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico and Hurricane Irma hit both Orlando and Jacksonville at the same
strength and approximately the same distance from its eye. The dark line represents Orlando, the dashed
dark line represents Jacksonville. Because Jacksonville's exposure to Irma was comparable to Orlando's,
and because Jacksonville did not receive a notable number of Puerto Rican FEMA applications related to
Irma or Maria, any significant and robust post-Irma effects seen in Jacksonville may represent the impact of
Irma on Orlando, which would confound our estimates of the impact of the Puerto Rican migrants.
                                                                                                        39




    1.4

    1.2

      1

      .8

      .6

      .4
           2014m1



                       2015m1



                                     2016m1



                                                    2017m1



                                                                  2018m1



                                                                                 2019m1



                                                                                               2020m1
                                                   month

                                Orlando                      Lake Charles, LA
                                Las Vegas, NV                Virginia Beach, VA
                                Salem, OR                    Boise, ID
                                Provo, UT                    Carson City, NV
                                Anniston, AL

  FIG. 7.--House Prices, Orlando and Synthetic Control Donors. The lines plot (the natural logarithm of)
the Zillow Home Value Index for Orlando and each of the positively weighted MSAs corresponding to the
CZs for the construction sector employment synthetic control (normed to September 2017). The synthetic
control weights by commuting zone for construction employment are listed in online Appendix Table A2.
                                                                                                          40


Table 1
Difference in Means, Recent Puerto Rican Migrants vs Comparators
                                           Natives                Puerto Rican                 Natives
                                       (all mainland)              Islanders                (Florida only)
Age (years)                              -9.383                     -7.445                    -8.827
                                          (-18.29)                   (-15.83)                  (-9.59)

Male                                     0.0698                    0.0675                       0.0352
                                           (4.07)                    (3.90)                     (1.16)

Married                                  -0.157                     -0.0279                   -0.117
                                          (-9.17)                    (-1.64)                   (-3.84)

Yrs. education completed                 -0.386                     -0.253                      -0.132
                                          (-5.27)                    (-3.04)                    (-1.02)

High school graduate                    -0.0648                    -0.0272                    -0.0469
                                          (-8.17)                    (-2.68)                    (-3.33)

4+ years of college                       -0.0154                   -0.0207                     0.0292
                                           (-0.95)                   (-1.27)                    (1.03)
Comparison observations                  6,431,276                  48,855                     333,182
  NOTE.--Analysis using data from the 2016 ACS five year sample. All results are for recipients that are in
the labor force. t statistics in parentheses.  Significance at the 10% level;  significance at the 5% level;
 significance at the 1% level.
                                                                                                       41


Table 2
Estimated Treatment Effects, All Workers
Sector                           Log                  Log Compensation                  Log
                              Employment                 per Worker                Establishments
Aggregate                6 months     12 months     6 months     12 months     6 months     12 months
Treatment effect         0.0021**     0.0038**       0.0005        0.0028       0.0054        0.0062
RMSPE                     9.9813       8.4823        2.5299        3.8088       1.0399        1.9979
RMSPE p-value             0.0121       0.0121        0.5273        0.4000       0.6424        0.6061
Andrews p-value           0.2222       0.0444        0.8000        0.2667       0.2667        0.2667
Moving block p-value      0.0000       0.0000        0.1875        0.1111       0.3750        0.2778
N                           165          165           165          165           165          165
Construction             6 months     12 months     6 months     12 months     6 months     12 months
Treatment effect          0.0153      0.0402**       0.0092       0.0331*       0.0125        0.0095
RMSPE                     5.5120       11.0658       5.2998        9.2167       3.3304        3.6134
RMSPE p-value             0.1141       0.0134        0.2617       0.0537        0.3289        0.4430
Andrews p-value           0.0889       0.0222        0.2000       0.0667        0.1333        0.2000
Moving block p-value      0.0000       0.0000        0.1250       0.0000        0.1875        0.0556
N                          149           149           149          149           149          149
Retail                   6 months     12 months     6 months     12 months     6 months     12 months
Treatment effect         0.0030**      0.0090*       0.0005        0.0033       0.0037        0.0159
RMSPE                     4.6217        4.8695       0.3605        0.7814       0.1335        2.2044
RMSPE p-value             0.0412       0.0588        0.9000        0.9588       0.9765        0.6882
Andrews p-value           0.3111       0.0222        0.4000        0.3333       0.3333        0.1333
Moving block p-value      0.0600       0.0000        0.5000        0.3889       0.6875        0.3889
N                           170          170           170          170           170          170
Hospitality              6 months     12 months     6 months     12 months     6 months     12 months
Treatment effect          0.0009        0.0118      0.0014**     0.0141**       0.0025        0.0076
RMSPE                     1.6708        2.8762       17.1481      13.6413       0.1277        0.6853
RMSPE p-value             0.3986        0.2635       0.0270       0.0338        0.9595        0.9054
Andrews p-value           0.6444        0.0222       0.4000       0.0667        0.6667        0.2000
Moving block p-value      0.4000        0.0536       0.0000       0.0000        0.8125        0.3889
N                          148           148           148          148           148          148
   NOTE.--Synthetic control estimates of the impact of the immigration inflow on the residualized (after
accounting for seasonal component and intercept) logarithms of the indicated outcomes in Orlando (6 and
12 months after Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico), using data from the QCEW, unrestricted donor pool.
Significance based on RMSPE p-values:  significance at the 10% level;  significance at the 5% level; 
significance at the 1% level.
Table 3
Estimated Treatment Effects, Non-Hispanic and Less-Educated Workers
                                     Non-Hispanic Workers                                          Less-Educated Workers
Sector                  Log Employment             Log Earnings per Worker            Log Employment              Log Earnings per Worker
Aggregate          6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE
Treatment effect    -0.0003**       0.0082**         0.0001         0.0009         -0.0006        0.0080**         0.0008        -0.0199*
RMSPE                10.9700        16.2198          0.8780         1.9797          4.1896         9.7029          1.7400         7.5027
RMSPE p-value         0.0448         0.0448          0.6791         0.6119          0.1765         0.0441          0.3750         0.0588
N                      134             134            134            134             136             136            136             136
Construction       6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE
Treatment effect     0.0004          0.0068        0.0004**       -0.0245**         0.0082         0.0166         0.0007**       -0.0147*
RMSPE                2.0665          3.7870         6.7462          7.4052          3.6389         3.8433          8.8591         8.4125
RMSPE p-value        0.4141          0.3203         0.0234          0.0469          0.2857         0.3308          0.0226         0.0602
N                     128             128             128            128             133            133              133            133
Retail             6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE
Treatment effect     -0.0001         0.0009          0.0036         0.0205         -0.0004         0.0089         0.0060**       0.0119**
RMSPE                 1.4148         3.4864          1.0713         3.0396          0.1467         0.8946          6.6239         7.1356
RMSPE p-value         0.3869         0.2993          0.5839         0.3577          0.9265         0.8015          0.0221         0.0221
N                      137            137             137            137             136            136              136            136
Hospitality        6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE     6 month TE     12 month TE
Treatment effect     -0.0016         0.0120         -0.0002         0.0028         -0.0041         0.0042          0.0003         0.0134
RMSPE                 0.5137         0.9949          1.2531         3.2994          1.3909         1.1233          0.9401         1.1408
RMSPE p-value         0.7883         0.8540          0.4818         0.2993          0.4962         0.8647          0.6165         0.8045
N                      137            137             137            137             133            133             133            133
  NOTE.--Synthetic control estimates of the impact of the immigration inflow on the residualized (after accounting for seasonal component
and intercept) logarithms of the indicated outcomes in Orlando (6 and 12 months after Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico), using data from the
QWI. Columns 1-4 show estimates for non-Hispanic workers. Columns 5-8 show estimates for less-educated workers. The donor pool is
restricted to include only those commuting zones which are observed for four quarters after the Hurricane, allowing 12-month estimates of
the treatment effects. Significance based on RMSPE p-values:  significance at the 10% level;  significance at the 5% level;  significance




                                                                                                                                              42
at the 1% level.
                                                                                                           43


Table 4
DD Estimated TEs of Hurricane Maria on Orlando
Outcome by Sector                           (1)                         (2)                          (3)
Aggregate
Log employment                          0.0108***                     -0.0009                     0.0028**
                                         (0.0026)                    (0.0080)                     (0.0012)
Log earnings/worker                      -0.0034                     -0.0047                      -0.0039*
                                         (0.0039)                    (0.0083)                     (0.0021)
Log establishments                        0.0001                      0.0137                     0.0070***
                                         (0.0096)                    (0.0188)                     (0.0016)
Construction
Log employment                            0.0097                     0.0303*                     0.0148**
                                         (0.0081)                    (0.0158)                     (0.0058)
Log earnings/worker                      -0.0009                     -0.0043                       0.0089
                                         (0.0092)                    (0.0216)                     (0.0080)
Log establishments                        0.0045                      0.0010                     0.0146***
                                         (0.0071)                    (0.0177)                     (0.0027)
Retail
Log employment                            0.0064                      -0.0197                    0.0057***
                                         (0.0041)                    (0.0156)                     (0.0014)
Log earnings/worker                      -0.0028                     -0.0052                     0.0031**
                                         (0.0031)                    (0.0076)                     (0.0013)
Log establishments                        0.0053                     -0.0143                     0.0089**
                                         (0.0082)                    (0.0162)                     (0.0038)
Hospitality
Log employment                          0.0097***                     0.0098                      0.0034**
                                         (0.0034)                    (0.0096)                     (0.0014)
Log earnings/worker                      -0.0017                     -0.0043                       -0.0087
                                         (0.0093)                    (0.0138)                     (0.0063)
Log establishments                       -0.0059                      0.0175                       0.0059*
                                         (0.0065)                    (0.0179)                     (0.0028)
  NOTE.--Difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of the immigration inflow on the residualized
(after accounting for seasonal component and intercept) logarithms of the indicated outcomes in Orlando,
in the post-treatment period, relative to the pre-treatment period. Estimated using the QCEW data. All
positively-weighted CZs in the synthetic Orlando are individually included as controls in (1) and (2), and the
composite synthetic Orlando for each outcome is the only control unit in (3). Authors own analysis using
the QCEW. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  Significance at the 10% level;  significance at the 5%
level;  significance at the 1% level.
Table 5
Difference-in-Differences pre-Trend Tests
                                         Employment                                              Earnings per Worker
Year     Period    All sectors   Construction       Retail       Hospitality    All sectors   Construction       Retail      Hospitality
2014    Q1 - Q2      -0.0006       -0.0100**       -0.0019**     -0.0045**        0.0053          0.0006      -0.0010***       0.0023
                    (0.0007)        (0.0040)        (0.0008)      (0.0018)       (0.0042)        (0.0017)       (0.0002)      (0.0015)
        Q3 - Q4      -0.0015         0.0006          -0.0011       0.0027         0.0007          0.0064        -0.0062        0.0010
                    (0.0011)        (0.0020)        (0.0007)      (0.0021)       (0.0020)        (0.0054)       (0.0051)      (0.0011)
2015    Q1 - Q2     -0.0012*      -0.0066***      -0.0030***    -0.0050***        0.0006          -0.0039       -0.0038        0.0035
                    (0.0006)        (0.0022)        (0.0007)      (0.0016)       (0.0009)        (0.0037)       (0.0029)      (0.0037)
        Q3 - Q4      -0.0001        -0.0050       -0.0082***    -0.0085***     0.0038***       -0.0147***        0.0032      0.0098***
                    (0.0008)        (0.0042)        (0.0006)      (0.0013)       (0.0007)        (0.0013)       (0.0035)      (0.0013)
2016    Q1 - Q2      -0.0006        -0.0010         -0.0020*     -0.0033**        0.0005          -0.0010       -0.0005        0.0007
                    (0.0007)        (0.0029)        (0.0011)      (0.0014)       (0.0007)        (0.0023)       (0.0004)      (0.0011)
        Q3 - Q4      0.0006         -0.0014           0.0009       -0.0020        0.0011         0.0024*        -0.0003        0.0004
                    (0.0008)        (0.0024)        (0.0008)      (0.0014)       (0.0009)        (0.0012)       (0.0004)      (0.0005)
2017    Q1 - Q2      -0.0004       -0.0125**          0.0001      -0.0056*     -0.0048***         -0.0076       -0.0013       -0.0173*
                    (0.0022)        (0.0049)        (0.0030)      (0.0028)       (0.0010)        (0.0098)       (0.0047)      (0.0078)
2018    Q1 - Q2      0.0026***      0.0153***        0.0022*         0.0035       -0.0038        0.0089***       0.0029          -0.0049
                      (0.0009)        (0.0044)       (0.0011)       (0.0025)     (0.0051)         (0.0005)      (0.0027)        (0.0066)
           Q3        0.0033***      0.0323***      0.0080***       0.0099**     0.0031***        0.0353***    0.0048***       0.0149***
                      (0.0011)        (0.0050)       (0.0009)       (0.0043)     (0.0006)         (0.0001)      (0.0002)        (0.0005)
  NOTE.--Difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of the immigration inflow on the residualized (after accounting for seasonal
component and intercept) logarithms of the indicated outcomes in Orlando, on two-quarter periods, relative to the last half of 2017 (when
the hurricanes hit and the migration from Puerto Rico to Orlando occurred). Columns 1-4 show estimates for the employment. Columns 5-8
show estimates for per-worker earnings. Estimated using the QCEW data with the synthetic Orlando for each outcome as the only control
unit. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  Significance at the 10% level;  significance at the 5% level;  significance at the 1% level.




                                                                                                                                             44
