                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                        EXIT VS. VOICE

                                       Eleonora Broccardo
                                         Oliver D. Hart
                                         Luigi Zingales

                                       Working Paper 27710
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27710


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We thank Patrick Bolton, Alex Edmans, Tore Ellingsen, Christian Leuz, Dirk Schoenmaker,
Andrei Shleifer, Yossi Spiegel, Stefano Zamagni, and participants at the University of Chicago
Finance lunch and the 2020 Stony Brook International Game Theory conference for very useful
comments on a previous draft. Eleonora Broccardo gratefully acknowledges financial support
from the Department of Economics and Management at the University of Trento. Luigi Zingales
gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Stigler Center at the University of Chicago.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Eleonora Broccardo, Oliver D. Hart, and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exit vs. Voice
Eleonora Broccardo, Oliver D. Hart, and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 27710
August 2020
JEL No. D02,D21,D23,D62,D64,H41,L21

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the relative effectiveness of exit (divestment and boycott) and voice (engagement)
strategies in promoting socially desirable outcomes in companies. We show that in a competitive
world exit is less effective than voice in pushing firms to act in a socially responsible manner.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that individual incentives to join an exit strategy are not necessarily
aligned with social incentives, whereas they are when well-diversified investors are allowed to
express their voice. We discuss what social and legal considerations might sometimes make exit
preferable to voice.

Eleonora Broccardo                               Luigi Zingales
University of Trento                             Booth School of Business
Via Inama, 5 -                                   The University of Chicago
Trento 38122                                     5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Italy                                            Chicago, IL 60637
eleonora.broccardo@unitn.it                      and NBER
                                                 luigi.zingales@ChicagoBooth.edu
Oliver D. Hart
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 220 Harvard
University Cambridge, MA
02138 and NBER
ohart@harvard.edu
1. Introduction

In recent years, companies have come under increasing stakeholder pressure to pursue
environmental and social goals. In 2019, $20.6bn flowed to funds that explicitly divest from "non-
sustainable" companies, more than 10 times the level a decade earlier (CBInsights (2020)). A
recent survey suggests that 38% of Americans are currently boycotting at least one company, up
from 26% only a year ago. 1 In the last quarter of 2019, the term ESG (Environment, Social and
Governance) was mentioned 357 times in earnings calls with CEOs versus only 49 times in the
last quarter of 2016 (CBInsights (2020)).
        At the same time a growing academic literature has argued that the usual presumption that
firms should maximize profit or market value is no longer valid in a world where, as result of
political failures either at the national or international level, externalities are not well-controlled.2
In particular, Hart and Zingales (2017) show that, to the extent a firm has a comparative advantage
relative to individuals in producing a public good (or avoiding a public bad), a firm's shareholders
may wish it to pursue social goals at the expense of profit. Consumers and workers may also be
willing to pay a price for a firm to act in a socially responsible way.
        In this paper we analyze theoretically whether pressure by stakeholders--consumers,
workers, shareholders--is likely to achieve a socially desirable outcome. 3 For concreteness we
focus on the case of environmental harm caused by pollution, but the paper can be applied to any
public good (or bad) where it is more efficient for a firm than for an individual to contribute to the
formation (or preservation) of that public good. Using Hirschman's (1970) terminology, we can
describe stakeholders' choices as exit versus voice. Investors or consumers can exercise their exit
option by divesting from polluting companies or boycotting their products; or investors can use
their voice by voting or engaging with management. (We focus on consumer boycotts, but argue
that worker boycotts are conceptually similar.)
        Under standard assumptions that agents are purely selfish, we are faced with a severe free
rider problem (Olson (1965)): unless an agent is large, the direct benefit she receives from any exit

1 https://www.comparecards.com/blog/38-percent-boycotting-companies-political-pandemic-reasons/
2 See, for example, Baron (2007), Benabou and Tirole (2010), Edmans (2020), Elhauge (2005), Graff Zivin and Small
(2005), Hart and Zingales (2007), Magill et al. (2015), Mayer (2018), Morgan and Tumlinson (2019), Schoenmaker
and Schramade (2019), and Stout (2012).
3 Our approach should not be confused with what Bebchuk and Tallarita (2020) call "stakeholderism." Stakeholderism

refers to a situation where, in making business decisions, corporate leaders take into account the well-being of
stakeholders (rather than just shareholders). In contrast, we are interested in analyzing how various stakeholders
(including shareholders) can persuade companies to act in a more socially responsible manner.

                                                                                                                2
or voice decision is negligible. To explain social action, we assume ­ consistent with empirical
evidence ­ that some investors and consumers are socially responsible in the sense that, when they
make a decision, they put a positive weight  on the well-being of others affected by the decision.
Other agents are purely selfish. In our model each firm can choose to be clean or dirty. A dirty
firm produces environmental damage equal to h. 4 A firm can avoid this damage by incurring an
additional fixed cost  and becoming clean. Given our simple set-up, it is socially desirable for a
firm to become clean if and only if h>  .
        We start by computing a competitive free entry equilibrium of this economy in the absence
of any environmental concerns. We then study how the equilibrium changes when environmental
concerns become an issue, depending on the strategy adopted by socially responsible stakeholders.
        The two exit strategies are very similar in their impact. Divestment and boycotts cause the
market value of a dirty firm to fall, leading some value-maximizing managers to switch to the
clean technology. However, even if we ignore the marginal incentive to participate, both exit
strategies will curb pollution in a less than proportional way: If ten percent of agents divest/boycott,
less than ten percent of firms become clean (an observation already made by Heinkel et al. (2001)
in the divestment context). The reason is that purely selfish agents will partially offset the effects
of divestment/boycotting by increasing their investment/purchases in companies shunned by
socially responsible agents. In both these cases the magnitude of the response depends on the slope
of the demand curve, which is driven by agents' risk tolerance for investors and by the utility of
the good for consumers.
        When we look at the marginal incentives to participate in an exit strategy, we find that
there is no simple relationship between the individual incentive to participate and the social
incentive to create clean firms. Divesting or boycotting can lead to too little or too much exit from
the perspective of a benevolent planner. However, when we focus on a level of the social
responsibility parameter  close to what is observed in experimental evidence (Charness and
Rabin (2003)), we find that the equilibrium level of exit is zero, unless pollution is extremely
harmful.




4In this paper we assume h to be known. This assumption is reasonable for standard pollution (for example PFOS or
Particulate matter), but not for climate change. The uncertainty about h generates an interesting risk management
problem, analyzed in Andersson et al. (2016).

                                                                                                               3
       We carry out our analysis under the assumption that exit decisions are common knowledge
and agents can commit to them. As we explain in Section 6, in the absence of this assumption,
both exit strategies become even less effective.
       We then consider the voice strategy. While divesting and boycotting are fairly "institution
free", there are multiple ways to express voice, all of them highly regulated. As a starting point we
abstract from any existing rule and reduce voice to a vote: shareholders are presented with the
choice of whether the firm they own should be clean or dirty. The only time an individual
shareholder's vote matters is when she is pivotal. Thus, as in Hart and Zingales (2017), we assume
that shareholders will vote as if their vote were pivotal. A pivotal shareholder trades off the net
social benefit from the clean technology, weighted by the shareholder's social parameter  , against
her own capital loss resulting from the choice of that technology. The net social benefit equals the
reduced pollution minus the cost of generating that reduction. If shareholders are well-diversified,
the personal capital loss is negligible. Thus, as long as  is positive, the first effect dominates and
socially responsible shareholders vote in line with a benevolent planner's goal.
       In our model we assume that all socially responsible agents have the same  . If we extend
the model to a distribution of the social responsibility parameter  , the difference between exit and
voice becomes even starker: all well-diversified investors with a positive  will vote for the social
optimum, while only investors (consumers) with a high  will divest (boycott).
       In practice, putting proposals up for a proxy vote is expensive and it will not be in the
interest of atomistic investors to incur the cost of doing so. We argue that mutual funds can use
engagement as a marketing strategy and show that socially responsible agents will be willing to
invest in a Green Fund that is committed to promoting an environmental agenda.
       Taken literally, our simple model suggests that for a sufficiently large number of
(moderately) socially responsible agents, the voice strategy dominates the exit one. In practice,
there are several real-world frictions that might attenuate or reverse this result. We discuss them
in Section 7. In spite of these frictions, it remains true that, when agents choose voice, their
individual incentives are aligned with the social incentive, whereas this is not the case when they
choose exit.
       There is a vast literature on socially responsible investment (SRI). Benabou and Tirole
(2010), Kitzmueller and Shimshack (2012), and Christiansen et al. (2019) provide very useful
overviews. On the divestment side, the first formal model is Heinkel et al. (2001). Our model of

                                                                                                    4
divestment is similar to theirs, but with the difference that they take as given that socially
responsible investors refuse to hold shares of dirty companies, whereas we suppose that socially
responsible investors make the divestment decision based on the impact this decision has. Pastor
et al. (2020) extend the Heinkel et al. (2001) model to derive an ESG factor in an equilibrium
asset-pricing model when investors have a taste for ESG (for another paper along similar lines, see
Pedersen et al. (2019)). They do endogenize the divestment decision, but under the assumption
that investors are purely selfish. Graff Zivin and Small (2005) and Morgan and Tumlinson (2019)
suppose that investors value public goods and pay more for the shares of firms that bundle private
and public goods; see also Aghion et al. (2020) and Bonnefon et al. (2019). However, each investor
is selfish in that he values his consumption of the public good and not the utility from the public
good accruing to others. Baron (2007), Chowdhry et al. (2019), Gollier and Pouget (2014), and
Oehmke and Opp (2020) consider the impact of divestment, but for the case of large as opposed
to atomistic investors
       There is also a smaller literature on consumer boycotting (see Kitzmueller and Shimshack
(2012) for a survey). Boycotts can be seen as a way to redistribute surplus (see Baron (2001)), or
as a way to induce companies to provide a public good (see Bagnoli and Watts (2003) and Besley
and Ghatak (2007)). In Bagnoli and Watts (2003) and Besley and Ghatak (2007), each consumer
is selfish in that he values his consumption of the public good and not the utility from the public
good accruing to others.
       There is also a vast literature on corporate social responsibility. This literature argues that
companies can or should have a purpose beyond profit or value maximization, including to act in
a socially responsible manner (e.g., Edmans (2020), Magill et al. (2015), Mayer (2018),
Schoenmaker and Schramade (2019), and Stout (2012)).            In contrast, we assume that some
individuals are socially responsible and derive the consequences for corporate behavior, depending
on the tools these socially responsible individuals have at their disposal.
       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our assumption on socially
responsible investors and consumers. Section 3 presents the model. Section 4 analyzes the exit
strategy, Section 5 the voice one. Section 6 covers robustness and extensions, and Section 7
includes discussion and qualifications. Section 8 concludes. An appendix considers the case of a
monopolistic firm.



                                                                                                    5
2. Socially Responsible Investors and Consumers

Responsible investing dates back at least as far as 1758, when the Philadelphia Yearly Meeting of
the Society of Friends required its members to cease and desist from slaveholding (Brown (1988)).
Consumer boycotting can be traced back even further to the vegetarianism of the Jain religion
(Laidlaw (1995)). The rejection of slavery by the Quakers and of animal products by the Jains was
on moral grounds, and thus did not lend itself to any economic calculus. This original perspective
survives in much of the contemporary socially responsible investment literature. From Heinkel et
al. (2001) to Hong and Kacperczy (2009), the early literature assumes that some investors simply
do not want to own certain kinds of stocks. Such an approach is appropriate for "sinful" products,
like tobacco, alcohol, or prostitution, but applies less well to social concerns that are less of a moral
nature. Most investors are not morally against companies that emit CO2, they would just like these
companies to emit less of it. Trinity Church was not morally against Walmart, it simply wanted
Walmart not to sell assault weapons, and so on.
           Some of the literature on socially responsible investment and consumption departs from
the purely moral view. For example, Graff Zivin and Small (2005), Morgan and Tumlinson
(2019), Bagnoli and Watts (2003), and Besley and Ghatak (2007) endogenize investor and
consumer choice by assuming that an individual will value a share or good based on a combination
of its private characteristics and the increased harm resulting from production. However, these
authors assume that individuals consider only the personal disutility of the increased harm,
ignoring the impact on others. As a result, in a large economy, there will be an extreme free rider
problem, leading to a large deviation between private and social optimality. Sugden (1982)
convincingly argues that such a model is inconsistent with the evidence on charitable
contributions. One way to mitigate the free rider problem is to introduce a "warm glow" effect,
along the line of Andreoni (1989). 5 In a sense this is what Pastor et al. (2020) do in assuming an
individual taste for green investment. However, in Pastor et al.'s approach, investors ignore their
impact on others.
           In our model socially responsible individuals are altruistic in the sense that they put some
weight on the utility of others. There is growing evidence in support of this assumption: see
Andreoni and Miller (2002), Charness and Rabin (2002), Riedl and Smeets (2017), Brodback et


5   Another way is to introduce reciprocal behavior along the lines of Sugden (1984).

                                                                                                       6
al. (2019), and Bauer et al. (2020). 6 We adopt Hart and Zingales (2017)'s formulation: we assume
that, in making a decision, an individual puts weight   [0,1] on the welfare of those affected by

the decision, where  reflects her degree of social responsibility. 7 Consider, for example, the
decision to wear a facemask to protect others from the risk of being infected, when this decision
is not mandatory. An individual will compare the private cost of her decision, say 10, with the

social benefit of the decision, say 50, where the latter is weighted by  . If  > , she will wear a
                                                                                               1
                                                                                               5
mask, if not she will not. 8
         With socially responsible individuals as we model them, the free rider problem is mitigated.
This point can be illustrated with an example. Imagine that one individual by spending I dollars in
water filtration can increase the water quality of a lake by f(I), a benefit that is shared equally
among N individuals along the lake (including himself). If the individual is purely selfish he will
maximize
                                     f (I )
                                            -I ,
                                       N
yielding the first order condition
                                     f '( I ) = N .
As N increases the underinvestment in the public good becomes more severe. Now consider the
possibility that the individual is socially responsible, in the sense that he puts a positive weight 
on the utility of others. He will then maximize:
                                     f (I )                 f (I )
                                            - I +  ( N - 1)        ,
                                       N                      N
which yields the first order condition:
                                                      1
                                     f '( I ) =           .
                                                  1 N -1
                                                    +    
                                                  N    N


6 Andreoni and Miller (2002) and Charness and Rabin (2002) find support for such preferences in lab experiments. A
preference for socially responsible investment has also been found in field experiments in situations where this
preference yields lower expected returns (Bauer et al. (2020)) and Riedl and Smeets (2017)). This preference is
positively correlated with the degree of altruism (Broadback et al. (2018)). Such a preference is also consistent with
the lower return of impact funds (Barber et al. (2020)).
7 For similar formulations, see Acquatella (2020), Besley and Ghatak (2018), and Frydlinger and Hart (2019).

8Consistent with our model, U.S. counties with higher civic capital (which can be interpreted as a higher  ) wear
masks more frequently and socially distance more; see Barrios et al. (2020).

                                                                                                                    7
For N large the above condition is
                                                  1
                                      f '( I )        .
                                                  
Not surprisingly, if  equals 1 we get the first best. If  < 1, we get more investment than in the
purely selfish case, as long as  is bounded away from zero.
           As in Hart and Zingales (2017), we assume that the socially responsible component enters
at the time a decision is made, but not after the decision is made. 9 We adopt this assumption to
avoid double counting in the aggregate welfare function. With  =0, the aggregate welfare function
is equal to
                                                  f (I ) - I   .

If we added the socially responsible component, the social welfare function would become
                                                          N -1
                                      f (I ) - I +             f (I ) .
                                                           N
Thus, we would be double counting the utilities of the agents. However, in our context we do not
think that incorporating the socially responsible component into the social welfare function would
substantially change our results.
           One interesting question is how broad is the group of people whose welfare enters a
socially responsible individual's calculations: does it include people in one's neighborhood, the
whole town, the whole country, or the whole world? The answer depends upon the socially
responsible perspective of an individual and what she considers her relevant community. In this
paper, we assume that the community includes everyone affected by the pollution.


3. The Model

3.1 The case where pollution is not a problem

Consider a three-date economy, as shown in Figure 1. At date 0 entrepreneurs can set up firms.
Production decisions are made at date 1. Production and consumption take place at date 2.
Entrepreneurs care only about money and have zero wealth. A fraction 0 <   1 of investors and
of consumers are socially responsible, with 0 <   1 (for simplicity, they all have the same  ).




9   Acquatella (2020) and Frydlinger and Hart (2019) make a similar assumption.

                                                                                                 8
The rest are purely selfish (  =0). We assume that consumers and investors are different (investors
do not consume firms' output and consumers do not invest).
        At date 0 pollution is not an issue (and is not expected to be an issue). There is a set-up
cost F for each firm, and each firm has a capacity constraint equal to one. After the set-up cost has
been sunk, there is an additional cost of production C, incurred at date 2. The expected value of C
is zero (up to the capacity constraint), but C is uncertain. We suppose
        (3.1)                                 C = ,
where  is an aggregate shock, which is normally distributed with mean 0 and variance  2 .       The
value of  is learned only at date 2. Note that we assume that the shock is an aggregate one to
capture the limited risk bearing capacity of investors. However, there could also be an idiosyncratic
component of the shock, which would explain why investors diversify their portfolios across firms.
                                        Figure 1: Timeline

0                                      1                                    2
|____________________________________|____________________________________|
Firms set up              Production decisions made          Uncertainty resolved
                                                             Production and
                                                             consumption occur

        Entrepreneurs cover the date 0 set-up cost F by issuing shares to investors. Investors have
an exponential utility function
(3.2)                                       U = -e - ,
where  is their final wealth. Investors hold the shares until date 2, when output is sold and profit
is realized. However, at date 1 there can be some portfolio rebalancing.
        We will study a competitive free entry equilibrium. We normalize the number of investors
to be one. Of course, a one investor economy is not competitive. Therefore, in order to make the
economy competitive, we will replicate it, as described below.
  Assume that the product market consists of a homogenous good (whose origin can be easily
determined, e.g., electricity). Normalize the number of consumers to be one, and suppose that the
consumer's utility function is
                                        1
        (3.3)                     U= q -  q 2 - pq ,
                                        2




                                                                                                   9
where the third term is the cost of buying q units of the good at price p. The maximization of this
utility leads to the following demand curve,


        (3.4)                  =  - q ,
                               p

or
                                              -p
        (3.5)                          q=        .
                                              
Output is sold in a competitive market. Production decisions are made at date 1. Each firm
produces up to its capacity constraint of one since price exceeds the expected value of C, which is
zero. Thus total supply equals N, where N is the number of firms set up at date 0, and equilibrium
in the date 2 goods market is given by
                                              -p
        (3.6)                          N=        .
                                              
Each firm's date 2 profit is

        (3.7)                          = p -  =  - N -  ,
                                      
and expected profit is
(3.8)                                 =  -  N .
        Consider the investor's date 0 portfolio decision. Assume that the investor can borrow and
lend at a zero rate of interest between dates 0 and 1 and dates 1 and 2. In a free-entry equilibrium
the market value of each firm at date 0 must be F since otherwise firms would enter or exit. The
total return for the investor at date 2 is therefore x - xF , where x is his investment level and we

normalize the investor's initial wealth to be zero. This return has a certainty equivalent given by
                                                         1
        (3.9)                       CE = x( - F ) -  x 2 2 .
                                                         2
The investor's demand for shares at date 0 will be given by the x that maximizes this certainty
equivalent. Thus,
                                              -F
     (3.10)                              x=          .
                                                2

In what follows we will assume that the investor holds all firms pro rata (his portfolio is fully
diversified).


                                                                                                  10
     (3.10) provides the total demand for firms' shares. The total supply is equal to N. Hence, for
the stock market to clear at date 0 we must have
                                                   -F
     (3.11)                                                = N.
                                                     2

Using (3.8), we obtain
                                                       -F
     (3.12)                                      N=              .
                                                        2 + 

This is the equilibrium number of firms that will set up at date 0. 10 From now on we assume  > F ,
so N>0. For future reference, it is useful to derive the formula for the certainty equivalent at the
optimal investment level x. This is obtained by substituting (3.10) into (3.9):

                                                1 ( - F ) 2 1 (  -  N - F ) 2
     (3.13)                             CE =               =                        .
                                                2  2         2      2

3.2 Replica economy

The economy as it stands is not competitive. To make it so we replicate the investor and consumer
sectors. In the replica economy there are r investors with the above investor preferences and r
consumers with the above consumer preferences. It is easy to see that the equilibrium number of
firms will be Nr, where N is given by (3.12). For large r each investor, consumer and firm is small
relative to the aggregate economy and so has little influence on market prices. In other words, for
large r the economy is approximately perfectly competitive. 11
        In what follows we will have the replica economy in mind even though we will not always
be explicit about it. When we study the effects of individual divestment, boycott and engagement
decisions the replica economy will be particularly relevant.


3.3 Pollution Becomes a Problem at Date 1




10 We ignore the fact that the solution to (3.12) may not be an integer. This will become unimportant in the replica
economy described below when r is large.
11 For details, see, e.g., Mas-Colell, Whinston, and Green (1995).



                                                                                                                 11
Suppose that at date 1 pollution becomes a problem (to emphasize, this eventuality is unanticipated
at date 0). 12 Operating with the existing technology (which we will now label dirty), each firm
produces harm h >0 to the environment at date 2. We assume that the total harm from a single firm
stays the same as the economy is replicated (replication simply makes the economy more
competitive). Consistent with this, we suppose that each of the r investors and the r consumers
                                                                                                    h
experiences the harm from a single firm equally, that is, each individual's utility is reduced by      .
                                                                                                    2r
           A firm can avoid polluting by incurring an additional fixed cost  at date 1; this fixed cost
comes out of date 2 profits. We call the firms that decide to pay this cost "clean". Thus, the cost
of a clean C firm is
(3.14)                                                 C C=  +  ,
while the cost of a dirty D firm is as before
(3.15)                                                   = C
                                                        CD  = .

If all investors and consumers are purely selfish (  =0), the existence of pollution will not change
any production or investment decision significantly when r is large: it will only reduce the utility
                      Nh
of each agent by         . The reason is simple. As r   , the pollution impact of any production and
                      2r
investment decision on each individual converges to zero. So, nobody internalizes the pollution
externalities, as in Pastor et al. (2020). As we will see shortly, this is not the case when people are
socially responsible. In this case, the outcome depends upon the strategy adopted by socially
responsible investors and consumers. Before analyzing this, however, we need to consider what a
benevolent planner would do, so that we have an appropriate benchmark.


3.4 Benevolent Planner's Response to Environmental Damage

As a benchmark, we derive a benevolent planner's solution in a world where all investors and
consumers are purely selfish. The number of firms N that entrepreneurs have set up at date 0 is
given at date 1. However, a benevolent planner can dictate what technology--clean or dirty--each
                                                                                          nc
firm should adopt at date 1, that is, she can choose the proportion of clean firms  =        . Assume
                                                                                          N
that this is the only instrument at the planner's disposal. That is, the planner chooses  and then


12   We consider a rational expectations equilibrium in Section 6.

                                                                                                     12
lets the date 1 stock market and the date 2 product market clear. The question is at what level will
she set  .
         We suppose that the planner's objective is to maximize the sum of investor and consumer
surplus, net of the harm imposed by pollution. Since the number of firms N is given, consumer
surplus is independent of  . The reason is that each firm produces one unit whether it is clean or

dirty as long as p exceeds the expected value of  +  , which we will now assume:
     (3.16)                               - N   .
To derive investor utility we need to compute the investors' return at date 1 after the planner sets
the proportion of clean firms at  and investors freely re-optimize their investment choices.

         Let the equilibrium prices of the two types of firms be Vc and Vd . The gross return of a

clean firm is  less than that of a dirty firm. Thus, in order to ensure that (purely selfish) investors
stay invested in both kinds of firms at date 1 we must have
    (3.17)                               V=
                                          c Vd -  .
The return of an investor at date 2 is
    (3.18)                       x ( - V ) + x [V + (1 -  )V ] - x F ,
                                        d     0  c          d     0


where x is her date 1 portfolio holding. The first term reflects the fact that the net return on her
investment is  -V =  -  - V . In the second and third terms x0 is the portfolio holding chosen
                 d         c

at date 0 (given by (3.10)). The second term reflects the fact that a fraction  of the firms the
investor owns have become clean, and the third term is the original cost of the date 0 investment.
         The certainty equivalent of this return is
                                                                    1
(3.19)                 CE= x( - Vd ) + x0 [Vc + (1 -  )Vd ] - x0 F -  x 2 2 ,
                                                                    2
and so the investor's date 1 choice of x will satisfy
                                               - Vd
(3.20)                                   x=           .
                                                2
The condition for date 1 stock market equilibrium is x = N , which combined with (3.11) yields
(3.21)                                      Vd = F .
Thus,




                                                                                                    13
                                         ( - F ) 2
(3.22)                       =CE                   -  x0
                                          2 2

                                        ( - F ) 2    ( - F )
                                    =             -          .
                                         2   2
                                                       2
By choosing  N clean firms, the planner will cause the total amount of pollution to be (1 -  ) Nh.
Thus, the planner will maximize

                                ( - F ) 2 ( - F )      
(3.23)                          2 2 -   2 - (1 -  ) Nh 
                                                       
with respect to  . Recall that  =  -  N , which is independent of  . We obtain a bang-bang
solution (either  =0 or  =1) depending on whether
                                            ( - F )
(3.24)                                                > or < Nh .
                                              2
Using (3.11), this boils down to
(3.25)                                       > or < h .
This is very intuitive. If  > h , the cost of avoiding pollution is bigger than the cost of pollution
itself and thus all firms should use the dirty technology (  =0). By contrast, if  < h the cost of
avoiding pollution is less than the cost of polluting and all firms should be clean (  =1).


4. Exit Strategies

4.1 Divesting

We now analyze what happens when there is no planner (or government) and social action is left
to individual investors or consumers. We consider first the strategy of divestment by investors.
Assume that a mass µ   of socially responsible investors announce that they will hold shares
only in C firms. We suppose that this announcement is visible and that investors can commit to
their divestment decision (we return to this issue in Section 6). We want to determine whether this
outcome can be sustained. To this end we first derive the product market and capital market
equilibrium under the assumption that a mass µ of socially responsible investors will divest from
dirty firms. Then, we check that each socially responsible investor does indeed want to divest (that
is, we are at a Nash equilibrium). In this subsection we assume that there is no consumer boycott.


                                                                                                  14
        We suppose that at date 1 firms are run by value-maximizing managers. One can imagine that
(before there were any environmental concerns) initial entrepreneurs designed an incentive scheme
to encourage managers to maximize market value at date 1 in order to obtain the highest valuation
at date 0. Note that initial entrepreneurs are not well-diversified and so they want to maximize the
value of their own company, not the joint value of all companies, as the common ownership
literature suggests (see Azar et al. (2018)) 13.
       Value maximization implies that in the date 1 equilibrium C and D firms must have the same
value V, otherwise there would be switching. 14 Let nc be the number of clean firms and

 = N - nc the number of dirty firms.
nd
       For divestors, the analogy of (3.10) is
                                                       -  -V
       (4.1)                                     x=               ,
                                                          2

since C firms yield expected profits  -  , rather than  , and cost V. Since divestors represent
a mass µ of investors, their demand for clean firms is

                                                     -  -V            
       (4.2)                                µx = µ                    .
                                                    
                                                        2
                                                                      

The rest of the market will not invest in clean firms since they are less profitable, but equally
expensive. Hence, (4.2) represents the total demand for clean firms, and we must have

                                                   -  -V 
       (4.3)                                    µ         = nc            .                           .
                                                      2
                                                         



13   We consider the possibility of socially responsible entrepreneurs in Section 6. In this paper we do not discuss how
incentive contracts can affect the ESG decision of managers; on this, see Davies and Van Wesep (2018).


14 An interesting question is whether a purely selfish investor could take advantage of the fact that clean and dirty
firms have the same price, but different expected profitability, by short selling one and using the proceeds to invest in
the other. The feasibility of this strategy depends on whether socially responsible investors are willing to lend shares
to short sellers and whether they are willing to accept borrowed shares as "bona fide" clean shares. In our model,
where socially responsible investors care about their impact, the answer to both questions is negative. A socially
responsible investor, who accepts a lower return for a greater cause, would be foolish to lend his shares to a speculator
who undoes his strategy without fully compensating him. The same is true for an investor buying lent shares.

                                                                                                                      15
Similarly, the demand for dirty firms will be given by

                                                             -V    
       (4.4)                                      (1 - µ )         ,
                                                            
                                                              2
                                                                   

which must be equal to nd :


                                                           -V     
      (4.5)                                     (1 - µ )          =nd .
                                                          
                                                            2
                                                                  

Adding (4.3) and (4.5) yields

      (4.6)                                  - V - µ = N  2 .

We know from (3.11) that N  =  - F , and therefore
                           2




      (4.7)                                            V= F - µ          .
                                                                        15




Substituting back into (4.3), we obtain

                                                     - F -  (1 - µ ) 
      (4.8)                                 nc = µ                   
                                                         2           

                                                         µ (1 - µ )
                                           = µN -                   .
                                                           2

(4.8) is illustrated in Figure 2. 16

                         Figure 2: Impact of µ on percentage of clean firms
In drawing this graph we assumed the following values of the parameters: N=10,       =0.04,    2 =0.2, and  = 0.02.




15   We assume that F >  , so that V>0. Otherwise firms might choose not to produce at all.

16A similar equation and figure can be found in Heinkel et al. (2001). The solution to (4.8) may not be an integer. We
ignore this issue, but imposing an integer constraint would affect our calculation of the marginal incentive to divest
below. We discuss this in Section 6.

                                                                                                                   16
                                        0.18
                                        0.16
                                        0.14




                     % of clean firms
                                        0.12
                                         0.1
                                        0.08
                                        0.06
                                        0.04
                                        0.02
                                          0
                                               0   0.1   0.2     0.3          0.4
                                                         mu



At this point it is helpful to provide some intuition. To understand (4.7), note that divestment leads
to a fall in the demand for dirty firms' shares, causing V to fall. If V fell by  , clean firms would
have the same net return as dirty firms previously, while dirty firms would have a higher net return.
As a result, the demand for shares would exceed the supply. Hence V must fall by less than  ,
indeed by µ according to (4.7).
       (4.7) also throws light on (4.8). If V fell by  , the demand for clean firms' shares would be
in proportion to the number of divestors since divestors would invest as much as before. However,
since V falls less, the demand for clean shares is lower and the number of clean firms is less than
proportional to the number of divestors. Indeed nc is quadratic in µ .

                                                                                            
        (4.8) implies that the marginal impact of divestment is increasing in µ . If N <       , we
                                                                                             2
have a corner solution: the number of clean firms nc =0 in a neighborhood of µ = 0 and, for low

µ , the marginal impact of µ on nc is zero. Note that a corner solution will occur when either the

risk aversion  is low or the variance of returns  2 is low (or both). Under these conditions it is a
(Nash) equilibrium for no socially responsible investor to divest: starting at µ = 0 , purely selfish
investors will absorb any divested stock with minimal price impact and as a result no firms will
become clean.




                                                                                                   17
                                                 (1 - µ )
           Conversely, nc >0 if N >                       . Thus, divesting will have a positive impact when the
                                                   2
mass of divesting investors µ is close to 1, the cost of the clean technology  is small, the risk
bearing capacity of investors is low, or the variance of returns is high.
           From now on we assume that we are at an interior solution for any µ > 0 , that is,
                                                           
       (4.9)                                      N>          .
                                                            2

           We next determine whether a socially responsible investor wants to divest when (4.9)
holds. As a first step, we compare the certainty equivalent of a divestor with the certainty
equivalent of a nondivestor. We then bring in the environmental impact of divestment.
           The payoff of a nondivestor is given by
                                        x + ( x - x)V - x F ,
       (4.10)                                  0         0



since they invest only in high return dirty firms.
           The certainty equivalent of (4.10) is
                                                              1
       (4.11)                         x( - V ) + x0 (V - F ) -  x 2 2 ,
                                                              2

and the x that maximizes (4.11) is
                                                                   -V
       (4.12)                                               x=             .
                                                                   2

Substituting (4.12) and (3.10) into (4.11) and using (4.7), we obtain the following expression for
the CE of a nondivestor:
                                                   1                       -F
                                     =                     (  - F + µ ) - µ 2 .
                                                                       2
       (4.13)                        CE
                                                  2                                   
                                       nd              2




           Carrying out the same exercise for a divestor yields
                                        1                                      µ
                               =                (  - F -  + µ )            -      ( - F ) . 17
                                                                       2
       (4.14)                  CEd
                                      2     2
                                                                                2




17   Note that (4.9) implies   nc > 0 , which in turn, given (4.3), implies  - F -  + µ > 0 .

                                                                                                             18
Thus by divesting an investor loses

                                           
   (4.15)                   CEnd - CE
                                    =         ( 2 - 2 F -  (1 - 2µ ) ) .
                                          2 2
                                     d




        A socially responsible investor will compare this loss with the effect her divestment has on
the environment and on other people's utilities. To keep track of this effect we have to take
seriously that we are in a replica economy. In the replica economy there are r investors, µ r of

whom divest; r consumers; and Nr firms set up in the free entry equilibrium, of which nc r choose

to become clean at date 1, where nc is given by (4.8). The effect of one investor's divestment
decision is composed of two elements: the impact on the environment and the impact on other
investors and on consumers. Investors are optimizing and so, by the envelope theorem, a small
change in the market value of firms caused by one investor divesting will have a second order
effect on other investors. Consumers will be unaffected because total supply equals N, independent
of the mix of clean and dirty firms. Thus, we are left with the effect on the environment.
        Currently µ r investors are divesting. If one investor stops divesting µ changes from µ to
    1           1                                                             nc
µ - , i.e., µ =- . The number of clean firms changes from nc r to (nc +          µ )r , plus some
    r               r                                                         µ
second order terms. That is, as r   , the change in the number of clean firms is
                                nc 1      n         (1 - 2µ )
        (4.16)                    (- )r =- c =-N +            ,
                                µ r       µ           2
where we use (4.8). So the damage created by the investor's decision not to divest is
     (1 - 2µ ) 
 N -  2  h , which the investor weights by her socially responsible parameter  . She then
               
compares this to the expression in (4.15). We may conclude that a socially responsible investor
will be willing to stay divested if


                                                               (1 - 2µ ) 
                          2 (
                              2 - 2 F -  (1 - 2µ ) )   h  N -
                                                                 2 
   (4.17)                                                                 ,
                        2                                                

which can be rewritten as



                                                                                                 19
     (4.18)               ( 2 - 2 F -  (1 - 2µ ) )  2 h  N  -  (1 - 2 µ ) 
                                                           2
                                                                          .

Using (3.11), we can rewrite (4.18) as
                                      2 (1 - 2 µ )         h (1 - 2 µ )
     (4.19)                   N -                    hN -
                                        2    2
                                                             2
or, rearranging,
                                                 µ              2 .
     (4.20)               ( h -  )  N -         +   (2 h -  ) 
                                         2       
                                                  2
                                                               2 2


Inequality (4.20) is the condition for a socially responsible investor to be willing to keep divesting.
We can use (4.20) to characterize the (Nash) equilibrium values of µ .

Proposition 1:
If the LHS of (4.20) is less than the RHS at µ = 0 , then µ = 0 is an equilibrium.
If the LHS of (4.20) is greater than the RHS at µ =  , then µ =  is an equilibrium.
If the LHS of (4.20) is equal to the RHS at 0  µ
                                               ^   , then µ = µ
                                                              ^ is an equilibrium 18.


To gain further insight, it is helpful to distinguish between the cases 2 >  and 2 <  .
Suppose that people are not strongly altruistic, in the sense that  is significantly less than ½. This
assumption is consistent with Charness and Rabin (2002), who find than an average  of 0.25 best
fits the data.
        Then, 2 >  is a case where pollution is very inefficient, while 2 <  is a case where
pollution is not very inefficient. With this intuition in mind, let us analyze the two cases.


Case1: 2 > 
The LHS of (4.20) is increasing in µ . Figures 3 a-c illustrate the possibilities. In 3a, µ =  is the
                                                                   ^ , and µ =  . In 3c, µ = 0 is the
unique equilibrium. In 3b, there are three equilibria, µ = 0 , µ = µ
unique equilibrium.



18 The conclusion that 0  µ   ^   is an equilibrium when the LHS of (4.20) equals the RHS is strictly speaking only
true in the limit economy. If r is large and finite, second order terms may determine whether any deviation from
 µ=µ  ^ is in an individual investor's interest. This warrants further investigation.

                                                                                                                20
Case 2: 2 <  .
Now the LHS of (4.20) is decreasing in µ and is negative when µ = 0 . The situation is as in Figure
3d The unique equilibrium is µ = 0 .
                                       Figure 3: Possible Cases




                   3a                                                         3b




                        3c                                                      3d


Two conclusions follow from our discussion. First, when h >  the social optimum is nc = N (see
Section 3.4), and so we want all socially responsible investors to divest. (Even if they do, according
                              (1 -  )
to (4.8) we have nc =  N -            <  N < N .) Yet, µ =  may not be an equilibrium. Indeed,
                              2
if pollution is not too inefficient and  is not very large, then 2 h <  and µ = 0 is the only
equilibrium: there is no divestment at all.




                                                                                                   21
       Even if 2 h >  , there is no guarantee that divestment will occur. It is quite possible that
                                                                              
the LHS of (4.20) is less than the RHS at µ = 0 (this will be true if N          ). Thus, for small µ ,
                                                                               2
Figure 3c applies and the unique equilibrium is µ = 0 .

       The first conclusion then is that there will typically be underdivestment when h >  .
        The second conclusion is that in the (perhaps unlikely) case where investors are very
socially responsible, there can be excessive divestment when h <  . When h <  , nc = 0 is

socially optimal. But if  = 1 and h >  , then we are again in Case 1 and it is easy to see that
                                         3
                                         4
Figure 3b can apply if  is large enough (the LHS of (4.20) is less than zero at µ = 0 and greater
than zero at µ = 1 ). Hence, µ =  is an equilibrium under these conditions: there can be too many
clean firms.
       The intuition for both underinvestment and overinvestment is roughly as follows. As (4.8)
shows, the number of clean firms is quadratic in µ and the marginal impact of divestment on nc is

increasing in µ . As a result, low µ equilibria can be sustained when h >  and high µ equilibria

can be sustained when h <  .
                                                                     
       The above analysis is under the assumption that N >                .   As we noted earlier, if
                                                                      2
     
N<      , µ = 0 is always an equilibrium, since nc = 0 in a neighborhood of µ = 0 : investors have
      2
                                         (1 -  )
no incentive to divest. Indeed if N <            , then µ = 0 is the only equilibrium, since nc =0 for
                                           2
µ  .
       In closing this subsection, let us note how our theoretical results compare with the
evidence. Most of the empirical literature on divestment focuses on institutional investors, not
individuals, whose choices are generally not observable (but see Hartzmark and Sussman (2019)).
Teoh et al. (1999) study one of the broadest divestment campaigns --the one against the apartheid
regime in South Africa-- and find no impact on stock prices.


4.2 Consumer Boycotts


                                                                                                    22
In this section we ignore the possibility of divesting and focus on a different form of exit: consumer
boycotts. For boycotts to be possible, we need to assume that consumers know the technology
behind the good they buy: they can tell whether the good is produced by a clean firm or a dirty
firm. We suppose that boycotting decisions are common knowledge and that consumers can
commit to them (but see Section 6). As in previous sections we suppose that a boycott is not
anticipated at date 0 when firms are set up, but only becomes a factor at date 1. Thus, N is
predetermined at date 1 and is given by (3.12).
         Consider the replica economy where there are r consumers. Suppose that a fraction  of
them are socially responsible, with parameter  . As before, we start by assuming that a fraction
   of consumers will boycott the dirty product and then derive the equilibrium value of  .
Boycotters buy only clean items at a price pc . The other consumers are either indifferent about

what they buy (if pc = pd ) or buy only dirty items (if pd < pc ). We will see that pd < pc . Thus, a

fraction  of the demand will be for clean products and a fraction (1 -  ) for dirty products.

                                                                                = N - nc . The
         Consider an equilibrium with nc clean firms and nd dirty firms, where nd
equilibrium in the output market requires that
                               -                       -
    (4.21)                           =  , (1 - )               =  ,
                                                        

where  and  are the prices of clean and dirty goods, respectively.
         Solving these equations yields,
                                                -
(4.22)                                      =   
                                                       ,

                                                (1-)-
                                            =     1-
                                                           .

In an interior equilibrium the expected date 1 profit of clean and dirty firms must be the same,
since otherwise the lower profit firms would have a lower market value (since investors must be
induced to hold the shares), and a dirty firm would have the incentive to become clean or vice
versa. Hence,

(4.23)                                      =  -  =  =  .

Substituting the value of  and  we have



                                                                                                   23
                                            -               (1-)-
(4.24 )                                     
                                                    -  =        1-


           = N - nc we can rewrite this as
and using nd

                                                           (1-)
(4.25)                                        = N -            

                                                                   (1-)
                                              = (1 - )N +              
                                                                            .

          Note that the first equation in (4.25) is very similar to (4.8). 19 The impact of boycotting is
similar to the impact of divesting. Boycotting will be effective when either the mass of boycotters
is close to 1 or the cost of the clean technology is small relative to slope of the demand curve. As
for divestors, boycotters impact the equilibrium level of C firms less than proportionally.

                  
          If  <  , we have a corner solution: the number of clean firms nc = 0 in a neighborhood

of  = 0 and, for low  , the marginal impact of  on nc is zero. Note that this will be the case
when the slope of the demand curve is low. Under these conditions it is a (Nash) equilibrium for
no socially responsible consumer to divest: starting at  = 0 , purely selfish consumers will absorb
any goods boycotters shun with minimal price impact and as a result no firms will become clean.
          For small , we have an interior solution with a positive number of clean firms ( nc > 0 ) if
                     
and only if  >  . From now on, we assume
                                                                      
(4.26)                                                           >  .

          Suppose that one of the socially responsible consumers stops boycotting. When she was
                                                                            1                                - pc
boycotting dirty products, she was maximizing her utility  q -  q 2 - pc q , yielding q =                         .
                                                                            2                                

                                                - pc 1   - pc 
                                                                                  2
                                                                  1
This purchase generates a utility of (  - pc )      -               (  - pc ) . When she
                                                                             2
                                                               =
                                                     2           2




19As for (4.8), the solution to (4.25) may not be an integer. We ignore this issue, but imposing an integer constraint
would affect our calculation of the marginal incentive to boycott below. We discuss this in Section 6.

                                                                                                                   24
                                           1                                       1
stops boycotting she maximizes  q -  q 2 - pd q and so her utility becomes           (  - pd ) . Thus,
                                                                                              2

                                           2                                      2
the change is

                                1                         1
                                   (  - pd ) - (  - pc=
                                                      )     (2  - pd - pc ) ( pc - pd ) 
                                            2         2
           (4.27)                                                                       .
                               2                         2 

         At the same time, the socially responsible consumer bears a cost of not boycotting due to
her internalizing a fraction of social welfare. As in the divestment case the effect of her stopping
her boycott on other consumers' and investors' utility is zero by the envelope theorem. But there
                                                       nc
is a negative effect on the environment equal to h        , which will have weight      in her utility
                                                       
function. Thus, a boycott is sustainable if and only if

                                   1                                       
(4.28)                                 (2 -  -  )( -  )                       .
                                   2                                       


We can rewrite this as

                1                                                             
(4.29)          2
                    2 -  -         +  - 1-  1- -                 -  (1 - 2),
                                                          


where we use (4.25). The LHS of (4.29) can be simplified (again using (4.25)) to

                                                             2
(4.30)                                         2
                                                   2 -  +    
                                                                 

and so (4.29) becomes

                                        2                    2
(4.31)                   2
                             2 -  +     
                                                -  +            
                                                                    ,

which can be rewritten as

                                                                        
(4.32)                          ( - )  (2 - 1)  - 2.

We can divide the cases up as in Section 4.1.

Case 1: 2 >  .

                         Figure 4: Possible Equilibria of the boycotting case


                                                                                                   25
                         4a                                          4b




                    4c                                                 4d


The RHS of (4.32) is increasing in  . Figures 4a-c illustrate the possibilities. In 4a,  =  is the
unique equilibrium. In 4b, there are three equilibria  = 0 ,  = ^ , and  =  . 20In 4c,  = 0 is the

unique equilibrium.



Case 2: 2 < 

The RHS of (4.32) is decreasing in  and is less than the LHS at  = 0 , since LHS of (4.32) =
                                                  
N( -  ) >  ( -  ) >   - 2 = RHS of (4.32) at  = 0 , where the first inequality

follows from (4.26). The situation is as in Figure 4d. The unique equilibrium is  = 0 .

           As with divestment, there can be too little boycotting or too much. First, when h >  the
social optimum is nc = N (see Section 3.4), and so we want all socially responsible consumers to

boycott. Yet,  =  may not be an equilibrium. Indeed, if pollution is not too inefficient and  is
not very large, then 2 h <  and  = 0 is the only equilibrium: there is no boycotting at all.




20   With the same caveat noted in footnote 18.

                                                                                                26
        On the other hand, there could be too much boycotting. Suppose h <  and  = 1 . If
     3
h>      we are in Case 1. But it is easy to see that the LHS of (4.32) exceeds the RHS at  = 0
     4
(by (4.26)); however, the LHS of (4.32) is less than the RHS at  = 1 if  N is close to  . Hence,
Figure 2b applies and  =  will be an equilibrium if  is large enough.
        The intuition for the distortions is as before. From (4.25), nc is quadratic in  and thus the

marginal impact of boycotting is increasing in  .
                                                                                          
        The above analysis is under the assumption N >       . As we noted earlier, if N < ,  = 0
                                                                                          
is always an equilibrium, since nc = 0 in a neighborhood of  = 0 : consumers have no incentive to

                            (1 -  )
boycott. Indeeed, if N <            , then  = 0 is the only equilibrium since nc =0 for    .
                              
        The most important takeaway from this section is that what we said about divestment is
true of boycotts as well. If pollution is not too inefficient and people are not strongly altruistic, we
will be in Case 2 and the equilibrium level of boycotting equals zero.
        Unlike for divestment, there is some evidence that consumer boycotts have an impact on
the stock price of targeted companies (Pruitt and Friedman (1986)). A possible explanation is that
the slope of the demand curve for goods is larger than the slope of the demand curve for shares.


5. Voice

Socially responsible investors can also engage with management. We assume that all investors
continue to buy dirty as well as clean firms ­ i.e., they do not discriminate. (To put it another way
they do not both engage and divest.) While divesting and boycotting are fairly "institution free"
strategies, engaging is not. Therefore, to analyze the engagement strategy we first look at the voting
decisions of atomistic shareholders, assuming that environmental proposals are exogenously put
up for a proxy vote. Later we will consider the role of mutual funds in facilitating engagement.


5.1 Voting
Suppose there are  N clean firms and (1 - ) N dirty firms at date 1. Assume that a vote takes
place whether one of the dirty firms should become clean. As mentioned in the Introduction, we



                                                                                                     27
follow Hart and Zingales (2017) in assuming that each shareholder votes as if she were pivotal,
since this is the only time her vote matters.
       Given  N clean firms, the resulting stock market equilibrium will be as in Section 3.4,
                                                                        = F -  and Vd = F ,
where the benevolent planner chose the number of clean firms. That is, Vc
and the certainty equivalent of each investor is given by (3.27):

                                       ( - F ) 2    ( - F )
       (5.1)                       =CE           -          .
                                        2 2           2
       It is important to recognize that the formula (5.1) reflects our assumption that investors are
well-diversified (see the discussion of (3.27)). As a result the capital loss incurred by any one firm
becoming dirty will be shared equally by r investors. We discuss the case of concentrated
ownership in Section 5.3.
       Suppose that one additional dirty firm becomes clean as a result of the vote. This will cause
                    CE                                 1
CE to change by         . But in the replica economy  = , and so the change in CE
                                                       Nr
converges to zero as r   .
       The remaining effect of bringing about an extra clean firm consists of two elements: the
impact on the environment and the impact on the wealth of other investors (the effect on consumers
is zero, since the supply of output remains at N). The impact on the environment is
                                        (rnc )
       (5.2)                       h           = hrN = h
                                         v
                              1
because nc =  N and  = .
                              Nr
       The impact on other investors' wealth is no longer zero (the envelope theorem does not
apply since firms that are pressed to choose clean by engaged shareholders are not maximizing
value), but is now given by
                         [ (r - 1)CE ]     (r - 1) CE    (r - 1) ( - F )
       (5.3)                              =           =-                 ,
                                             Nr            Nr      2
which converges to
                                                    ( - F )
       (5.4)                                    -
                                                     N  2
as r   .


                                                                                                   28
        Summing the two effects and weighting them by  yields the conclusion that bringing
about an extra clean firm is desirable for the investor if
                                              ( - F ) 
(5.5)                                     h -          >0.
                                               N  2 
                                 -F
Since  > 0 and by (3.11) N =            , we may conclude that a socially responsible investor will
                                   2
vote "clean" (that is, to make the dirty firm clean) if and only if h >  , which is the same criterion
used by the planner. In other words, if h >  , all socially responsible investors will vote clean,
while if h <  all investors will vote dirty.
        Note that (5.5) applies regardless of  , as long as  > 0 . Thus, if instead of having a
fraction of investors with the same  , we have a distribution of investors with different  's, then
all the investors with  > 0 will vote as the benevolent planner would. Hence, as long as the
majority of investors are a little socially responsible, voting will deliver the social optimum. If the
majority of investors are purely selfish, however, and a vote requires majority support to be
effective, engagement by socially responsible shareholders will have no impact.


5.2 Engaging through an intermediary
        Putting proposals up for a proxy vote is expensive. It will not be in the interest of atomistic
investors to incur the cost of doing so, and management is unlikely to take the lead. By contrast,
mutual funds can use engagement as a marketing strategy (O'Leary and Valdmanis (2020)). A
Green Fund can sell its ability to put socially responsible proposals on the ballot as a feature of
their fund and pay the cost out of the management fee. The question then is whether atomistic
socially responsible investors are willing to put their money in the Green Fund.
        As a benchmark we consider the case where the impact of engagement by a Green Fund is
linear, that is, if a fraction  of investors' wealth is placed with the fund, a fraction  of firms will
adopt the clean technology.
        Suppose that the Green Fund controls a fraction  of wealth at date 1. That leads to  N
clean firms and (1 - ) N dirty firms. The resulting stock market equilibrium will be as in Section
3.4. Consider an investor's decision to divest from the Green Fund. Her current certainty




                                                                                                    29
                                                                                      CE
equivalent is given by (5.1). If she divests, her certainty equivalent changes by         , where
                                                                                      
   1
 =- . So, as in the case of voting, the change in CE converges to zero as r   .
   r
        The remaining effects of divesting from the Green Fund are also exactly the same as with
voting. The impact on the environment is given by (5.2) and the impact on other investors' wealth
by (5.3). Thus, a socially responsible investor will choose to divest from the Green Fund if and
only if h <  .
        Our conclusion is that all the socially responsible investors will invest in the Green Fund
if h >  and none will invest if h <  . Hence, socially responsible mutual funds can help to
achieve the social optimum.
        The presence of intermediaries greatly relaxes the informational burden that the voice
option imposes on investors. While it is hard to imagine that investors are sufficiently informed to
vote on all ballot propositions, institutional investors have a fiduciary duty to exercise their voting
rights. Thus, socially responsible investors can express their choices by picking the intermediary
with the right "ideology", in the language of Bolton et al. (2020).
        Note that a socially responsible fund can engage in ways other than just through voting.
For example, Carleton et al. (1998) describe the behind-the-scenes engagement of TIAA-CREFF
and Dimson et al. (2015) and Barko et al. (2018) show the effectiveness of behind-the-scenes
engagement by socially responsible funds. One of the strategies that intermediaries use behind the
scenes is to threaten to divest if management does not accede to their wishes. If credible, this
strategy could induce management to compromise because it reduces the cost of doing so, but it is
not useful to win more votes. The reason is that announcing that you will divest if the vote to
become clean fails only makes it more attractive for other shareholders to vote dirty, since
divestment lowers the price at which they can buy additional shares.


5.3 Nonatomistic Investors
        The engagement result derived in Section 5.1 depends heavily on investors being well
diversified, so that the impact of their decisions on the value of their own portfolio is infinitesimal.
This is not true anymore if an investor is a significant stakeholder. In that case, a socially
responsible investor will weigh the net social benefit of a vote for clean (multiplied by  ) against


                                                                                                     30
the reduced return on her portfolio due to the drop in profitability of the clean firm (multiplied by
the investor's stake in that firm). Thus, significant investors (even if socially responsible) may vote
dirty when this is socially inefficient.
        In the value maximizing approach to corporate governance, large shareholders are often
thought to be beneficial because they reduce the agency costs produced by the separation of
ownership and control (Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). In contrast, in the socially responsible
approach to corporate governance, large shareholders reduce the level of provision of public goods
by firms and to that extent are undesirable.
        Note that one downside of investors being well-diversified is that they have an incentive
to persuade firms to take advantage of their monopoly power in the product market and raise
consumer prices. This idea has received a great deal of attention recently (see Azar et al. (2018)).
In order to guard against this we would advocate that only ESG proposals should be voted on, not
those concerning prices and quantities. More important, we do not fear open votes to collude
because these will attract the attention of the antitrust authorities.


5.4 Takeovers
      A natural question to ask is whether takeovers affect engagement. As Hart and Zingales
(2017) show (see also Elhauge (2005)), takeovers can undermine social action to turn companies
clean, creating an "amoral drift." Here we briefly sketch the argument.
      Suppose that engagement leads a company to choose clean (provisionally). This means that
                         = F -  . A (purely selfish) bidder could make an unconditional tender
it market value will be Vc

offer for the company at a price p between Vc and Vd =F, at the same time announcing that, if
more than 50% of the shares are tendered, he plans to freeze-out nontendering shareholders at a
price p' between p and Vc . Even a socially responsible investor will tender. The reason is that
given that she has a very small shareholding the chance that her tender decision will be pivotal is
negligible. Furthermore, by not tendering she receives p' if the bid succeeds as opposed to p; while
if the bid fails she owns shares worth Vc rather than receiving p (she could always buy back her
shares). Thus tendering is a dominant strategy. Since everyone tenders the bid succeeds and the
bidder makes a profit of Vd -p. This is true even if a majority of the investors are socially



                                                                                                    31
responsible and would have voted against the bid if given the chance. For further details, see Hart
and Zingales (2017).
      There is an asymmetry here. It is unlikely that a socially responsible bidder will buy a dirty
company and turn it clean. The reason is that the bidder will have to pay at least Vd to persuade
shareholders to tender (at a lower price it would be profitable for someone, e.g., management to
make a counteroffer), which means he loses Vd - Vc on the transaction. There is an environmental

gain of h, but this is weighted by  . Thus only if Vd - Vc =  <  h will he proceed. In contrast,

dispersed shareholders will vote for the company to become clean if h >  .
     One important qualification to the above is that, as a result of a number of legal decisions in
recent years and the existence of poison pills, it has become hard to take over a U.S. company if
the majority is against the bid. These developments serve to mitigate the amoral drift, and make it
less likely that takeovers will interfere with socially responsible engagement.
     We can summarize our discussion of voice as follows. The conditions for voice to deliver a
desirable social outcome are less stringent than the analogous conditions for exit. Consistent with
our results, Dyck et al. (2019) find that divestment is not a driver of ESG performance change (at
least as measured by ESG ratings), while shareholder engagement is.


6. Robustness and Extensions


6.1 Visibility and Commitment
       So far we have assumed that individuals can commit to their strategy (be it divestment, or
boycotting) and that this strategy is common knowledge. In practice, it is difficult for individuals
to communicate and commit to their strategy. Here technology and institutions might make a
difference.
       In our model firms are assumed to be aware that some investors (consumers) plan to divest
(boycott). But how do they know this? One way is for investors or consumers to make
announcements. In a pre-internet world, the authors of this paper could have announced that they
would divest, but it would have been hard for anyone to know about it. In contrast, large institutions
and companies could easily publicize their divestment and boycott decisions. Today, thanks to




                                                                                                   32
social media, this difference has become smaller, facilitating the announcement of divestments and
boycotts.
           Even today it is difficult to verify whether someone has carried through their announced
strategy, given the variability of demand. 21Verification is important because there is a commitment
issue. At date 1, some investors could announce that they will divest. This announcement might,
if believed, be sufficient to push some companies to switch to clean. But, after having achieved
their goal, the divestors will be tempted to sell the clean companies and buy the more profitable
dirty ones, which trade at the same price. If this behavior is anticipated, divestment will become
ineffective.
           The same problem arises in the case of boycotts. Some consumers may announce that they
will buy only clean products, causing some companies to install a clean technology. But once this
is done what ensures that consumers do not renege on their promise and buy cheaper dirty
products?
           These commitment problems can exist even in the presence of intermediaries. Suppose that
investors invest through a mutual fund, e.g., Fidelity. Fidelity might have a fund that plans to invest
only in clean companies and another fund that plans to invest only in dirty companies. A socially
responsible investor might put all her money in the Fidelity Green Fund. Seeing how much wealth
has been invested in the Green Fund, some companies may elect to become clean. But once
companies have made this decision what is to stop investors from switching their money from the
Green Fund to the Dirty Fund? 22
           The commitment problem is stark in our setting because we study a one-shot game: firms
make their production decisions at date 1, then investors and consumers make their investment and
consumption decisions, then the world ends. Reality is more complex and commitment may be
easier to establish in a repeated setting.




21
     See Ashenfelter et al. (2007).

22 One way in which a mutual fund can help increase the level of commitment is by offering only "clean" products,
increasing the cost for investors to switch.

                                                                                                              33
        Visibility can also help with commitment. Even today, if the authors of this paper announce
that they will divest from oil companies, it would be hard for anyone to check. 23 In contrast, the
decision by the Harvard University endowment to achieve greenhouse gas neutrality by 2050 can
easily be verified. 24 In a similar fashion, on June 26, 2020 Unilever announced that it would not
advertise on Facebook or Twitter for the rest of the year, citing hate speech and divisive content
on the platforms. 25 Unilever's action can easily be verified, and so Unilever is likely to stick to
this commitment.


6.2 Integer Issues
We have assumed that firms can adjust continuously to the choices of investors and consumers, in
the sense that nc is a continuous variable. If nc has to be an integer, this can affect the incentives

                                                                                                          
to divest and boycott. Consider divestment first. Suppose we are at µ = 0 with N >                           .
                                                                                                           2
According to (4.8), if one investor divests, the number of clean firms becomes positive. But maybe
nc equals 0.1.
        In our model this counts as a positive impact, possibly enough to motivate a socially
responsible investor to divest. In reality, since a fraction of a firm is not feasible, the question is
whether the new equilibrium would involve zero or one clean firm. Incorporating integer
constraints is beyond the scope of this paper. We limit ourselves to noting that introducing these
constraints is unlikely to strengthen the individual incentive to divest.
        Next consider boycotting. The same considerations apply as with divesting: one person's
boycott might lead nc to increase by 0.1. However, in this case there is a natural interpretation. We
can imagine that a firm can choose a convex combination of clean and dirty, that is it can at a cost
 produce  units of clean product and 1-  units of dirty product, where   [0,1] . Then, if
one consumer boycotts a firm can switch to a small amount of clean production to satisfy that
consumer.


23 However, someone who makes a personal decision to divest or boycott may incur a personal cost if they deviate

from this decision, which can help to sustain commitment. See, e.g., Ederer and Stremitzer (2017). Note that
commitment is not an issue in the literature that assumes that people divest or boycott for moral reasons.
24 See https://www.thecrimson.com/article/2020/4/22/endowment-ghg-neutral-2050/
25See https://www.wsj.com/articles/unilever-to-halt-u-s-ads-on-facebook-and-twitter-for-rest-of-2020-11593187230.




                                                                                                              34
6.3 Labor Boycott
Our simple model does not have any labor costs, let alone the possibility of workers boycotting a
firm. Yet, in a competitive labor market the effect of a labor boycott is very similar to the effect of
the consumer boycott we analyzed in Section 4.2. Purely selfish workers work for any firm, while
socially responsible workers boycott dirty firms. The resulting equilibrium would be similar to that
in Section 4.2, with workers in dirty firms being paid more than workers in clean firms and the
equilibrium level of clean firms depending on the slope of the labor demand curve. Indeed, Nyborg
and Zhang (2013) provide evidence that workers in socially responsible firms are paid less.
        The situation is different if a firm has some market power. Consider, for instance, a case
where there is one monopsonist and many workers. The monopsonist has the choice to stay dirty
and be able to hire only from a smaller pool of workers or pay the cost  and be able to hire all
workers. As we discuss in the Appendix, when the market is not competitive, if the pool of
boycotters is large enough, not only will boycotters be able to turn the firm clean, but they will be
able to do so without bearing any cost.


6.4 Rational Expectation Equilibrium

We have assumed that the harm at date 1 is unanticipated at date 0. Relaxing this assumption does
not change the analysis very much. If all investors and consumers are purely selfish, it does not
change it at all since the date 1 market value of firms will be independent of h, and so the incentives
of entrepreneurs to set up firms at date 0 will be unaffected. On the other hand, if divestment or
boycotting by socially responsible investors or consumers is anticipated to occur at date 1, then
this reduces the date 1 and date 0 market value of firms, and so the equilibrium number of firms
will be lower. The same is true if it is anticipated that successful engagement will cause firms to
choose the clean technology since this reduces future profitability. 26


6.5 Social Entrepreneurs



26 Given this, founders of firms at date 0 may try to make engagement more difficult at date 1 through provisions in
the corporate charter, for example, by putting in super-majority provisions or a dual-class voting structure.



                                                                                                                 35
We have assumed that the entrepreneurs at date 0 who set up companies are interested only in
money. But suppose that some of them are socially responsible. If they anticipate the harm at date
1 might they try to influence their firms to act in a socially responsible way? In our setting this is
difficult to achieve. The reason is that we have assumed free entry, that is an infinite supply of
entrepreneurs. Even if some are socially responsible many are likely not to be. As a result, in the
free entry equilibrium the market value of a firm that does not encourage social responsibility will
be F and the market value of a firm that does encourage social responsibility will be below F.
Since we have assumed that entrepreneurs have zero wealth they will not be able to finance the
latter. In effect competition drives out good behavior.
           Note that the situation is different at date 1. At this point the entry cost F is sunk and so
firms earn rents. Therefore, firms have the ability to choose clean without being driven out of the
market.


7. Discussion


7.1 Awareness and Social Pressure Campaigns
The biggest limitation of our analysis is that we take social preferences as given. As a result, we
miss an important benefit of exit campaigns: their effect on social preferences. Black Americans'
boycott of municipal transportation in Montgomery (Alabama) in 1955 informed all Americans
about the cost of segregation, changing many people's preferences. The fur-free campaign
launched by the Humane Society is not just the announcement of a boycott, but an attempt to
shame fur users, i.e., to lead purely selfish individuals to behave as if they were socially responsible
consumers. 27
           When it comes to informing and changing people's preferences the exit strategy is superior
to the voice one. A successful information campaign can keep the relevant piece of news in the
media for an extended period of time. A corporate vote is not so newsworthy to begin with. The
media feel compelled to cover it at most twice, when the vote is announced and when the votes
are counted. By contrast, an exit campaign is newsworthy every time a famous person/institution
joins the exiters. Thus, exit is more effective at communicating the news.



27   https://www.humanesociety.org/all-our-fights/going-fur-free.

                                                                                                     36
       Exit is also more effective at pressuring people into behaving socially, even if their  is
equal to zero. It is not only peer pressure that operates, but also the pressure to join a growing and
potentially successful movement (Thaler and Sunstein (2008)). Both these forces help a highly
motivated minority to achieve some successes it would never be able to achieve through a voice
strategy. Consistent with this idea, corporate boycotts succeed mostly by affecting a target's
reputation in the media, not the demand for their product (King (2011)).
       For these reasons, a highly-motivated minority might find exit a more successful strategy
than voice. Yet, there is no guarantee that its ability to succeed is linked to the social desirability
of its goal. Thus, extending the model to incorporate information and social pressure is unlikely to
change the fundamental result that voice is more aligned to social incentives than exit.


7.2 Best Strategy Contingent on Size
       If a majority of investors is socially responsible, voice will deliver the socially desirable
outcome. Even when socially responsible investors are not a majority, as long as they can
concentrate their holdings in a subset of firms in which they represent a majority (without affecting
much the diversification of their portfolio), they can have an impact that is proportional to their
size. Thus, they can do better that an exit strategy, which will have an impact less than proportional
to the mass of socially responsible consumers/investors.
       Problems start to arise when socially responsible consumers/investors represent such a
small minority that they cannot reach a majority of the votes in any single firm without
significantly reducing the diversification of their portfolio. In such situations, the exit strategy may
more effective.


7.3 Legal Restrictions
Boycotting and divesting are hard to restrict by legal means. Not surprisingly, they have been the
strategy of choice for insurrectional movements, from the American colonies' boycott of British
tea in 1773 to the Indian boycott of British textiles in 1921. In contrast, voice can be easily
restricted so much to become ineffective.
       In the United States shareholder proposals are only precatory (i.e., not binding). In
addition, management can easily prevent a proposal from appearing on the ballot by invoking the
"ordinary business operations exception", which allows management to exclude proposals that


                                                                                                     37
relate to its ordinary business operations. For example, in its attempts to reduce sales of assault
weapons Trinity Church submitted a shareholder proposal for inclusion in Walmart's 2014 proxy
materials, asking the Walmart board to oversee the sale of "products that especially endanger
public safety and well-being, risk impairing the company's reputation, or offend the family and
community values integral to the company's brand." The SEC (and later the U.S. Court of
Appeals) upheld the Walmart management's decision to use the ordinary business exception to
exclude this proposal from the ballot. Thus, shareholder voice could not be heard on this important
issue because of legal constraints.
          In case this was not enough, the US Department of Labor has recently released a new
proposal that requires private pension fund managers to focus only on maximizing financial returns
for their beneficiaries, ignoring any ESG factor. 28 While possibly motivated by the desire to avoid
the expropriation of pension investors by asset managers, this might have the effect of preventing
pension investors from expressing their preferences through voice.
          Thus, another major limitation of the voice strategy is that it can easily be restricted.


8. Conclusions
          This paper is an attempt to analyze the welfare implications of two traditional strategies
aimed at shaping corporate outcomes: exit and voice. To make the problem tractable we have made
a number of simplifying assumptions: identical firms with zero marginal cost up to a capacity
constraint, a linear demand curve, constant absolute risk aversion, normal distribution, etc. We
have also studied the three principal socially responsible strategies, divestment, boycotting and
engagement, separately, without considering how they might interact with each other. Subject to
these limitations, we find that in a competitive world exit is less effective than voice in pushing
firms to act in a socially responsible manner. Furthermore, we find that individual incentives to
join an exit strategy are not necessarily aligned with the social incentive, while they are when
investors are allowed to express their voice.
            We have derived these results under the best possible scenario for the exit strategies:
investors and consumers who can announce their strategies to the world and commit to them. If
we relax these assumptions exit becomes even less effective.



28   https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/ebsa/ebsa20200623.

                                                                                                      38
        One question raised by our paper is why social engagement is relatively rare in spite of all
its desirable properties. In some cases, engagement is infeasible because somebody owns a
majority of the votes, such as Mark Zuckerberg with Facebook, or the company is privately held,
such as Koch Industries. We think that an important additional factor resides in the current U.S.
proxy system, which tends to limit shareholders' ability to influence corporate policy. The
restrictions reflect a fear that individual shareholders are activists in the sense that they put a lot of
weight on a single issue (e.g., their utility is ­Nh). If instead individuals are socially responsible
(in the way we define), this fear is unfounded. Individual shareholders have the incentive to vote
on issues in a socially optimal way and their engagement can lead to more efficient outcomes.




                                                                                                       39
References

Acquatella, Angie. 2020. "Optimal Reimbursement Contracts for Physician Administered Treatments."
    Harvard, mimeo.

Aghion, Philippe, Roland Bénabou, Ralf Martin and Alexandra Roulet. 2020. "Environmental Preferences
    and Technological Choices: Is Market Competition Clean or Dirty?" CEP Discussion Paper No 1684
    March 2020

Andersson, Mats, Patrick Bolton & Frédéric Samama (2016). "Hedging Climate Risk". Financial Analysts
   Journal, 72:3, 13-32,

Andreoni, James. 1989. "Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian
    Equivalence." Journal of Political Economy 97 (6): 1447­1458.

Andreoni, James, and John Miller. 2002. "Giving according to GARP: An experimental test of the
    consistency of preferences for altruism." Econometrica, 70 (2), 737­753.

Ashenfelter Orley C., Ciccarella Stephen, and Shatz Howard J. 2007. "French Wine and the U.S. Boycott
    of 2003: Does Politics Really Affect Commerce?" NBER Working Paper # 13258

Azar, José, Martin C. Schmalz, and Isabel Tecu. 2018. "Anticompetitive effects of common ownership."
    The Journal of Finance 73(4): 1513-1565.

Bagnoli, Mark, and Watts Susan G. 2003. "Selling to Socially Responsible Consumers: Competition and
    The Private Provision of Public Goods." Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 12 (3): 419­
    45. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1430-9134.2003.00419.x.

Barber, Brad, Adair Morse, and Ayako Yasuda. 2020. "Impact Investing." Journal of Financial Economics,
    forthcoming.

Barko, Tamas, Cremers, K. J. Martijn, and Renneboog, Luc. 2018. "Shareholder Engagement on
    Environmental, Social, and Governance Performance". CentER Discussion Paper Series No. 2017-
    040.

Baron, David P. 2001. "Private Politics, Corporate Social Responsibility, and Integrated Strategy." Journal
    of Economics and Management Strategy, 10(1): 7-45.

Baron, David P. 2007. "Corporate Social Responsibility and Social Entrepreneurship." Journal of
    Economics & Management Strategy 16 (3): 683­717. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-
    9134.2007.00154.x.

Barrios, John, Efraim Benmelech, Yael V. Hochberg, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2020. "Civic
     Capital and Social Distancing during the Covid-19 Pandemic." NBER WP.

Bauer, Rob, Tobias Ruof, and Paul Smeets. 2020. "Get real! individuals prefer more sustainable
    investments." Working Paper.



                                                                                                        40
Bebchuk, Lucian A. and Tallarita, Roberto. 2020. "The Illusory Promise of Stakeholder Governance."
    Cornell Law Review, December.

Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2010. "Individual and Corporate Social Responsibility." Economica 77
    (305): 1­19. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0335.2009.00843.x.

Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2007. "Retailing Public Goods: The Economics of Corporate
    Social      Responsibility."    Journal    of  Public    Economics    91    (9):   1645­63.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2007.07.006.

Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2018. "Prosocial Motivation and Incentive." Annual Review of
    Economics 10:411­38.

Bolton, Patrick, Li, Tao, Ravina, Enrichetta, and Rosenthal, Howard. 2020. "Investor Ideology." Journal
    of Financial Economics, August: 320-352.

Bonnefon, Jean-Francois, Landier, Augustin, Sastry, Parinitha and Thesmar, David. 2019. "Do Investors
    Care About Corporate Externalities? Experimental Evidence." HEC Paris Research Paper No. FIN-
    2019-1350.

Brodback, Daniel, Nadja Guenster, and David Mezger. 2019. "Altruism and Egoism in Investment
    Decisions." Review of Financial Economics 37 (1): 118­48. https://doi.org/10.1002/rfe.1053.

Brown, Ira V. 1988. "Pennsylvania's Antislavery Pioneers, 1688­1776." Pennsylvania History: A Journal
    of Mid-Atlantic Studies 55(2): 59-77.

Carleton, Willard T., Nelson, James M., & Michael S. Weisbach. 1998. "The influence of institutions on
    corporate governance through private negotiations: Evidence from TIAA-CREF." Journal of Finance,
    53: 1335-1362.

CBINSIGHTS. 2020. State of Fintech: Investment & Sector Trends to Watch,
   https://www.cbinsights.com/research/report/fintech-trends-q4-2019/

Charness, Gary, and Matthew Rabin. 2002. "Understanding Social Preferences with Simple Tests." The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (3): 817­69. https://doi.org/10.1162/003355302760193904.

Chowdhry, Bhagwan, Shaun William Davies, and Brian Waters. 2019. "Investing for Impact." The Review
   of Financial Studies 32 (3): 864­904. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy068.

Christensen, Hans B., Luzi Hail, and Christian Leuz. 2019. "Adoption of CSR and Sustainability Reporting
    Standards: Economic Analysis and Review." NBER Working Paper # 26169. URL:
    http://www.nber.org/papers/w26169

Davies, Shaun William, and Edward Dickersin Van Wesep. 2018. "The Unintended Consequences of
    Divestment."        Journal       of      Financial Economics   128      (3):    558­75.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2018.03.007.

Dimson, Elroy, Ouzhan Karaka, and Xi Li. 2015. "Active Ownership." Review of Financial Studies 28
   (12): 3225­68. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhv044.

                                                                                                     41
Dyck, Alexander, Karl V. Lins, Lukas Roth, and Hannes F. Wagner. 2019. "Do Institutional Investors Drive
    Corporate Social Responsibility? International Evidence." Journal of Financial Economics 131 (3):
    693­714. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2018.08.013.

Ederer, Florian, and Alezander Stremitzer. 2017. "Promises and Expectations." Games and Economic
    Behavior, 106(C): 161-178.


Edmans, Alex. 2020. Grow the Pie: How Great Companies Deliver Both Purpose and Profit. Cambridge
   University Press.

Elhauge, Einer. 2005. "Sacrificing Corporate Profits in the Public Interest." New York University Law
    Review. 80(3): 733­869.

Frydlinger, David, and Oliver D. Hart. 2019. "Overcoming Contractual Incompleteness: The Role of
    Guiding Principles." NBER Working Paper # 26245. https://doi.org/10.3386/w26245.

Gollier Christian, and Sébastien Pouget. 2014. "The "Washing Machine": Investment Strategies and
     Corporate Behavior with Socially Responsible Investors", TSE Working Paper, n.14-457, January
     2014.

Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Arthur Small. 2005. "A Modigliani-Miller Theory of Altruistic Corporate Social
    Responsibility." Topics in Economic Analysis & Policy 5 (1): 1-19. https://doi.org/10.2202/1538-
    0653.1369.

Hart, Oliver, and Luigi Zingales. 2017. "Companies Should Maximize Shareholder Welfare Not Market
     Value."      Journal     of    Law,    Finance,   and    Accounting     2    (2):    247­75.
     https://doi.org/10.1561/108.00000022.

Hartzmark, Samuel M., and Abigail B. Sussman. 2019. "Do Investors Value Sustainability? A Natural
    Experiment Examining Ranking and Fund Flows." The Journal of Finance 74 (6): 2789­2837.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12841.

Heinkel, Robert, Alan Kraus, and Josef Zechner. 2001. "The Effect of Green Investment on Corporate
    Behavior." The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36 (4): 431-449.
    https://doi.org/10.2307/2676219.

Hendel, Igal, Saul Lach, and Yossi Spiegel. 2017, "Consumers' Activism: The Cottage Cheese Boycott."
    RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 48, No. 4, Winter 2017 pp. 972­1003

Hirschman, Albert O. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations, and
    States. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Homanen, Mikael. 2018. "Depositors Disciplining Banks: The Impact of Scandals". Chicago Booth
   Research Paper No. 28.

Hong, Harrison, and Marcin Kacperczyk. 2009. "The Price of Sin The Effects of Social Norms on Markets."
   Journal of Financial Economics, 93: 15-36.


                                                                                                     42
King, Brayden G. 2011. The Tactical Disruptiveness of Social Movements Sources of Market and
    Mediated Disruption in Corporate Boycotts," Social Problems, Vol. 58, No. 4 (November 2011), pp.
    491-517

Kitzmueller, Markus, and Jay Shimshack. 2012. "Economic Perspectives on Corporate Social
    Responsibility." Journal of Economic Literature 50 (1): 51­84. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.50.1.51.

Laidlaw, James. 1995. Riches and Renunciation. Religion, Economy, and Society among the Jains,
    Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Magill, Michael, Martine Quinzii, and Jean-Charles. Rochet. 2015. "A Theory of the Stakeholder
   Corporation." Econometrica 83(5): 1685­1725.

Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael D. Whinston, and Jerry R. Green. 1995. Microeconomic Theory, Oxford
    University Press.

Mayer, Colin. 2018. Prosperity: Better Business Makes the Greater Good. Oxford University Press.

Morgan, John, and Justin Tumlinson. 2019. "Corporate Provision of Public Goods." Management Science
   65 (10): 4489­4504. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3137.

Nyborg, Karine, and Tao Zhang. 2013. "Is corporate social responsibility associated with lower wages?'
   Environmental and Resource Economics 55(1): 107-117

Oehmke, Martin, and Marcus M. Opp. 2019. "A Theory of Socially Responsible Investment." SSRN
   Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3467644.

O'Leary and Valdmanis. 2020. Accountable: The Rise of Citizen Capitalism, Harper Business.

Olson, M. 1965. The logic of collective action: Public goods and the theory of group, Harvard University
    Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Pastor, Lubos, Robert F Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor. 2020. "Sustainable investing in equilibrium."
     Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Pedersen, Lasse Heje, Shaun Fitzgibbons, and Lukasz Pomorski. 2019. "Responsible Investing: The ESG-
    Efficient Frontier." SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3466417.

Pruitt, Stephen W., and Monroe Friedman. 1986. "Determining the Effectiveness of Consumer Boycotts:
     A Stock Price Analysis of Their Impact on Corporate Targets." Journal of Consumer Policy 9 375-
     387.

Riedl, Arno, and Paul Smeets. 2017. "Why Do Investors Hold Socially Responsible Mutual Funds?" The
    Journal of Finance 72 (6): 2505­50. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12547.

Schoenmaker, Dirk and Willem Schramade. 2019. Principles of Sustainable Finance, Oxford University
    Press.



                                                                                                      43
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny. 1997. "A Survey of Corporate Governance." Journal of Finance
     52 (2): 737-783.

Stout, Lynn. 2012. The Shareholder Value Myth. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.

Sugden, Robert. (1982). "On the Economics of Philanthropy." The Economic Journal 92(366): 341-350.

Sugden, Robert, 1984. "Reciprocity: The Supply of Public Goods through Voluntary Contributions."
    Economic Journal, 94(376): 772-787.

Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
  Happiness, Penguin Books

Teoh, Siew Hong, Ivo Welch, and C. Paul Wazzan. 1999. "The effect of socially activist investment policies
  on the financial markets: Evidence from the South African Boycott." Journal of Business, vol. 72, no.
  1: 35-89.




                                                                                                       44
                                      Appendix

A.1 The Monopoly Case
       A natural question to ask is how much our results change if firms have some monopoly
power, either because they are large or because they supply a distinctive product. While we cannot
do justice to this topic here, we can provide some preliminary analysis. To proceed we ignore
investors and focus on consumers.
       Suppose that there is a single firm at date 1 that has zero marginal cost. (It incurred a fixed
cost F at date 0 but this is now sunk.) In order to capture the idea that this firm has monopoly
power, we drop the capacity constraint. The firm faces n consumers. The firm can become clean
at fixed cost  . If it does not become clean it creates environmental harm equal to hQ, where Q is
the firm's total output. This harm is spread equally over the consumers. Each consumer has the
utility function given in (3.3). A fraction  of these consumers are socially responsible with
parameter  ; the rest are purely selfish.
       Start with the case where there is no boycott and the firm is run by a profit-maximizing
manager. Each consumer's demand curve is given by
     (A.1)                                  =  - q ,
                                            p
                                                           Q
where q is individual consumption. In equilibrium, q =       , and so the firm's demand curve is
                                                           n
                                                     Q
     (A.2)                                  =  -
                                            p          .
                                                     n
The firm maximizes revenue given by

                                              Q2
   (A.3)                               = Q - 
                                      pQ         .
                                              n
The first order condition is
                                            n                
    (A.4)                             Q=          and p =        .
                                            2                2
The firm's profit and environmental harm are, respectively,

                                                    2n
    (A.5)                               = pQ
                                           =           ,
                                                   4

                                                                                                   45
                                                      h n
     (A.6)                                =  =
                                          H hQ            .
                                                       2
Obviously, the firm has no incentive to become clean since this reduces its profits by  .
       Consider now what happens if all socially responsible investors announce that they will
boycott the firm's product unless it is clean (we suppose that consumers can stick to this
commitment). The firm has a choice. It can remain dirty and sell only to purely selfish consumers
or it can become clean and sell to everybody. In the first case, its market is a fraction (1 -  ) of
what it was before. Its demand curve is
                                                      Q
     (A.7)                                = -
                                          p                 ,
                                                   (1 -  )n
and it maximizes its revenues given by

                                                       Q2
     (A.8)                              = Q -
                                       pQ                    .
                                                    (1 -  )n
The optimum is
                                        (1 -  )n                     
     (A.9)                        Q=                   and p =           ,
                                          2                          2
and the firm's profit and environmental harm are

                                                 2 (1 -  )n
     (A.10)                                   =             ,
                                                    4
                                                  h (1 -  )n
     (A.11)                                  H=              .
                                                     2
       The alternative is for the firm to incur the fixed cost  and sell to everybody. In this case,
(A.2)-(A.4) apply and the firm's profit is

                                                       2n
     (A.12)                                   ='          -      ,
                                                      4
which we assume to be nonnegative.
       Comparing (A.10) and (A.12), we see that the firm will choose to become clean if and only
if
                                                       4
      (A.13)                                       >       .
                                                        2n


                                                                                                 46
         Obviously, if (A.13) does not hold, there are not enough socially responsible consumers to
persuade the firm to choose clean. In contrast, if (A.13) does hold, a boycott can induce the firm
to choose clean. Moreover, it is an equilibrum for all socially responsible consumers to boycott.
The reason is that, since the firm chooses clean, it is costless to boycott: there is no cheaper dirty
product available that the consumer is forgoing.
         Although a boycott can occur if (A.13) holds, we now consider whether it can also be an
equilibrium for nobody to boycott. If one consumer boycotts when nobody else does the amount
                                                                                                                  
of pollution is reduced by hq , where q is the individual's demand, given by (A.1) with p =                           . 29
                                                                                                                  2
That is, pollution is reduced by
                                                            h
(A.14)                                                          .
                                                            2
Social welfare, excluding the consumer's own utility, increases by

                                              h     h  2
(A.15)                                         - q=  -                 ,
                                              2 2   2 4
where the second term reflects the decrease in the firm's profit from not selling to this consumer.
         By not purchasing, the consumer loses all her consumer surplus, given by

                                                    1 2      2
(A.16)                                           q -  q - pq = .
                                                    2        8
In deciding whether to boycott the consumer therefore compares (A.16) with (A.15), where the
latter is weighted by  . The conclusion is that the consumer will not boycott if

                                             2  h  2 
(A.17)                                          - ,
                                             8  2 4 
which can be simplified to
                                                                   
     (A.18)                                              4h           .
                                                                1 + 2



29 Note that this effect is not present in the competitive model of Section 3, since the number of firms N is given and,
whether a firm is clean or dirty, it produces the same quantity of product with the same amount of pollution. Whether
in practice a reduction in demand can curb a firm's externality even when it is not sufficient to induce a change in
technology depends a great deal on the nature of the externality. Reducing demand for furs reduces the number of
animals killed in a proportional way, but reducing the demand for Facebook ads does not change proportionally the
amount of hate speech on Facebook.

                                                                                                                      47
It is easy to see that this condition will hold as long as a benevolent planner who is constrained to
decide whether a dirty firm should operate at all or close down would choose to let the firm operate.
The total surplus from a dirty firm that produces Q units, divided equally among consumers, is

                                  Q 1  Q 2            1  Q2
                               n   -       - hQ = Q -       - hQ .
                                2 n 2 
   (A.19)
                                      n          2    2 n

For this to be positive we must have
   (A.20)                                       > 2h ,
which implies (A.18).
       When all socially responsible consumers boycotting and none boycotting are both
equilibria, one can ask which equilibrium is more plausible. A full analysis is beyond the scope of
this paper, but one consideration is worth noting. The consumers are better off in the boycott
equilibrium. The reason is that, given that the boycott succeeds, the firm produces the same amount
as without the boycott at the same price, but absorbs the cost  . In return, the consumers enjoy a
cleaner environment: harm falls by hQ . Thus, the boycott redistributes surplus from the
monopolist to consumers regardless of the size of h.
       Related to this observation, there is no simple relationship between the market outcome
and the social optimum. Similar to Section 3.4, consider a social planner who operates in a world
where all consumers are purely selfish and can choose the technology but cannot control the firm's
monopoly power. The equilibrium level of the firm is the same whether the firm is clean or dirty;
                     n
it is given by Q =     (see (A.4)). Thus, the only difference between the two situations is that
                     2
                                                                                h n
choosing clean induces an extra cost  , but reduces environmental harm by           . It follows that
                                                                                 2
the planner will choose clean if and only if
                                                   h n
       (A.21)                                  <       .
                                                    2
Comparing (A.13) and (A.21), we see that boycotts can occur when they are not socially optimal
and not occur when they are.
       As previously, commitment is an issue. Here, a further question arises. If consumers can
commit to a boycott, why can't they commit not to buy the product at any price above average cost



                                                                                                  48
(here, zero)? 30 One argument for why a commitment to boycott might be easier to sustain is that
reneging on a boycott may be visible whereas paying more than you said you would may not be.
Also the reputational loss from reneging on a boycott may be bigger than that from breaching a
price commitment.




30   Hendel et al. (2017) provide an example of a boycott to reduce prices in excess of marginal cost.

                                                                                                         49
