                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         OPENNESS TO TRADE AND THE SPREAD OF INDUSTRIALIZATION:
      EVIDENCE FROM CANADA DURING THE FIRST ERA OF GLOBALIZATION

                                        Taylor Jaworski
                                           Ian Keay

                                      Working Paper 27716
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27716


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




For their helpful comments and suggestions the authors thank Ann Carlos, Bill Collins, Maggie
Jones, David Rosé, Angela Redish, Carol Shiue, and seminar participants at the University of
Guelph, University of Colorado-Boulder, Wilfrid Laurier University, and the 2019 CNEH
conference. Maggie Jones and Brian Marein provided excellent research assistance. The authors
accept responsibility for all remaining errors and omissions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Taylor Jaworski and Ian Keay. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Openness to Trade and the Spread of Industrialization: Evidence from Canada during the First
Era of Globalization
Taylor Jaworski and Ian Keay
NBER Working Paper No. 27716
August 2020
JEL No. F63,N11,N71,O14

                                         ABSTRACT

We use new data on manufacturing in Canada to quantify the impact of globalization on the
growth and composition of industrialization in the second half of the nineteenth century. We find
that industries and regions more exposed to international trade experienced faster growth.
Consistent with the literature on economic development in Canada, we find that scale economies,
government policy decisions, and domestic market expansion also played an important role in
manufacturing growth. However, after controlling for these factors, we find that greater exposure
to globalization shaped the pattern of regional industrialization in a way not appreciated in
Canadian historiography.


Taylor Jaworski
Department of Economics, UCB 256
University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309
and NBER
tjaworski@gmail.com

Ian Keay
Department of Economics
Queen's University
Kingston
Canada
ikeay@econ.queensu.ca
Introduction
    Differences in the impact of globalization across countries are well documented (Wood,
1995; World Bank, 2009). Over the last half century, the welfare gains associated with falling
trade costs and specialization have also been shown to be unequally distributed across workers,
firms, and locations (Harrison and Hanson, 1999; Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2007). Theoretically,
the growth of inequality and regional divergence within countries can be linked to differences
in exposure to global markets (e.g., Rauch, 1991; Co¸
                                                    sar and Fajgelbaum, 2016). Historically,
although a great deal is known about the aggregate effects of global market integration in the
late nineteenth century (e.g., see O'Rourke and Williamson, 1999; Estevadeordal, Frantz and
Taylor, 2003), less is known about the extent of regional variation in these effects.1
    In this paper, we quantify the effect of openness to international trade on regional industri-
alization in Canada during the First Globalization. In doing so we look beyond internal factors
emphasized in the literature on Canadian economic growth (Acheson, 1972; Inwood, 1991;
Gerriets and Inwood, 1986; Chernoff, 2014), and toward the global forces and economic geog-
raphy that shaped industrial development in this period. Specifically, our approach is motivated
by recent work by Co¸
                    sar and Fajgelbaum (2016). In their model, internal trade costs within a
country combined with differential access to international markets lead to the emergence of a
dual economy structure with some regions specialized in export-oriented sectors and other re-
gions isolated from growing domestic and international markets. Greater openness to trade­as
Canada experienced during the First Globalization­exacerbates differences between regions as
mobile factors of production migrate to be closer to international transshipment points.
    Consistent with these predictions, we find exposure to global markets accelerated regional
industrialization and the reallocation toward international gates linking Canada to the rest of the
world. This growth occurred in response to the interaction between proximity to international
gates and both export and import intensity. In addition, output per establishment, the number
   1
     One exception is the work of Fajgelbaum and Redding (2018), who find that proximity to world markets
played an important role in the structural transformation of Argentina between 1869 and 1914.



                                                   1
of establishments, and the number of industry-district pairs recording positive output increased
faster where exposure to international markets was greatest.
   Notably, the location and composition of late nineteenth century industrial activity in Canada
was also affected by the adoption of capital intensive technologies with increasing returns to
scale, government policy decisions, and the growth of internal markets, but exposure to global
markets mattered too. Between 1871 and 1891, Canadian industrial activity shifted towards
large, urban producers in and around Toronto and Montreal because these locations provided
better access to foreign markets. The Canadian experience with industrialization during the
First Globalization provides a clear illustration of the extent to which heterogeneity in expo-
sure can drive regional inequality in a rapidly developing, small-open economy.
   The key challenges to identifying the effect of exposure to international markets are the
presence of selection (in terms of district-industry pairs with non-zero outcomes) and omit-
ted variables (including the level of local productivity or productivity growth, technological
change, domestic market access, and simultaneous policy changes). We are able to address
these challenges in our setting. First, including controls for internal and external scale effects,
domestic market access, and trade and migration policies, confirm the importance of these fac-
tors while maintaining a distinctive role for the interaction between internal geography and
globalization. Second, controlling for selection and addressing simultaneity using an instru-
mental variables strategy does not alter our findings. Finally, our results are unchanged after
controlling for initial productivity in 1871 and productivity growth from 1871 to 1891.
   This paper contributes to several strands of research at the intersection of economic history
and international trade. First, we contribute to the literature on the economic history of Canada
(Green, 1969; McInnis, 1968; Urquhart, 1993; Norrie, Owram and Emery, 2008) during the
First Globalization (Inwood and Keay, 2012; Harris, Keay and Lewis, 2015; Alexander and
Keay, 2018, 2019). The part of this literature that focuses on regional industrialization tends
to emphasize forces within Canada, while the literature on Canada's integration into the world



                                                2
economy emphasizes the role of trade policy on aggregate changes in manufacturing. In this
paper, we consider the extent to which Canada's position as a small open-economy contributed
to the emergence of regional inequality in the second half of the nineteenth century.
       Second, work by Hanson (1996), Fujita, Krugman and Venables (1999), Co¸
                                                                             sar and Fajgel-
baum (2016), Atkin and Donaldson (2015), Ramondo, Rodriguez-Clare and Saborio-Rodriguez
(2016), Redding (2016), Co¸
                          sar and Demir (2016), Martincus, Carballo and Cusolito (2017),
and Brooks, Gendron-Carrier and Rua (2019) emphasizes the role of internal economic geog-
raphy in shaping the effects international trade. More broadly, there is also related research
emphasizing the regional or local effects of exposure to international markets (Dix-Carneiro,
2014; Autor, Dorn and Hanson, 2016; Dix-Carneiro and Kovak, 2017, 2019; Devlin, Kovak
and Morrow, 2020). In this paper, we focus on changes in the distribution and composition of
industrial activity in response to the combined effects of internal geography and greater exter-
nal integration. For Canada, we emphasize the shift in regional industrialization towards the
south and west in the late nineteenth century, particularly concentrating in and around Toronto
and Montreal.
       Third, there is a growing literature that quantifies the effect of internal trade costs on the
spatial distribution of economic activity. For example, for the United States, this includes work
by Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), Nagy (2017), and Hornbeck and Rotemberg (2019) on
railroads and work by Chandra and Thompson (2000), Michaels (2008), and Jaworski and
Kitchens (2020) on highways.2 This work emphasizes the role of domestic trade frictions in
shaping domestic market access. In this paper we study the combined effects of domestic
trade frictions and exposure to international trade on industry-location pairs within Canada. In
particular, we are interested in the how Canada's internal economic geography mediated the
impact of the country's external orientation during the First Globalization.
   2
   See the survey by Redding and Turner (2015) for an overview of the relevant theoretical framework and the
empirical literature that extends to other developed countries, developing countries, and more recent settings.




                                                      3
Historical Background
    In 1868 John Jack and Edward Beaton opened an iron foundry in Bear River, Nova Scotia.
Bear River is a small village in the Annapolis valley, not far from the eastern shore of the Bay
of Fundy. In the 1870s, Bear River had a population of approximately 900, and in addition to
Jack, Beaton and Co. there was a tannery and a cluster of saw mills operating in and around the
village-centre. The closest port of entry for import and export goods was in the town of Digby,
about 10 miles to the west, which boasted a large resident fishing fleet and a fairly substantial
deep-water port.3 Annapolis Royal, located 16 miles north of Bear River, was the last station on
the Windsor-Annapolis Railway, which connected to eastern Canadian and US markets through
the Grand Trunk and Intercolonial lines. Halifax, the largest commercial centre in the Maritime
region, is located 130 miles north-east of Bear River. Jack, Beaton and Co.'s four employees,
which included the two proprietors, produced a few Franklin stoves and a wide range of iron
castings, but they specialized in the production of ploughs and plough-parts, generating $3,000
in gross revenue in 1871.
    Charles Thaine also operated an establishment producing castings and agricultural imple-
ments in the 1870s, but his shop was located over 900 miles west of Jack, Beaton and Co., on
the corner of Cardigan and Eramosa streets in downtown Guelph, Ontario. In 1871, Thaine's
shop had three employees, including the proprietor, and they generated $1,777 in gross rev-
enue, primarily from the production of double-mould ploughs and the eponymous `Thaine's
self-regulating turnip sower.' The biggest difference between Thaine's shop and Jack and
Beaton's foundry is that Guelph was, and continues to be, a very different place than Bear
River. Located in the heart of southwestern Ontario­just 47 miles from Toronto and 95 miles
from Buffalo, New York­Guelph's 6,500 residents had their own very active customs house
and, by 1871, the Great Western and Grand Trunk rail lines passed through the center of town.
    3
      Ports of entry in late nineteenth century Canada were defined by the presence of a customs house. Digby's
customs house was moderately busy, handling just under $134,000 in trade in 1871. Approximately $627,000
in imports and exports passed through the Guelph customs house, and the largest port of entry in Canada was in
Montreal, which processed over $52 million in imports and exports in 1871.



                                                      4
   Also located in downtown Guelph, just a few blocks from Thaine's shop, James Parker and
John Harvey ran a small tannery. They employed three men, producing $9,000 in sole leather
in 1871, most of which was probably sold to John McNeil's large shoe factory less than half a
mile away on the west side of Wyndam Street close to the customs house. Like Thaine's shop,
Parker and Harvey's tannery was favorably located with easy access to foreign and domes-
tic markets, but unlike agricultural implements, finished sole leather was not a widely traded
product in the late nineteenth century. Alexander and Keay (2018, p. 14) report that the his-
torical trade elasticity for finished leather products from Canada was -1.7, while the elasticity
of substitution between foreign and domestically produced agricultural implements was much
higher at -4.6. This difference is reflected in differences in trade openness­in 1871, imports
and exports accounted for four times more of the Canadian agricultural implement market than
the market for finished leather products (59.3 versus 14.8 percent).
   John Jack and Edward Beaton had closed their foundry in Bear River by 1891, they are not
listed in the business directories for Nova Scotia and the total value of all agricultural imple-
ment production in Bear River's Annapolis county decreased to zero. James Parker and John
Harvey's tannery was also closed by 1891, and the gross value of all finished leather products
produced in Guelph had fallen by over on half since 1871. In contrast, Charles Thaine was
still managing a thriving business in 1891, and agricultural implement production in Guelph
had risen from eight establishments to 12, total employment had grown from 36 employees to
105, and gross production expanded by a factor of five, from $34,000 in 1871 to more than
$163,000 in 1891.
   Jack and Beaton's foundry, Parker and Harvey's tannery, and Thaine's agricultural imple-
ment shop are not isolated examples of differential late nineteenth century industrial success.
Like many resource-rich, small open-economies, Canada experienced remarkably rapid eco-
nomic, industrial, and urban growth during the decades after 1870 (Urquhart, 1993). This
growth occurred in an economic environment marked by powerful and transformative internal



                                               5
and external forces, including mass migration, technological innovation, railway building, pro-
tectionist trade policies, and sharply falling trans-oceanic transport costs. Exposure to these
forces was not uniform across firms, industries, or regions in Canada, and just as we observe
in the face of globalization today, some producers flourished, while others struggled to adapt.
In particular, Figure 1 shows that between 1871 and 1891 the growth of manufacturing output
in Canada shifted south and west, favoring large, urban, capital-intensive production facilities
in southern Ontario and southwestern Quebec.
   Even before the large increases in GDP and GDP per capita that define the wheat boom
period (1896-1913), domestic urban and industrial growth was very rapid, nearly matching
the global industrial leaders, including the United States and Britain (Harris, Keay and Lewis,
2015). From 1871 to 1891 the total number of manufacturing establishments in Canada in-
creased by 72 percent, employment in these establishments rose by 86 percent, and industrial
output increased by over 102 percent. To provide context for these figures, US gross industrial
output grew by just under 60 percent and the number of manufacturing establishments by only
34 percent between 1869 and 1889. Although industrial expansion in Canada after 1870 was
impressive, it was also very unevenly distributed across regions and industries. Manufacturing
activity expanded most rapidly among the largest, urban producers around Toronto in south-
ern Ontario, and Montreal in southwestern Quebec. Smaller, more remote producers in the
northern districts in Ontario and Quebec, and in the Maritime provinces (other than those in
Halifax and St. John, New Brunswick) did not thrive during this period. For some industries,
industrial production permanently abandoned these peripheral districts (Green, 1969; McInnis,
1968; Chamard and Inwood, 1986; Norrie, Owram and Emery, 2008).
   The traditional narrative attributes uneven regional and industrial growth in the late nine-
teenth century almost entirely to factors internal to the domestic economy (Acheson, 1972;
Inwood, 1991; Gerriets and Inwood, 1986; Chernoff, 2014). The diffusion of technologies
characterized by strong internal and external scale economies and capital intensification­large



                                               6
factories, continuous production lines, increasing vertical and horizontal complexity, and even-
tually electrification­are said to have facilitated a concentration of market power and political
influence among the largest producers in the most densely populated urban areas (Bliss, 1987;
Wylie, 1989). The beneficiaries of this concentration are thought to have used their new-found
power to influence trade and migration policies, most notably the National Policy (Dorval,
2019; Inwood and Keay, 2005; Alexander and Keay, 2019).
   The National Policy sought to promote European migration to Canada, support the building
of a trans-continental rail line entirely within Canadian territory, and protect Canadian man-
ufacturers from growing import competition, specifically imported American manufactured
goods. Given the regional and industrial patterns we observe in Canadian growth, the Na-
tional Policy's narrowly targeted protectionism, maintenance of relatively unskilled migrant
labor flows, and the regional concentration of government subsidized transportation infrastruc-
ture, disproportionately favored capital-intensive producers located in and around the rapidly
growing urban markets.
   Taken together these factors are said to have undermined industrial and regional diversifi-
cation because more resource-intensive, geographically remote producers did not benefit from
new trade protection, were isolated from the new transportation corridors, and could not attract
investment to take advantage of internal scale economies or cross-industry spillovers. In this
view, the key forces affecting the location and composition of industrial production during the
late nineteenth century are said to have been entrepreneurs' technological choices, the gov-
ernment's policy decisions, and access to expanding domestic markets. Instead, in this paper,
we quantify the role of globalization in shaping Canada's regional industrialization during the
nineteenth century.




                                               7
Empirical Analysis
       Throughout the late nineteenth century, global markets were rapidly integrating due to re-
ductions in trade and trans-oceanic shipping costs (Mohammed and Williamson, 2004; Jacks
and Pendakur, 2010; Jacks, Meissner and Novy, 2010). We motivate our empirical analysis
with a simple model clarifying the impact of exposure to international trade on regional indus-
trialization (Co¸
                sar and Fajgelbaum, 2016). In the model, producers are integrated with both
domestic and foreign markets, and all trade passes through a port of entry so that distance to
ports introduces heterogeneity in international trade costs. Together, differences in proximity
to ports and differences in comparative advantage lead producers close to ports of entry to
specialize and engage in international trade, while producers far from ports of entry do not
specialize and produce for local markets. The model highlights the role of internal distance
to ports of entry and orientation to international markets as determinants of regional economic
activity. We draw on these insights to construct of our main variable of interest­exposure to
globalization­and to motivate our main estimating equation.


Constructing a Measure of Exposure to Globalization

       Late nineteenth century Canadian census districts covered large geographic regions and
economic activity within these districts was geographically concentrated in villages, towns,
and cities that comprised distinct nodes of production. In addition, although coastal ports were
important international access points, they were not the only access points­between 1870 to
1913 over 40 percent of Canadian trade moved north and south across the Canada-US land
border (Alexander and Keay, 2019).
       For our empirical analysis, we identify the largest production node for each district as the
sub-district with highest value of industrial production enumerated in the 1871 manufacturing
census (Walling, 1875).4 We identify Canadian ports of entry with the presence of a customs
   4
     On average, the largest sub-districts produced just over 43% of their district's industrial output, and in almost
all cases the most populous centre within each district was located in the most industrial sub-district.


                                                          8
house, not a deep-water port. In 1871 there were 120 ports of entry operating in Canada:
fifty-two in Ontario, nineteen in Quebec, twenty-seven in Nova Scotia, and twenty-two in
New Brunswick. Thirteen of these ports of entry, were not located on either the Canada-
US border or the Atlantic coast. However, all ports were directly connected to the border
or coast by navigable water or rail. We define dj as the economic distance from the largest
production node in each census district to the closest port of entry using the shortest path
through a transportation network that includes railroads, inland waterways, and wagon roads.5
       Canadian customs houses handled different volumes of trade during this period. For exam-
ple, the West Isles customs house on New Brunswick's Bay of Fundy coast processed roughly
$19,000 in imports and exports in 1871, over $7.5 million was recorded by the Halifax customs
house, $12.5 million passed through Toronto, and $52 million passed through Montreal. To ac-
count for differences in the volume of trade recorded by each customs house, we weight the
economic distance from each district to the closest port of entry by the total value of imports
and exports passing through that port in 1871. Proximity to the customs houses in Montreal,
Toronto, or Halifax, for example, is therefore associated with considerably more exposure to
international trade than the equivalent economic distance to the customs house in West Isles.
       We define exposure to international trade for industry i and district j as,

                                                   X i + Mi                 X j + Mj
                           Exposureij =                       ×                                                (1)
                                               Y i + Mi - X i                   dj
                                              exposure for industry i   proximity for district j


where Xi is total exports, Mi is total imports, and Yi is total output in industry i in 1871, and
   5
      Specifically, economic distance is measured as the total cost to move one ton of freight by wagon, water, and
rail, from each production node to each port of entry. For all three transport modes the cost per ton-mile (and
transshipment costs) are taken from Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016, pp. 811-812). Donaldson and Hornbeck
(2016) report the average cost to move a ton of freight one mile by wagon (20.7¢), water (0.44¢) and rail (0.57¢),
and use transshipment costs between modes of of 44.8¢per ton. We convert their USD nominal transport costs to
CAD at the 1871 average annual official exchange rate (1.115 USD = 1 CAD). Wagon distances are assumed to
be straight line connections from each production node to the closest navigable water or rail line. Ports of entry
are located in 68 of the 135 production nodes. We include at least one mile of wagon transport for all production
node-port of entry pairs, so the minimum economic distance is 20.7¢CAD. Navigable water and rail routes are
based on the networks included in the CANIND71 database's GIS shapefiles.


                                                          9
Xj and Mj are total exports and imports through the closet customs house to district j in 1871.
Note that equation (1) takes a broad approach to defining openness to international trade by
including both imports and exports. During the late nineteenth century, Canada was mainly a
raw material exporter. Until the 1890s and early 1900s, few Canadian manufacturing industries
exported more than a token amount of their gross output (Alexander and Keay 2019). As a re-
sult, many industries had limited exports between 1871 and 1891. This suggests that exposure
to international trade for many Canadian industries is partially captured through competition
from imports in the domestic market. We also consider narrower measures that captures an
industry's exposure to exports or imports individually.


Main Estimating Equation

   To quantify the effect of exposure to international trade on Canadian regional industrializa-
tion, we estimate regressions of the form:


                        ln Yij = i + j + Exposureij + Xij  + ij                                (2)


The dependent variable is the log-difference of a manufacturing outcome, e.g., the value of
output, the number of establishments, etc., between 1871 and 1891. The fixed effects, i
and j , respectively, control for differences in technology, input use, and export (or import)
orientation at the industry level and differences in agglomeration, natural and transportation
advantages, and industrial diversity across districts. The coefficient of interest,  , measures the
effect of exposure to globalization on the growth of manufacturing. The identifying assumption
is that in the absence of differences in Exposureij , the relative growth of manufacturing would
have been the saame across district-industry pairs.
   In this setting, we are particularly concerned with the role of other factors driving indus-
trialization emphasized in the literature on Canadian economic development in the second half



                                                10
of the nineteenth century (e.g., trade and immigration policy, internal and external economies
of scale, and density and internal integration within Canada). Our first approach to addressing
these concerns is to include variables, Xij , that proxy for these factors. Our second second
approach is to use instrumental variables to isolate exogenous variation in exposure to interna-
tional trade. Finally, our main empirical analysis focuses on district-industry observations with
strictly positive manufacturing outcomes. We address concerns about selection by present-
ing results using an indicator for the presence of any manufacturing as a dependent variable.
We also present results that formally correct for selection following the approach of Heckman
(1979).


Manufacturing Data by Industry and Census Distict

   The data for the empirical analysis is drawn from the 1871 and 1891 Canadian censuses of
industrial establishments (Canada 1875 and 1894). We harmonize census districts to maintain
constant geographic boundaries; we also harmonize industries using the four-digit Standard
Industrial Classification. This results in 135 harmonized industries located in 200 harmonized
census districts, providing us with 27,000 (= 135 × 200) potential industry-district combina-
tions. Table 1 reports the number of observations, and the mean, standard deviation, maximum,
and minimum, for the variables used in our empirical analysis. The variable P Qij > 0 is an
indicator equal to one for all district-industry observations with strictly positive production in
both 1871 and 1891. The first row of Table 1 shows that production occurred in 6,206 industry-
district pairs. These observations are the focus of our main analysis.
   The region variables reported in Table 1 reveal that industry-district production was not
uniformly distributed across Canada during our period of study. Ontario, Quebec, and Mar-
itimes are categorical variables equal to one for all industry-districts in each province or region.
TorMonHal is a categorical variable equal to one for all industries located in Toronto, Mon-
treal or Halifax. Urban is a categorical variable that takes the value of one for all industries


                                                11
located in the 10 largest urban centres in 1871.6 Remote is a categorical variable that takes the
value 1 for all industries located in the three least densely populated districts.7 Nearly half of
the industry-district cells with positive production are located in Ontario, over 15 percent are
located in the 10 largest urban centres, and nearly 7 percent are located in just the three largest
cities. At the other end of the population density distribution, we see that fewer than 1 percent
of the industry-district observations are located in the most remote districts.8
       We measure the change in regional industrial activity in three ways. The variables P Qij ,
Estij and P Q/Estij , measure the log-differences in industry-district gross output, number
of establishments, and gross output per establishment between 1871 and 1891. Gross output
grew at an average rate of 82 percent from 1871 to 1891, or just over 4 percent per year,
while the number of establishments in a census district increased by 47 percent, on average,
and output per establishment grew by just under 50 percent. Across all industry-districts with
positive production, labour productivity, (P Q/Lij ), grew at an average annual rate of just over
1 percent per year, or 22.7 percent over the sample period.
       The average economic distance from the largest production node to the closest port of entry
in 1871 was 50.73¢(1871 CAD), which is roughly equivalent to two ton-miles by wagon, 102
ton-miles by water, or 79 ton-miles by rail. In Table 1 we also report the average physical
distance from each district centroid to the closest port of entry (25 miles), urban centre (55.5
miles), and Toronto, Montreal or Halifax (97.4 miles). The average volume of trade passing
through Canadian ports of entry in 1871 was $69,120, but what is even more noteworthy is the
large standard deviation in the ports of entry trade volumes (142.4), which implies a coefficient
of variation for this variable that is well over two.
   6
     Urban includes: Montreal/Hochelaga; Toronto; Quebec City; Hamilton; Ottawa; Kingston; London; Halifax;
and St. John.
   7
     Remote includes: Algoma; Nipissing; and Labrador.
   8
     We do not report summary statistics for industry group categorical variables that take the value 1 for all
industry-districts in each two-digit industry. The largest industry groups are Food and Beverages, Wood Products,
and Iron and Steel Products, which account for more than 40 percent of the total industry-districts with positive
production. The smallest industry groups, with fewer than 1 percent of the industry-district observations, are
Electrical Apparatus, and Petroleum and Coal Products.



                                                      12
       Industry openness is measured as the total value of imports and exports for industry i in
1871, as a share of the size of the domestic market for that industry, where domestic market
size is the sum of gross domestic production and imports, less exports. Canada was remark-
ably open to industrial trade flows during the post-confederation, pre-wheat boom period, with
imports and exports accounting for over 25 percent of the Canadian market for the average
industry in 1871. Export intensity, which is measured as exports as a share of gross domestic
production, averaged over 7 percent in 1871, and the import share of the domestic market av-
eraged almost 20 percent in that year. By 1891, 12 years after the imposition of the National
Policy tariffs, average trade openness among Canadian industries had risen to just over 85 per-
cent, as a share of domestic market size. We also use a categorical variable, Tradeable, which
takes the value of one for industries with more than $1,000 in imports and exports in 1891.
From Table 1 we can see that 74.5 percent of our industry-districts were producing Trade-
able goods, which suggests that they were exposed to significant foreign competition, either in
domestic or foreign markets.
       The presence of scale effects is reflected in average firm size and district population den-
sity in 1871, where firm size is represented by the number of workers per establishment, and
population density is simply the total population of each district divided by district acreage.
From Table 1 we can see that across all industries the average establishment employed slightly
over 8 workers in 1871, including proprietors, and the average district housed just under 6
people per acre.9 To capture the effect of policy changes, we use the increase in trade protec-
tion under the 1879 National Policy and each district's foreign born population share in 1871.
The increase in protection is calculated as the change in total duties collected for all products
produced (or potentially produced) by each industry, divided by the total value of imports for
home consumption, between 1877­the last full fiscal year prior to the introduction of the Na-
   9
    We note that the distribution of average firm size in 1871 is slightly skewed towards smaller firms­the bottom
quartile have fewer than 2.6 employees, the median firm has only 4.4 employees, and firms in the top decile have
more than 17 employees. District population densities are even more strongly skewed towards the lower tail­the
median district's population density in 1871 is only 0.08 people per acre.



                                                       13
tional Policy­and 1880­the first full fiscal year after the policy was put in place (Alexander
and Keay, 2019).10 Because the impact of migration policy falls differentially across districts
in part due to the persistence in migration patterns over time, districts with initially high foreign
born population shares are more likely to be affected by late nineteenth century policy-induced
changes in immigration. From the last rows in Table 1, we can see that the average manu-
facturing industry in Canada enjoyed a tariff increase of just less than 10 percent under the
National Policy, and more than 17 percent of the average district's population was born outside
of Canada in 1871.



Results
Exposure to Globalization

       Our main objective is to identify a connection between exposure to foreign competition and
industrial output growth from 1871 to 1891 across Canadian industries and census districts.
We measure all continuous variables as natural logarithms, with nominal values denominated
in 1871 Canadian dollars and scaled by $1, such that minimum log-values are 0.11 Standard
errors are clustered by industry and district.12
       For comparison, the first column in Table 2 reports the estimated coefficient on the inter-
action between distance to a coastal port­measured as the physical distance from each district
centroid to Halifax­with industry export intensity­measured as total exports divided by gross
domestic output for each industry i in 1871. This variable, denoted Exportij , reflects the stan-
dard approach in the literature on the regional effects of export orientation during the more
recent period of globalization. The estimated coefficient is negative and statistically signifi-
  10
      All trade and tariff data are drawn from the Canadian trade and navigation tables, published annually in the
federal government's parliamentary sessional papers (Canada 1872 and 1892).
   11
      Scaling nominal values by 1¢or $2 has no effect on our qualitative conclusions. We add one mile of wagon
transport to all economic distance measures, so no additional scaling is necessary for that variable.
   12
      Using Conley (1999) standard errors with bandwidths between 100 and 300 kilometers to account for spatial
dependence has no impact on our qualitative results.



                                                       14
cant, which indicates that producers located closer to Canada's largest coastal port (Halifax),
with greater export orientation in their production, employed an increasing number of workers
between 1871 and 1891 relative to more remote, less specialized establishments.
       Moving to our main analysis, Column 2a of Table 2 reports the results from estimating
equation (2) using all industry-district pairs with strictly positive production. The dependent
variable is the growth in industry-district gross output between 1871 and 1891. In line with our
preferred measure of exposure to international trade in equation 1, distance in the globalization
interaction term is now measured as the inverse of the cost to move one ton of freight from
each district's primary production node to the closest port of entry, scaled by the volume of
trade passing through that port in 1871. Openness to international trade is the sum of industry
imports and exports in 1871, divided by each industry's domestic market size. Our measures of
both economic distance and openness rise sharply as production shifts from northern to south-
ern districts, from east to west, and from low to high population densities.13 Because distance
is included in the denominator of the interaction term, the positive and statistically significant
effect of exposure reported in Column 2a ( = 1.093) is consistent with the predictions of
Co¸
  sar and Fajgelbaum (2016). During the late nineteenth century, Canadian producers who
were more open to international trade, either because they were exporting into foreign mar-
kets or because they faced import competition on domestic markets, and producers who were
located closer to the most active ports of entry, grew faster than more remote producers.
       To get a better sense of the economic relevance of our baseline results, we can revisit John
Jack and Edward Beaton's iron foundry in Bear River, and Charles Thaine's and James Parker
and John Harvey's establishments in Guelph. To access foreign markets, Jack and Beaton had
to ship their ploughs through the customs house in Digby, just over 10 miles east of Bear River.
By horse and wagon, this trip would have taken a little over four hours­approximately the travel
  13
    The unconditional correlation between (inverse) economic distance and latitude, longitude, and population
density, for districts with strictly positive production, is -0.018, 0.121, and 0.483. The unconditional correlation
between openness and latitude, longitude, and population density is -0.078, 0.071, and 0.100.




                                                        15
time for a transport truck driving from New York City to Boston today. Charles Thaine, on the
other hand, only had to get his ploughs to the Guelph customs house in Market Square, less than
four blocks from his shop. The difference in the economic distance to the closest port of entry
for Jack, Beaton and Co., relative to Thaine's agricultural implement shop, was almost exactly
equal to one standard deviation in the distance measured used to construct our Exposureij
variable. At the mean of the data, using the estimate reported in Column 2a of Table 2, a one
standard deviation reduction in our distance measure would have led to an increase in gross
industrial output growth of 5.7 percentage points.
   For Parker and Harvey's tannery, it was not the distance to the closest port of entry that
mattered, it was the industry's openness to trade. Sole leather was not a widely traded product
in 1871­the value of all imports and exports of finished leather products accounted for only
15 percent of the Canadian market. In contrast, nearly 60 percent of the domestic agricultural
implement market was comprised of traded goods in 1871. The difference in the industry open-
ness term included in Exposureij for tanneries relative to agricultural implement producers is
1.38, or approximately one half of a standard deviation in openness measured across all 200
industries. At the mean of the data, an increase in openness by 1.38 log-points would have
been associated with a 10 percentage point increase in gross industrial output growth between
1871 and 1891. This increase in output growth would have accounted for a substantial share
of the 54 percent reduction in gross output experienced by the tanneries in Guelph's Welling-
ton county between 1871 and 1891. Together, these calculations suggest that the economic
consequences implied by the baseline estimate were considerable in this period.
   For the results presented in Column 2a, industry openness is measured as the sum of im-
ports and exports scaled by domestic market size. It is possible that the mechanisms underlying
the connection between exposure and industrial output growth could differ depending on the
source of the competitive pressure. In other words, foreign competition faced by Canadian
exporters in external markets could affect the regional and industrial composition of Cana-



                                              16
dian growth differently than foreign import competition faced by domestic producers in home
markets. We allow for this possibility by including export intensity and import intensity, both
interacted with trade weighted economic distance to the closest port of entry, as separate ex-
planatory variables in equation (2). In Column 2b of Table 2, we can see that both the export
and import intensity interaction terms are positive and the size of these effects are similar. In
fact, we cannot statistically distinguish between the strength of the import and export intensity
connections to output growth. This suggests that conditional on the distance to the closest port
of entry, Canadian industry-districts that faced foreign competition in the form of either im-
ports on domestic markets or exports into external markets, experienced faster output growth
from 1871 to 1891. The source of exposure to international trade does not seem to have been
important.
       Foreign competition could have promoted increased Canadian industrial output along at
least three margins: establishments may have entered `empty' districts that had no local industry-
specific competition in 1871 (the geographic margin), more establishments may have opened
in districts with existing local competition (the extensive margin), and establishments that were
already in operation in 1871 may have increased their output levels (the intensive margin). In
Column 3a of Table 2 we report results from a probit model in which the dependent variable
takes the value of one for industry-districts with strictly positive production during the late
nineteenth century.14 As we can see from Column 3a, the probability of observing production
in an industry-district cell is positively related to exposure to globalization. Industrial output
in Canada expanded between 1871 anad 1891 in part because production spread into previ-
ously empty industry-districts that were more exposed to foreign competition. The results in
columns 3b and 3c reveal that there was also an increase in the number of establishments in
the most exposed industry-districts and an increase in production per establishment in those
  14
    To account for any incidental parameter bias associated with the inclusion of industry and district fixed effects,
we make bias corrections as described by Cruz-Fernandez, Fernandez-Val and Weidner (2017). In addition,
conditional logit and linear probability models generate qualitatively similar, although less precise, estimates.




                                                         17
regions. In other words, along all three margins, late nineteenth century industrial growth
in Canada expanded fastest where exposure to foreign competition was greatest: production
moved into new, relatively exposed districts; more establishments entered where there was al-
ready local, relatively exposed, competition; and existing establishments in the most exposed
industry-districts got bigger.
    Up to this point we have shown that foreign exposure was associated with changes in the
location and composition of Canadian industrial production during the late nineteenth century.
However, this does not necessarily mean that the internal factors emphasized in much of the
Canadian historiography were unimportant. In the last column in Table 2 we report the results
from including of three additional variables in equation (2). The variable P olicyij interacts
the change in each industry's average weighted tariff following in introduction of the National
Policy, with each district's foreign born population share in 1871.15 The variable Scaleij in-
teracts employment per establishment for each industry, with district population density.16 The
variable Internalij captures exposure to internal market expansion by interacting a categorical
variable (T radeablei ) that takes the value 1 for all industries with more than $1,000 in total im-
ports and exports in 1891, with the inverse of the physical distance from each district centroid
to the closest major urban centre.17
    From Column 4 fo Table 2 we can see that the traditional narratives about differential late
nineteenth century industrial development in Canada were not wrong. Industry-districts with
larger tariff increases under the National Policy and larger foreign-born population shares en-
joyed significantly more rapid industrial output growth between 1871 and 1891, as did more
   15
      Because the non-manufacturing industries in the All Other industry group were not the target of the National
Policy tariffs, they received very small, or in some cases negative tariff changes in 1879. For these six industries
we drop AW T from the P olicyij interaction.
   16
      For a small number of industries, employment per establishment in 1871 already far exceeded estimates
of `minimum efficient scale' for late nineteenth century North American industrial technology (Sokoloff, 1984;
Inwood and Keay, 2012). For industries with L/Est > 15, we drop firm size from the Scaleij interaction.
   17
      Using alternate indicators to identify industries producing tradeable products, including modern trade elas-
ticity estimates and other trade volume thresholds, does not affect our qualitative conclusions. Halifax and St.
John are included as urban centres even though large surrounding rural areas in their census districts reduce their
population densities well below those of other eight cities.



                                                        18
densely populated districts with larger establishments, and industries producing tradeable prod-
ucts in close proximity to the largest domestic urban markets. However, the effects of these
internal factors do not alter the the importance of foreign exposure. Even with these controls
for policy, scale, and internal market exposure, the interaction between industry openness and
district proximity to a port of entry remains strongly and significantly related to more rapid
industrial output growth.
       Taken together the results from Table 2 provide evidence consistent with the importance
of exposure to international trade as an explanation for the regional variation in the growth
of manufacturing in Canada. Importantly, our results add this new explanation for regional
industrialization to the traditional narrative around Canadian economic development while at
the same time confirming the earlier view emphasizing the importance of economies of scale,
policy decisions, and the expansion of domestic markets.


Heterogeneity, Mechanisms and Identification

       Because industry-districts in late nineteenth century Canada varied widely in terms of their
geographic, market, and technological environments, it is reasonable to expect differences in
their reactions to exposure to international trade. We explore heterogeneity in the results re-
ported Column 2a of Table 2 by interacting Exposureij with categorical variables that are
equal to one for all industry-districts in the bottom quartile with respect to, exposure, output
growth, and labour productivity in 1871.18
       Columns 1a through 1c Table 3 show that industry-districts in the bottom quartile of expo-
sure, output growth, and productivity were significantly less sensitive to foreign competition,
relative to the average industry-district. In fact, for producers in the least exposed and lowest
productivity industry-districts, exposure to international markets was actually associated with
  18
     Other potential sources of heterogeneity do not appear to have been associated with differences in industry-
districts' exposure to foreign markets, including: provinces; industry groups; border, coastal, or interior ports of
entry; or trade elasticities.



                                                        19
significant contractions in gross output between 1871 and 1891. Among the slowest grow-
ing industry-districts, the relationship between exposure and the growth of industrial activity
is reduced by just over one-quarter.19 These results suggest that there may be an asymme-
try underlying our baseline estimates: greater exposure to foreign markets among Canadian
establishments was related to faster rates of expansion for most industry-districts, but for the
least exposed, slowest growing, and least productive producers, increasing foreign competition
after 1871 was not associated with performance improvement, but rather decline and output
contraction.
       Theoretically, comparative advantage is the mechanism driving differential industrial de-
velopment across regions and industries. This suggests a productivity channel through which
exposure to foreign markets can affect domestic output growth. Import competition in do-
mestic markets can have a similar productivity effect, triggering intra- and inter-industry ra-
tionalization, innovative effort, investment and human capital accumulation (Pavcnik, 2002;
Melitz, 2003). The weaker connection linking growth to exposure among the least productive
industry-districts, as revealed in Column 1c of Table 3, is consistent with the presence of this
mechanism.
       Another potential mechanism that plays an important role in modern discussions about
globalization's impact on the regional and industrial composition of growth, is intra-firm and
intra-industry specialization (Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott, 2007). This channel is
unlikely to have been particularly active in Canada during the late nineteenth century be-
cause there are virtually no examples of multinational firms in operation in Canada at this
time, and industry-level trade specialization throughout the supply chain appears to have been
uncommon­trade in industrial products was dominated by goods destined for final consump-
tion (Inwood, 1995; Alexander and Keay, 2019).20 In columns 2a to 2c in Table 3, we directly
  19
      Quantile regressions confirm that the strength of the relationship between output growth and Exposureij is
significantly reduced for the industry-districts in the bottom three growth deciles.
   20
      At the four-digit SIC level of industry aggregation, we cannot confidently categorize traded industrial prod-
ucts as either intermediate inputs or final consumption goods. As a result, with the data available to us we cannot



                                                       20
assess the role of productivity improvement in our estimates of the link connecting exposure
to foreign markets with manufacturing growth. In Column 2a we replace the dependent vari-
able in equation (2) with the change in industry-district labour productivity (i.e., gross output
per worker) from 1871 to 1891. We see that Exposureij is positively related to productivity
growth among Canadian industry-districts after 1871. This is consistent with the large body
of trade literature that documents the productivity enhancing effects of foreign competition for
both exporters and import competing producers. In columns 2b and 2c we use output growth
as the dependent variable, but we now include industry-district productivity growth as an addi-
tional explanatory variable in equation (2). Productivity growth and output growth are clearly
positively related to each other among the Canadian industry-districts (Column 2b), but we
can also see that even after controlling for effect of productivity improvement, greater levels of
exposure to foreign competition are still significantly related to more rapid output growth (Col-
umn 2c). This suggests that although productivity improvement matters, it does not appear to
have been the only channel through which exposure to foreign competition affected Canadian
industrial development.
    In the remaining columns of Table 3 we address two threats to identification in our baseline
results. Our results for the geographic margin of growth, and the connections linking produc-
tivity to trade openness and output growth, suggest that there are good reasons to interpret the
results reported so far with caution. Specifically, as the results from the probit model reported
in Column 3a of Table 2 imply, late nineteenth century industrial production was not randomly
distributed across Canadian industries or districts. Producers carefully selected the most desir-
able locations and industries, and this selection means that the industry-districts where we do
not observe production may not have been otherwise comparable to those districts with strictly
positive production.
    We address this selection issue using the approach of Heckman (1979). In the first stage we
quantify intra-industry supply chain specialization in the estimates of the connection between trade openness and
output growth.



                                                      21
estimate a probit to predict the likelihood of industry-district production as a function of our
Exposureij variable, and exposure to scale effects captured by the industry average employ-
ment per establishment interacted with the physical distance from each district centroid to the
closest urban location.21 The intuition here is to a proxy variable­scaleij ­for fixed costs as the
excluded variable to predict whether a location is selected by producers in a particular industry
in the first stage. We then calculate the non-selection hazard from the first stage (the inverse
Mills ratio), and include it as a control for selection in the second stage. Column 3a in Table
3 shows that the inverse Mills ratio is significant, which suggests that selection effects may be
important, but the connection linking exposure to industrial growth is statistically significant
and larger in magnitude relative to our baseline estimate in Column 2a of Table 2. This im-
plies that exposure to foreign markets may have been more important for the industry-districts
that were not selected for production so that controlling for this negative selection along the
geographic margin reinforces the relationship between manufacturing growth and exposure to
globalization.
       In Column 3b in Table 3, we address endogeneity associated with our Exposueij variable.
In particular, although openness to international trade competition can affect industrial activ-
ity through the specialization and trade cost mechanisms, the growth of manufacturing and
exposure can both be affected by underlying productivity growth. To address this potential
simultaneity, we use 1870 US industry-specific factor shares as instruments for industry open-
ness in the first stage.22 The intuition for this approach is that using industry-specific factor
shares from the United States focuses on exogenous variation in export orientation due to in-
dustry technology rather than variation in unobserved local productivity or specific correlated
features of Canadian factor markets. In Column 3b we report the second stage estimates for
the effect of Exposureij . As expected, after addressing endogeneity, the estimated coefficient
  21
    The first stage results are reported in Column 1 of Appendix Table A1.
  22
    The first stage results are reported in Column 2 of Appendix Table A1. Although we do not anticipate strong
simultaneity linking individual industry-districts to trade-weighted economic distances to the ports of entry, the
US factor shares are interacted with the physical distance from each district centroid to the closest urban location.


                                                        22
is larger than the estimate obtained using ordinary least squares.
       Finally, in Column 3c, we control for selection bias and endogeneity by including the in-
verse Mill's ratio from our Heckman selection model in our 2SLS-IV estimation (Inwood and
Keay, 2013). Even with both sets of controls, we still find evidence that industry-districts with
more exposure to globalization grew faster than their more distant and less open counterparts.23


Robustness and Sensitivity

       In addition to controlling for potential selection and endogeneity and the inclusion of other
factors affecting Canadian industrial development, in Table 4 we report additional results to as-
sess the sensitivity and robustness of our main finding. These results focus on the measurement
of exposure to globalization and identification in our preferred specification.
       Examining the residuals from the estimates reported in Column 2a of Table 2 reveals un-
usual patterns. For example, Algoma and Nipissing in northern Ontario and Labrador in north-
ern Quebec were exceptionally remote, and yet industrial output growth, despite starting from
very low initial levels, was substantial.24 In contrast, Toronto, Montreal and Halifax were
large, densely populated urban districts with the most active customs houses. These cities also
had rapid output growth but they started from highest levels of production in 1871. Among
industries, the residuals from equation (2) for the six industries that comprise the All Other
group also stand out. This group is comprised of agricultural services, business and personal
services, construction, forestry, mining, and utilities, all produce `industrial' products, none of
which are traditional manufacturing industries since their output is a combination of intensively
traded unprocessed raw materials and non-tradeable services. In the first first set of sensitivity
  23
      At the bottom of columns 3b and 3c we also report the results from diagnostic tests. From the Hausman
exogeneity test, we can reject the null that openness is exogenous in equation (2). The Hansen valid-instrument
test indicates that US factor shares are exogenous in the second stage in our instrumental variables approach. The
Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument test confirms that our excluded instruments significantly predict openness in
the first stage regressions.
   24
      Algoma was 223 miles from Sault Ste. Marie, Nipissing was 170 miles from Penetanguishene, and Labrador
was 342 miles from Trois Rivieres. Gross output growth in these three districts averaged 41.3 percent between
1871 and 1891.


                                                       23
tests we re-estimate equation (2), dropping the three most remote districts, the three largest
cities, and then the non-manufacturing All Other industry group. From the results reported in
Columns 1a and 1b of Table 4, we can see that our qualitative conclusions are not dependent
on the inclusion of the most and least remote districts, or non-manufacturing industries. Even
without these observations, the relationship between industrial output growth and exposure to
international trade remains strong.
    In the second set of tests we explore sensitivity to our measure of industry openness and
district distance. The openness variable we use to construct Exposureij is a continuous mea-
sure of total trade for each industry relative to domestic market size. The inclusion of export
and import values in this variable means that we may be capturing some features of industry
openness that are unique to foreign exporters, rather than domestic producers. As an alternate
measure of openness, we define T radeablei as a categorical variable that is equal to one for
industries with trade volumes over $1,000 in 1891.25 The other part of the Exposureij variable
measures economic distance from each district's largest production node to the closest port of
entry, scaled by the volume of trade passing through that port in 1871. Here, we consider two
alternate measures of proximity to foreign competition. First, we replace economic distance
with the physical distance from each district centroid to the closest port of entry. Second, we
identify all ports of entry within 30 miles of each district centroid, then sum all trade pass-
ing through these ports in 1871.26 From columns 2a through 2c of Table 4, the results show
that greater exposure to globalization is again positive and significantly related to industrial
output growth. This suggests that our conclusion that globalization affected the location and
composition of industrial activity is not sensitive to the particular way we identify exposed
producers.
   25
      The use of other thresholds, scaling by modern trade elasticity estimates, or using US trade volumes, generates
closely collinear categorical variables.
   26
      This approach does not actually include any measure of physical or economic distance, because it only
includes total import and export volumes recorded by all ports of entry within two days wagon-travel of each
district centroid.




                                                        24
    Aside from measurement issues, another concern with our Exposureij variable is that
it captures `initial conditions' for Canadian producers during the late nineteenth century. In
1879, John A. Macdonald's National Policy narrowly targeted specific products and industries
for trade protection. These tariffs may have been, at least in part, differentially applied in
response to initial levels of import penetration, and they were explicitly intended to promote
output expansion among Canada's infant industries (Harris, Keay and Lewis, 2015; Alexander
and Keay, 2019). As a result, our measure of exposure to foreign competition from 1871 could
be correlated with industrial development only because it is proxy for subsequent reductions
in openness due to differential protection under the National Policy. In Column 2d of Table
4, we use openness to trade in 1891 as our measure of exposure to globalization. When in-
teracted with trade weighted economic distance to the closest port of entry, this end-of-period
measure of openness is again significantly and positively correlated with late nineteenth cen-
tury industry-district output growth. In other words, even after allowing for changes in import
penetration due to the National Policy tariffs that may have altered industry openness, exposure
is still significantly related to growth.
    Our final test addresses another issue common in paneel regressions: the choice of appro-
priate controls for industry and district-invariant effects (Co¸
                                                               sar and Fajgelbaum, 2016; Fajgel-
baum and Redding, 2018; Wolf, 2007). Rather than including a full set of industry and district
fixed effects, we simply include a constant and the industry-specific openness and district-
specific distance terms from our exposure interaction. From Column 3 in Table 4, we obtain
similar results with this approach: economic distance to the closest port of entry is negatively
related to industry-district industrial output growth in Canada between 1871 and 1891, industry
openness is positively related, and the interaction is significant and positively related to growth.
These results provide confidence that the combination of an industry's openness and districts
proximity to foreign markets played an important role in the distribution of industrial activity
across Canadian regions and industries in the second half of the nineteenth century.



                                                25
Conclusion

   Jack, Beaton and Co. shut down and agricultural implement production disappeared from
Annapolis county in Nova Scotia sometime during the 1870s. James Parker and John Harvey's
tannery in Guelph went out of business in the first few years of the 1880s. Meanwhile, Charles
Thaine continued to sell ploughs and turnip sowers into the early twentieth century in Guelph.
The contraction of finished leather products in Wellington county and movement of agricul-
tural implement production out of rural Nova Scotia was coincident with rapid increases in
industrial production in and around Toronto and Montreal. This shift of the industrial and ge-
ographic composition of Canadian production during the post-Confederation, pre-wheat boom
period does appear to have been in part due to differences in scale economies, the policy en-
vironment, the abundance of urban-industrial migrants, access to railways, and proximity to
rapidly expanding urban markets in southern Ontario and south-western Quebec. In this paper,
we offer support for the traditional narrative that emphasizes the role played by these internal
factors in the variation in late nineteenth century Canadian industrial growth. However, we also
find support for an under-appreciated explanation for the pattern of regional industrialization
in Canada.
   After 1870, regional and industrial differences in the growth of agricultural implement pro-
duction and finished leather goods were not isolated examples of uneven development. Even
before the unprecedented growth associated with the wheat boom, expanding industrial activity
in Canada was moving south and west, towards large, urban producers in and around Toronto
and Montreal. A significant and economically important reason for this movement was expo-
sure to international trade. Reductions in trade costs triggered globalization and global market
integration. In Canada, we find that greater exposure to these forces was associated with greater
output growth across locations and industries: new establishments entered previously empty
industry-districts, new establishments opened in districts with domestic incumbents, and ex-
isting establishments increased their output levels. In other words, exposure to globalization


                                               26
contributed to the shift in Canadian manufacturing toward producers in and around Toronto and
Montreal, and this shift occurred along geographic, extensive and intensive margins of produc-
tion. Our measurement of this effect is weakest at the bottom of the growth, exposure, and
productivity distributions; it cannot be exclusively attributed to productivity improvement and
it is not extinguished after addressing selection and endogeneity, industry and district-specific
policy, or scale and internal market access.
   Late nineteenth century globalization marked a sharp break in international market integration­
the volume and extent of global trade expanded at historically unprecedented rates for nearly
45 years. Canada was a small, open economy that was actively engaged in this globalization
process, and domestic industrial development at this time was rapid, but quite dramatically
uneven across locations and industries. In this setting, we provide novel evidence for the role
of exposure to globalization. Our results not only help understand why the specific experi-
ences of Jack, Beaton and Co., and Parker and Harvey were so different from the experience
of Charles Thaine, but also shed new light on the processes underlying industrial development
in Canada during this period and, more generally, suggest new avenues for research into the
regional effects of the First Globalization.




                                               27
References
Acheson, Thomas W., "The National Policy and Industrialization of the Maritimes,
  1880-1910," Acadiensis, Spring 1972, 1 (2), 3­28.

Alexander, Patrick D. and Ian Keay, "A General Equilibrium Analysis of Canada's National
  Policy," Explorations in Economic History, April 2018, 68, 1­15.

   and , "Responding to Globalization: The Causes and Consequences of Canadian Trade
  Policy, 1870-1913," Journal of Economic History, September 2019, 79 (3), 826­861.

Atkin, David and Dave Donaldson, "Whoâ CTMs Getting Globalized? The Size and Nature of
  Intranational Trade Costs," NBER Working Paper, 2143, 2015.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, "The China Shock: Learning from
  Labor-Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade," Annual Review of Economics, 2016,
  8, 205­240.

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, "Firms in
  International Trade," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2007, 21 (3), 105­130.

Bliss, Michael, Northern Enterprise, Toronto ON: McClelland and Stewart, 1987.

Brooks, Leah, Nicolas Gendron-Carrier, and Gisela Rua, "The Local Impact of Containeriza-
  tion," Working Paper, 2019.

Canada, Parliamentary Sessional Papers, Vol. 3, Ottawa, ON: I.B. Taylor, 1872.

  , Census of Canada, 1870-71, Vol. 3, Ottawa, ON: I.B. Taylor, 1875.

  , Parliamentary Sessional Papers, Vol. 5, Ottawa, ON: S.E. Dawson, 1892.

  , Census of Canada, 1890-91, Vol. 3, Ottawa, ON: S.E. Dawson, 1894.

Chamard, John and Kris Inwood, "Regional Industrial Growth during the 1890s: The Case of
  the Missing Artisans," Acadiensis, Autumn 1986, 16 (1), 101­117.

Chandra, Amitabh and Eric Thompson, "Does Public Infrastructure Affect Economic Activ-
  ity? Evidence from the Rural Interstate Highway System," Regional Science and Urban
  Economics, 2000, 30, 457­490.

Chernoff, Alexander, "1871 Productivity Differentials and the Decline of the Maritime Manu-
  facturing Sector," Acadiensis, Winter/Spring 2014, 43 (1), 65­88.

Co¸
  sar, A. Karem and Banu Demir, "Domestic Road Infrastructure and International Trade:
  Evidence from Turkey," Journal of Development Economics, 2016, 118, 232­244.

   and Pablo D. Fajgelbaum, "Internal Geography, International Trade, and Regional Special-
  ization," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2016, 8 (1), 24­56.

                                            28
Conley, Timothy G., "GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence," Journal of Econo-
  metrics, September 1999, 92 (1), 1­45.
Cruz-Fernandez, Mario, Ivan Fernandez-Val, and Martin Weidner, "Bias Corrections for Probit
  and Logit Models with Two-Way Fixed Effects," Stata Journal, 2017, 17 (3), 517­545.
Devlin, Allison, Brian K. Kovak, and Peter M. Morrow, "The Long-Run Labour Market Effects
  of the Canada-US Free Trade Agreement," 2020.
Dix-Carneiro, Rafael, "Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics," Econometrica,
  2014, 82 (3), 825­885.
  and Brian K. Kovak, "Trade Liberalization and Regional Dynamics," American Economic
  Review, 2017, 107 (10), 2908­2946.
   and Brian K Kovak, "Margins of Labor Market Adjustment to Trade," Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics, 2019, 117, 125­142.
Donaldson, David and Richard Hornbeck, "Railroads and American Economic Growth: A
  "Market Access" Approach," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2016, 131 (2), 799­
  858.
Dorval, Bill, "Manufacturing and Credit Ratings in Late Nineteenth Century Canada," 2019.
  Unpublished Manuscript.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz, and Alan M. Taylor, "The Rise and Fall of World Trade,
  1870­1939," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (2), 359­407.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D. and Stephen J. Redding, "Trade, Structural Transformation, and Devel-
  opment: Evidence from Argentina, 1869­1914," Working Paper 2018.
Fujita, Masahisa, Paul R. Krugman, and Anthony J. Venables, The Spatial Economy: Cities,
  Regions, and International Trade, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Gerriets, Marilyn and Kris Inwood, "Contextualizing Maritime Canada: Productivity and
  Structure in Provincial Manufacturing," Acadiensis, Autumn 1986, 26 (1), 32­51.
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou and Nina Pavcnik, "Distributional Effects of Globalization in
  Developing Countries," Journal of Economic Literature, 2007, 45 (1), 39­82.
Green, Alan G., "Regional Inequality, Structural Change and Economic Growth in Canada,
  1890-1956," Economic Development and Cultural Change, July 1969, 17 (4), 567­583.
Hanson, Gordon H., "Localization Economies, Vertical Organization, and Trade," American
  Economic Review, 1996, 86 (5), 1266­1278.
Harris, Richard, Ian Keay, and Frank Lewis, "Protecting Infant Industries: Canadian Manufac-
  turing and the National Policy, 1870-1913," Explorations in Economic History, April 2015,
  56 (1), 15­31.

                                            29
Harrison, Ann E. and Gordon H. Hanson, "Who Gains from Trade Reform? Some Remaining
  Puzzles," Journal of Development Economics, January 1999, 59 (1), 125­154.

Heckman, James, "Internal Geography, International Trade, and Regional Specialization,"
  Econometrica, 1979, 47 (1), 153­161.

Hornbeck, Richard and Martin Rotemberg, "Railroads, Reallocation, and the Rise of American
  Manufacturing," Working Paper, 2019.

Inwood, Kris, "Maritime Industialization from 1870 to 1910: A Review of the Evidence and
  its Interpretation," Acadiensis, Autumn 1991, 21 (1), 132­155.

  , "The Representation of Industry in the Canadian Census, 1871-1891," Social History,
  November 1995, 28 (56), 347­374.

   and Ian Keay, "Bigger Establishments in Thicker Markets: Can We Explain Early Pro-
  ductivity Differentials Between Canada and the United States?," Canadian Journal of Eco-
  nomics, November 2005, 38 (4), 1327­1363.

  and , "Diverse Paths to Industrial Development: Evidence from Late-Nineteenth Century
  Canada," European Review of Economic History, August 2012, 16 (3), 311­333.

  and , "Trade Policy and Industrial Development: Iron and Steel in a Small Open Economy,
  1870-1913," Canadian Journal of Economics, November 2013, 46 (4), 1265­1294.

Jacks, David and Krishna Pendakur, "Global Trade and the Maritime Transport Revolution,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, November 2010, 92 (4), 745­755.

  , Chris Meissner, and Dennis Novy, "Trade Costs in the First Wave of Globalization," Ex-
  plorations in Economic History, April 2010, 47 (2), 127­141.

Jaworski, Taylor and Carl Kitchens, "National Policy for Regional Development: Evidence
  from Appalachian Highways," Review of Economics & Statistics, 2020, 101, 777­790.

Martincus, Christian Volpe, Jeronimo Carballo, and Aana Cusolito, "Roads, Exports, and Em-
 ployment: Evidence from a Developing Country," Journal of Development Economics, 2017,
 125, 21­39.

McInnis, Marvin, "The Trend of Regional Income Differentials in Canada," Canadian Journal
 of Economics, February 1968, 1 (2), 440­470.

Melitz, Marc, "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
 Productivity," Econometrica, November 2003, 71 (6), 1695­1725.

Michaels, Guy, "The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence from the Interstate
 Highway System," Review of Economics & Statistics, 2008, 90, 683­701.




                                           30
Mohammed, Saif Shah and Jeffrey Williamson, "Freight Rates and Productivity Gains in
 British Tramp Shipping, 1869-1950," Explorations in Economic History, April 2004, 41
 (2), 172­203.

Nagy, David Krisztian, "Hinterlands, City Formation, and Growth: Evidence from the US
  Westward Expansion," Working Paper, 2017.

Norrie, Kenneth, Douglas Owram, and J.C. Herbert Emery, A History of the Canadian Econ-
  omy, fourth ed., Toronto: Thomson-Nelson, 2008.

O'Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson, Globalization and History: The Evolution of
  a Nineteenth Century Atlantic Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.

Pavcnik, Nina, "Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from
  Chilean Plants," Review of Economic Studies, January 2002, 69 (1), 245­276.

Ramondo, Natalia, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and Milagro Saborio-Rodriguez, "Trade, Domes-
  tic Frictions, and Scale Effects," American Economic Review, October 2016, 106 (10), 3159­
  3184.

Rauch, James, "Comparative Advantage, Geographic Advantage and the Volume of Trade,"
  Economic Journal, September 1991, 101 (408), 1230­1244.

Redding, Stephen and Matthew A. Turner, "Transportation Costs and the Spatial Organization
  of Economic Activity," in Gilles Duranton, J. Vernon Henderson, and William Strange, eds.,
  Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, Vol. 5, Amersterdam: North-Holland, 2015,
  pp. 1339­1398.

Redding, Stephen J., "Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare," Journal of International
  Economics, 2016, 101, 148­167.

Sokoloff, Kenneth, "Was the Transition from the Artisanal Shop to the Non-Mechanized Fac-
  tory Associated with Gains in Efficiency?," Explorations in Economic History, October
  1984, 21 (4), 351­382.

Urquhart, Malcolm C., Gross National Product of Canada, 1870-1926: Derivation of the
  Estimates, Montreal: Queen's McGill Press, 1993.

Walling, Henry F., Atlas of the Dominion of Canada, Montreal QC: George N. Tackabury,
 1875.

Wolf, Nikolaus, "Endowments vs. Market Potential: What Explains the Relocation of Industry
 After the Polish Reunification in 1918?," Explorations in Economic History, January 2007,
 44 (1), 22­42.

Wood, Adrian, "How Trade Hurt Unskilled Workers," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Sum-
 mer 1995, 9 (3), 57­80.


                                            31
World Bank, World Bank Development Report: Reshaping Economic Geography, Washington,
 DC: World Bank, 2009.

Wylie, Peter, "Technological Adaptation in Canadian Manufacturing, 1900-1929," Journal of
 Economic History, September 1989, 49 (3), 569­591.




                                           32
        Table 1: Census District and Industry Summary Statistics


                                           No. Obs.       Mean       Std. Dev.        Min.        Max.
Positive Productionij :
PQ > 0                                      27,000        0.230        0.421            0           1
Regionj :
Ontario                                      6,206        0.477        0.500            0           1
Quebec                                       6,206        0.339        0.473            0           1
Maritimes                                    6,206        0.184        0.387            0           1
Tor-Mon-Hal                                  6,206        0.067        0.250            0           1
Urban                                        6,206        0.152        0.360            0           1
Remote                                       6,206        0.006        0.078            0           1
Growth Ratesij :
P Q                                          6,206        0.824        1.721         -6.553       8.179
Est                                          6,206        0.471        0.971         -3.843       7.045
P Q/Est                                      6,206        0.493        1.367         -6.217       8.179
P Q/L                                        6,206        0.227        0.560         -2.942       3.611
Distancej :
Economic Dist. Port                          6,206        50.73         41.56        20.66       221.29
Physical Dist. Port                          6,206        24.98         32.01        0.209       341.99
              Tor-Mon-Hal                    6,206        97.44         72.66        0.405       448.29
              Urban                          6,206        55.54         55.77        0.209       427.06
(X + M ) Closest Port                        6,206        69.12        142.39        0.095       490.78
Opennessi :
(X + M )/(P Q + M - X )1871                  6,206        0.252        2.231            0         22.82
X/P Q                                        6,206        0.071        0.203            0           1
M/(P Q + M - X )                             6,206        0.192        0.294            0           1
Tradeable Q                                  6,206        0.745        0.436            0           1
(X + M )/(P Q + M - X )1891                  6,183        0.867        6.422            0         50.65
Scale and Policy:
L/Esti                                       6,206        8.082        13.21            1        152.40
P op/Acrej                                   6,206        5.835        20.96         0.000       100.97
AW TiN P                                     6,206        0.095        0.095         -0.620         1
F Born/P opj                                 6,206        0.173        0.128         0.001        0.491
 Notes and Sources: Detailed variable descriptions and source information provided in text. j identifies
 200 districts included in the 1871 or 1891 Canadian censuses of industrial establishments; i identifies 135
 SIC4 industries included in the 1871 or 1891 Canadian censuses of industrial establishments. Economic
 distance in ¢CAD; all other nominal values in 000 CAD; physical distance in miles.  = log-difference
 1871-1891. Distance, openness, scale and policy variables from 1871, unless otherwise noted.




                                                  33
                                    Table 2: Baseline Results Exposure to Globalization and Industrial Growth

                            Export                   Baseline                                          Margins                               Other
                          Orientation        Openness Sep. Xij + Mij                 P Qij > 0         Estij   P Q/Estij                   Hypotheses
                              (1)              (2a)          (2b)                       (3a)           (3b)      (3c)                         (4)
      Exportij            -0.667***
                            (0.063)
      Exposureij                             1.093***                                  0.430**        0.621***           0.579**            1.105***
                                              (0.399)                                  (0.174)         (0.209)           (0.277)             (0.414)
      XExpij                                                     0.953***
                                                                  (0.314)
      M Expij                                                    1.174***
                                                                  (0.436)
      P olicyij                                                                                                                               1.701*
                                                                                                                                             (0.986)
      Scaleij                                                                                                                                0.099**




34
                                                                                                                                             (0.048)
      Internalij                                                                                                                             4.303**
                                                                                                                                             (1.968)
      Industry FE
      District FE
      N                       6,198            6,206                6,206               27,000           6,206             6,206               6,206
      Notes and Sources: See Table 1 notes. Detailed description of specifications and variables provided in text. All continuous variables measured as
     natural logarithms (scalar transformed). Robust standard errors (reported in parentheses) clustered by industry and district. Estimation over industry-
     districts with P Qij > 0, except Column 3a. Estimation by OLS (Columns 1, 2a, 2b, 3b, 3c and 4); probit with bias corrected fixed effects (Column
     3a) (Cruz-Gonzalez, Fernandez-Val and Weidner 2017). Dependent variables = lnLij (Column 1); P Qij (Columns 2a, 2b and 4); categorical
     variable taking value 1 when P Qij > 0 (Column 3a); Estij (Column 3b); P Q/Estij (Column 3c). Exportij = industry export share of
     domestic production interacted with physical distance to coastal port (Halifax); Exposureij = industry openness interacted with (inverse) trade
     weighted economic distance to closest port of entry; Xexpij = industry export share interacted with (inverse) trade weighted economic distance
     to closest port of entry; M expij = industry import share of domestic market interacted with (inverse) trade weighted economic distance to closest
     port of entry; P olicyij = manufacturing industry AW TN P interacted with district foreign born population share; Scaleij = industry employees
     per establishment (non-factory) interacted with district population density; Internalij = industry T radeablei categorical variable interacted with
     (inverse) physical distance to closest urban centre. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at 90%, 95%, 99% level of confidence.
                                           Table 3: Results for Heterogeneity, Mechanism, Selection, and Simultaneity

                                                  Heterogeneity                                      Productivity                             Selection & Simultaneity
                                   Exposure           P Q       P Q/L1871              P Q/L                 %P Q                     Heckman 2SLS-IV Heckman & IV
                                      (1a)             (1b)         (1c)                 (2a)           (2b)        (2c)                 (3a)         (3b)          (3c)
      Exposureij                   1.241***        1.262***      1.675***              1.888**                    0.512**             1.556*** 1.382***          1.727***
                                    (0.437)          (0.427)      (0.457)              (0.904)                    (0.251)              (0.452)      (0.468)       (0.537)
      Exposureij × Q1               -3.551*         -0.365*     -2.750***
                                    (1.904)          (0.200)      (0.306)
      %P Q/Lij                                                                                        0.308***        0.308***
                                                                                                       (0.014)         (0.015)
               1
      M ills-
            ij                                                                                                                         2.887**                             2.144***
                                                                                                                                       (1.211)                              (0.558)
      Industry FE
      District FE




35
      N                               6,206            6,206            6,206            6,206           6,206           6,206           6,206           6,206              6,206
      Exog. Test                                                                                                                                        2.947*              1.857
                                                                                                                                                        (0.086)            (0.173)
      Weak Inst. Test                                                                                                                                  6.866***            4.277**
                                                                                                                                                        (0.001)            (0.016)
      Valid Inst. Test                                                                                                                                   1.057              1.330
                                                                                                                                                        (0.304)            (0.249)
      Notes and Sources: See Table 1 and Table 2 notes. Detailed description of specifications and variables provided in text. Estimation by OLS (Columns 1a-2c); two-stage Heckman
     selection (Column 3a); 2SLS instrumental variables (Column 3b); and Heckman selection with 2SLS (Column 3c) (Inwood and Keay 2013). Excluded instruments in IV specifi-
     cations include US factor shares, and (inverse) physical distance to closest urban centre. Dependent variables = %P Qij (Columns 1a-1c, 2b-2c, 3a-3c); %P Q/Lij (Column
     2a). Q1 = 1 for all industry-districts in bottom quartile (0 otherwise); industry-districts with P Q  0 = 1,693, or approximately 27% of all industry-districts with positive
     production (Column 1b). Heckman selection (Columns 3a and 3c) uses (inverse) Mills ratio calculated from a first stage probit (with bias corrected fixed effects), to control for
     selection into positive production. Hausman exogeneity test H0 : endogenous regressors may be treated as exogenous; Hansen valid instrument over-identification test H0 : ex-
     cluded instruments are uncorrelated with second stage error term, and correctly excluded from second stage; Kleibergen-Paap weak instrument F test H0 : excluded instruments
     are weakly identified in first stage (reported F statistics exceed 10% Stock-Yogo critical values, rejecting weak instrument null). *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at 90%,
     95%, 99% level of confidence.
                                                      Table 4: Results for Sensitivity and Robustness
                                  Test 1: Drop Outliers                                     Test 2: Alt. Exposure                              Test 3: Alt. FE
                             Remotej & Cityj      AllOtheri          AltOpeni      P hysDistj         (X + M )30  mi       Exposure1891           Drop FE
                                                                                                                j                   ij
                                   (1a)               (1b)              (2a)           (2b)                (2c)                (2d)                  (3)
      Exposureij                0.998***            0.886**                                                                                      1.384***
                                 (0.353)            (0.381)                                                                                        (0.541)
      Alt1 Exposureij                                                 1.103**
                                                                      (0.506)
      Alt2 Exposureij                                                                0.170***
                                                                                      (0.064)
      Alt3 Exposureij                                                                                    0.492**
                                                                                                         (0.229)
      Exposure1891
              ij                                                                                                               0.929**
                                                                                                                               (0.416)




36
      Ec.Dist.P ortj                                                                                                                              -0.054*
                                                                                                                                                  (0.030)
      Opennessi                                                                                                                                  0.141***
                                                                                                                                                  (0.040)
      Constant                                                                                                                                     0.213
                                                                                                                                                  (0.439)
      Industry FE
      District FE
      N                              5,752              5,951          6,206           6,206               6,206                6,206              6,206
      Notes and Sources: See Table 1, Table 2 and Table 3 notes. Detailed description of tests and variables provided in text. Test (1a) drops remote districts,
     Toronto, Montreal, and Halifax; Test (1b) drops all non-manufacturing industries in All Other group. Test (2a) measures openness with categorical variable
     T radeablei that takes the value 1 for industries with (X + M )1891 > $1, 000; Test (2b) measures trade-weighted distance to port as physical straight-
     line distance in miles; Test (2c) measures trade-weighted distance to port as (X + M ) for all ports of entry within 30 miles of district j centroid; Text
     (2d) allows for changes in exposure due to the imposition of the National Policy tariffs (1879) by measuring industry openness in 1891. Test (3) replaces
     district FE with Ec.Dist.P ortj , and industry FE with Opennessi . *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at 90%, 95%, 99% level of confidence.
                     Figure 1: Manufacturing Growth in Canada, 1871-1891




                                                                                     Percent Change
                                                                                     0.59 - 4.93
                                                                                     0.35 - 0.59
                                                                                     0.22 - 0.35
                                                                                     0.13 - 0.22
                                                                                     0.08 - 0.13
                                                                                     0.05 - 0.08
                                                                                     0.03 - 0.05
                                                                                     -0.01 - 0.03
                                                                                     -0.38 - -0.01



Notes: This figure shows the growth of manufacturing output by district in Canada between 1871 and 1891
(weighted by initial share in 1871).




                                                  37
Appendix




   38
Appendix Table A1: First Stage Results for Selection and Instrumental Variables


                                  Heckman-First Stage                 2SLS-First Stage
                                         Probit                             OLS
                                  Dep. Var. = P Qj > 0             Dep. Var. =Exposureij
           Exposureij                    0.250
                                        (0.217)
           Scaleij                     0.140***
                                        (0.037)
           U S K Shareij                                                       0.036
                                                                              (0.024)
           U S M Shareij                                                     0.192***
                                                                              (0.061)
           Industry FE
           District FE
           N                                27,000                             6,206
             Notes and Sources: See Table 1, Table 2, Table 3 and Table 4 notes. Detailed variable
             and specification descriptions provided in text. Incidental parameter bias in the probit
             regression corrected as described by Cruz-Fernandez, Fernandez-Val and Weidner
             (2017). Scaleij = industry employees per establishment interacted with district j
             physical distance to closest urban location; U S K Shareij = capital's share of
             total cost in US industry i from 1870 US industrial census interacted with district j
             physical distance to closest urban location; U S M Shareij = raw material's share
             of total cost in US industry i from 1870 US industrial census interacted with district
             j physical distance to closest urban location. IV diagnostic tests reported in Table 3.




                                                    39
