                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE EITC AND MATERNAL TIME USE:
                  MORE TIME WORKING AND LESS TIME WITH KIDS?

                                        Jacob Bastian
                                        Lance Lochner

                                     Working Paper 27717
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27717


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 2020, Revised January 2021




We would like to thank Marianne Bitler, Elira Kuka, Brenden Timpe, and Riley Wilson for
comments and Gabe Goodspeed, Qian Liu, and Tom Trivieri for excellent research assistance.
This research was funded by the Smith Richardson Foundation and the Upjohn Institute. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jacob Bastian and Lance Lochner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The EITC and Maternal Time Use: More Time Working and Less Time with Kids?
Jacob Bastian and Lance Lochner
NBER Working Paper No. 27717
August 2020, Revised January 2021
JEL No. D13,H24,H31,H53,I31,I38,J13,J22

                                         ABSTRACT

Parents spend considerable sums investing in their children's development, with their own time
among the most important forms of investment. Given well-documented effects of the Earned
Income Tax Credit (EITC) on maternal labor supply, it is natural to ask how the EITC affects
other time allocation decisions, especially time with children. We use the American Time Use
Surveys to study the effects of EITC expansions since 2003 on time devoted to a broad array of
activities, with considerable attention to the amount and nature of time spent with children. Our
results confirm prior evidence that the EITC increases maternal work and reduces time devoted to
home production and leisure, especially among unmarried women. More novel, we show that the
EITC also reduces time spent with children; however, almost none of this reduction comes from
time devoted to active investment-related activities that are most likely to foster child
development.


Jacob Bastian
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
jacob.bastian@rutgers.edu

Lance Lochner
Department of Economics
Faculty of Social Science
Western University
1151 Richmond Street, North
London, ON N6A 5C2
CANADA
and NBER
llochner@uwo.ca
1.      Introduction


     A growing literature documents the importance of family investments for child develop-

ment (e.g., see surveys by Cunha et al., 2006; Heckman and Mosso, 2014; Kalil, 2015), with

parental time becoming an increasingly important form of investment (e.g., Lee and Bowen,

2006; Del Boca et al., 2014; Carneiro et al., 2015; Caucutt et al., 2020). Caucutt et al. (2020)

document that more than two-thirds of all family expenditures on child development (for

children ages 12 or less) come in the form of parental time investments.

     It is tempting to assume that the more time mothers spend working, the less they must

spend with their children. Yet, such an assumption is clearly at odds with the time series for

female labor supply and time with children, which have both increased substantially in recent

           1
decades.       Cross-sectional relationships are also at odds with a direct tradeo. For example,

Guryan et al. (2008) show that more educated parents both work more and spend more

time with their children compared to less-educated parents.              Clearly, parents devote time

to many leisure and home production activities besides child care (Becker, 1965; Kooreman

and Kapteyn, 1987; Aguiar and Hurst, 2007), and these activities trade o with work.

     Understanding parental (especially maternal) time allocation decisions is critical for un-

derstanding the impacts of tax and transfer policies, including many welfare-to-work initia-

tives, on investments in children and child development.             The Earned Income Tax Credit

(EITC), the focus of our study, is one of the most signicant tax/transfer policies in the

United States, impacting millions of low- to middle-income families.                 Dahl and Lochner

(2012, 2017), Chetty et al. (2011), Bastian and Michelmore (2018), Manoli and Turner

(2018) and Agostinelli and Sorrenti (2018) estimate positive impacts of EITC expansions on

the test scores, educational attainment, employment, and earnings of economically disad-

                       2
vantaged children.         These studies emphasize the increase in nancial resources for families

that benet from EITC expansions, with much of the increase in family income coming

   1 See, e.g., Bryant and Zick (1996), Gauthier et al. (2004), Sayer et al. (2004), Bianchi and Robinson
(1997), Craig (2006), Kimmel and Connelly (2007), Guryan et al. (2008), and Kalil et al. (2012) for evidence
on growing parental time with children, while Costa (2000), Goldin (2006), Fernández (2013), and Bastian
(2020) document the substantial increase in female labor supply over time.
   2 Hoynes et al. (2015), Averett and Wang (2018), and Braga et al. (2019) show that the EITC also improves
children's health.




                                                     1
                                                                                     3
from greater labor force participation and higher pre-tax family earnings.               Agostinelli and

Sorrenti (2018) and Bastian and Michelmore (2018) raise concerns that the additional time

mothers spend working could oset the benets associated with greater nancial resources.

Indeed, several studies estimate negative eects of full-time maternal employment on child

                                                                              4
development (Brooks-Gunn et al., 2002; Ruhm, 2004; Bernal, 2008).

    Even if the EITC increases maternal labor supply by increasing net-of-tax wages for

low-income families, it need not reduce parental time investments in children. The positive

income eects from higher wages can create incentives to increase overall investments in

children. As shown by Caucutt et al. (2020), if all investment inputs are suciently comple-

mentary, families may wish to increase all types of investments, including time investments,

despite the increase in their opportunity costs.          Thus, higher wages may cause parents to

substitute leisure and home production for time at work with little, or even positive, eects

on time spent with children. Indeed, Kooreman and Kapteyn (1987) and Kimmel and Con-

nelly (2007) estimate that increases in maternal wages lead to reductions in time devoted to

leisure and home production but much weaker or even modest positive eects on child care.

    Looking more directly at impacts of the EITC, studies spanning three decades of re-

search have consistently concluded that it raises employment among single mothers (Homan

and Seidman, 1990; Eissa and Liebman, 1996; Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001; Grogger, 2003;

                                                5
Hoynes and Patel, 2018; Bastian, 2020).             Much less is known about changes in other uses

of time. Looking at a broader set of tax policies, Gelber and Mitchell (2012) estimate that

policies which encourage maternal labor supply also reduce time spent on home production.

In their analysis of the EITC using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, Bas-

tian and Michelmore (2018) estimate modest and statistically insignicant eects of EITC

expansions on the time parents spend with their children; however, their sample size is small

and estimates imprecise.

    In this paper, we use the 2003-2018 American Time Use Surveys (ATUS) to study,

   3 For these mothers, the EITC also improves health (Evans and Garthwaite, 2014), reduces stress and
nancial insecurity (Mendenhall et al., 2012; Jones and Michelmore, 2016), and reduces poverty (Hoynes and
Patel, 2018).
   4 Using family and child xed eects approaches, Heiland et al. (2017) estimate that mothers who work
10 hours more per week spend about 3-4% less time with their children.
   5 Recently, Kleven (2019) has challenged this conclusion.




                                                      2
in detail, the time allocation responses of mothers to state and federal expansions in the

EITC with an emphasis on time spent with children. More specically, our main empirical

approach estimates the eects of changes in the maximum EITC benet level (by state,

year, and family composition) on time spent in dierent activities, accounting for observed

family demographic characteristics and unobserved dierences across states over time (i.e.,

state   ×   year xed eects).      This specication leverages dierential EITC benet amounts

oered to families of dierent sizes across states and over time; however, we show that results

are similar when further limiting our identifying variation to come from dierences in the

evolution of EITC benets by family size across states (by including in our specication

interactions of the number of children in the household with state and year xed eects).

Using detailed information from ATUS on respondents' activities and who they were with

during each activity, we estimate the same specications for a variety of time allocation

activities, with and without children.

    Our analysis begins by conrming the overwhelming consensus that the EITC encourages

labor market participation among single mothers. Not only do we examine a more recent

period than most previous studies, but we also nd similar eects on labor supply whether

we use standard survey-based measures of work (from the Current Population Survey, CPS)

                                                                    6
or non-standard measures based on time diaries in ATUS.                 Next, we show that the increased

time devoted to work comes at the expense of both leisure and home production activities.

These activities are most strongly curtailed when mothers are with their children, raising

concerns about adverse eects on child development.

    The main contribution of our work is a close examination of how maternal time with

children changes in response to EITC expansions, exploring detailed impacts on child in-

vestment (e.g. reading, helping with homework, playing, arts and crafts, providing medical

care) vs. non-investment activities.          Most interestingly, our results suggest that despite

   6 Most previous research examines earlier EITC expansions (especially the major expansion from 1993 to
1996). There is some disagreement on the impacts of more recent EITC expansions on female labor supply,
with Bastian and Michelmore (2018) and Bastian and Jones (2019) estimating moderate positive eects
(consistent with the previous literature) and Kleven (2019) nding more modest eects of the 2009 federal
expansion and no eects of state expansions. Our approach is similar to that of Bastian and Michelmore
(2018) and Bastian and Jones (2019), reaching similar conclusions. By contrast, Kleven (2019) takes an event-
study approach that does not leverage dierences in the magnitude of dierent expansions for identication.
See Schanzenbach and Strain (2020) for a replication and critique of his analysis.




                                                     3
negative eects of EITC benet levels on the time single mothers spend with their children

(especially young mothers and children), we estimate negligible eects of the EITC on time

devoted to active investment activities. Reductions in time spent with children are almost

exclusively observed for passive non-investment activities like housework, running household

errands, waiting, shopping, and relaxing. An interesting exception is that both married and

unmarried mothers respond to EITC expansions by spending less time providing or obtain-

ing medical care for their children, which may reect general improvements in children's

health (presumably due to higher family income levels) as estimated by Hoynes et al. (2015),

Averett and Wang (2018), and Braga et al. (2019). We also estimate moderate reductions

in maternal time spent volunteering and attending social events with their children, among

the only activities adversely aected by the EITC that may hinder child development.

     The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the EITC and its expansion

at the federal and state levels over the 20032018 period. We describe our empirical strategy

in Section 3 and the ATUS data in Section 4. Our empirical analysis of the impacts of EITC

expansions on maternal time use is discussed in Section 5. Section 6 concludes by discussing

the implications of our ndings for families and child development.




2.      Federal and State EITC Policy Details


     The EITC distributes over $65 billion each year to almost 30 million low-income families,

lifting 6 million people out of poverty (Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 2019). Total

EITC benets are determined by annual earnings, number of children, state of residence,

and marital status.    Figure 1 shows the relationship between EITC benets in 2018 and

household earnings by the number of children and marital status.        The EITC contains a

phase-in region, where benets increase with earnings; a plateau region, where benets do

not change with earnings; and a phase-out region, where benets decrease with earnings.

Households that earn beyond this phase-out region are not eligible for the EITC. In 2018,

federal EITC benets for households with 3 or more children supplemented family earnings

at a phase-in rate of 45% (for low earners), reaching a maximum benet level of more than

$6,000 for families earning between about $14,000 and $24,000. Maximum possible benets




                                               4
fall to about $5,700 and $3,500 for households with 2 children and 1 child, respectively, while

families with no children face a maximum benet of about $500.

     Figure 2 shows the evolution of maximum benets by number of children over time.

The largest EITC expansions occurred between 1993 and 1996, which increased benets

dramatically for those with at least 2 children.         Our analysis covers a later period, from

2003 to 2018. The only change in the federal EITC schedule during this period occurred in

2009, when the maximum credit available to families with three or more children increased

by almost $1,000 (and their phase-in rate increased from 40% to 45%).

     As of 2018, 29 states oered their own EITC. State EITC benets generally top-up

federal EITC benets by a xed percent, varying from about 3 to 40 percent (for values up to

$220 to $2,800). Combined, the federal and state EITC can amount to over $9,000 per year,

with the average recipient receiving over $2,500 annually. Figure 3 maps the cross-country

expansion of state EITC rates (as a fraction of federal benets) over time, while Appendix

Figure A.1 shows the evolution of maximum possible federal plus state EITC benets. The

latter highlights the considerable variation in maximum benet levels by family size across

states and over time.

     We combine state and federal annual maximum EITC benet amounts (based on state of

residence, marital status, number and ages of children, and year) into the variable       M axEIT C ,
                                                  7
measured in thousands of year 2018 dollars.            For our sample of women ages 1849 in the

20032018 ATUS, Figure 4 shows the distribution of            M axEIT C     separately for families of

dierent sizes (Panel A) and for the periods before and after the 2009 federal EITC expan-

sion (Panel B). These distributions illustrate the type of EITC variation by family size, over

time, and across states that we exploit for identication.




3.      Empirical Strategy


     In this section, we describe our strategy for estimating the eects of federal and state

EITC expansions, as embodied by changes in            M axEIT C ,   on mother's time allocation deci-

   7 We use the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers to adjust all dollar amounts for ination to
year 2018 values.




                                                   5
         8
sions.       Two key features of federal and state EITC policies play critical roles in our analysis:

(i) the federal EITC oers higher benets to families with more children, and (ii) state

EITCs are generally proportional to federal EITC amounts. Together, these features gen-

erate rich variation in EITC benets at the stateyearnumber of children level in response

to both state and federal EITC expansions.                      For example, the federal EITC expansion in

2009 raised maximum benet levels for families with 3+ children, which eectively increased

total (federal plus state) EITC benets more in states with higher state EITC rates. Fur-

thermore, whenever states raise their EITC rates, they eectively increase maximum benet

levels more for larger families due to the structure of the federal EITC. Importantly, these

changes in maximum benet amounts (M axEIT C ) reect exogenous policy variation that

is independent of individual family income levels or actual receipt of the EITC, which are

both endogenous with respect to work behavior (we formally test for EITC policy exogeneity

in section 5). Our estimation approach leverages these sources of exogenous policy variation.

    We use the following regression to estimate the eects of EITC expansions on various

time-allocation outcomes,         Yist ,   separately for married and unmarried mothers:


    Yist = 1 M axEIT Cist · M arist + 2 M axEIT Cist · U nmarist + Xist 3 + st +                            ist ,     (1)


where subscript        i   refers to mother,      s   to state of residence, and          t   to year.   M arist    is an

indicator equal to one for married mothers, while                     U nmarist = 1 - M arist         is an indicator

equal to one for unmarried mothers. The vector                     Xist   contains a rich set of potentially time-

varying individual-level controls (e.g., number of children, marital status, race/ethnicity, age,

and educational attainment), while               st   reects state        ×   year xed eects (FE) that account

for any unobserved factors (e.g., state-wide economic, policy, or demographic trends) that

vary across states over time and similarly aect all families within a state. The idiosyncratic

error,       ist , is assumed to be independent of            M axEIT Cist      and marital status, conditional on

                                                          9
other covariates      Xist   and state     ×   year FE.

   8 M axEIT C is highly correlated with other aspects of the EITC and does a good job of capturing EITC
expansions over time. For example, regressing         M axEIT C    on the EITC phase-in rate, controlling for number
of children, state xed eects, and year xed eects, yields an                R2   of 0.999. We also consider the phase-in
rate as an alternative measure of EITC policies in Section 5.8.
   9 We report standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level. Alternate
clustering and standard error specications yield similar results (available upon request). ATUS weights are
used in all specications.



                                                               6
     The inclusion of state         ×     year FE (st ) means that our identication of the impacts of

M axEIT C       (i.e.,   1   and    2 )   derives from variation in the dierential EITC treatment of

families of dierent sizes. As foreshadowed above, equation (1) exploits four distinct sources

               10
of variation.       First, dierences in state EITC rates imply larger dierences in                M axEIT C
between families of dierent sizes in states with higher EITC rates. Second, the 2009 federal

expansion increased          M axEIT C       for families (in all states) with 3+ children but not other

families. Third, an increase in any state's EITC rate generates a larger change in                M axEIT C
benets for families with more children.               Fourth, the federal expansion raised        M axEIT C
more for families with 3+ children in states with larger EITC rates.

     By including interactions between the number of children and both state FE and time

FE, it is possible to eliminate the rst and second sources of identifying variation, respec-

tively, relying only on variation at the stateyearnumber of children level induced by the

interaction of federal and state EITC policies and changes in either over time. We establish

the robustness of our results to this more demanding specication (and others) below in

Section 5.8.

     Our robustness analysis also facilitates an exploration of variation coming from the 2009

federal EITC expansion vs. changes in state EITC policies.                      These results suggest that

both sources of variation aid in estimation, with the federal EITC expansion providing a

particularly strong source of identifying variation in             M axEIT C .    We, therefore, look more

directly at the 2009 federal EITC expansion, providing graphical evidence of parallel pre-

trends in time allocation for families aected and unaected by the expansion.                         We also

report the estimated eects of this expansion over time in an event-study format.

     Given our sample sizes, we are able to explore heterogeneity in the eects of EITC

expansions conditional on marital status. We do this by estimating equations of the form:



 Yist = M axEIT Cist · M arist · Zist 1 + M axEIT Cist · U nmarist · Zist 2 + Xist 3 + st +            ist , (2)


where    Zist reects a vector of indicator variables for mother's race or educational attainment.
     A key identifying assumption throughout our analysis is that EITC policy expansions

    10 We note that average dierences in       M axEIT C   by number of children are absorbed by indicators for
number of children in    Xist ,   while any average dierences across states over time are absorbed by the state
×   year FE.



                                                           7
are not correlated with other economic policies or conditions which may themselves aect

female employment or time allocation decisions. For example, if states were more likely to

create or expand an EITC during economic expansions and budget surpluses, the relationship

between state EITCs, female employment, and time use would reect economic conditions

in general, not just EITC-driven increases in employment. Our inclusion of state                ×   year FE

(st ) greatly lessens this concern, since they absorb any state-specic changes in economic or

policy conditions that aect families of all sizes in the same way. Still, we show below that

the EITC expansions during our time period are uncorrelated with state-specic measures

of annual economic conditions and policies.




4.      Data from the American Time Use Surveys


     We use the 20032018 Bureau of Labor Statistics' American Time Use Survey Data

(ATUS). ATUS is the nation's rst federally administered, continuous survey on time use in

the United States. The goal of the survey is to measure how people divide their time among

                                                                 11
life's activities (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019).            ATUS data are linked to the CPS

and contain rich demographic and geographic information. We keep all women ages 1849

in the main sample, 58,090 observations. Of these women, 43,685 are mothers and 15,677

are unmarried mothers.

     With the use of time diaries, ATUS asks respondents how they spent every minute of

a 24 hour day, also recording who they spent their time with.                  We scale reported time-

use so that units can be interpreted as weekly hours. We divide time-use into three broad

categories:   paid work activities (including work, commuting, job search, and job-related

                                                   12
socializing), home production, and leisure.             All time unaccounted for by these categories

can be classied as schooling, sleep, and uncategorized, where only 1.36 (out of 168) hours

  11 Time-use data exists for earlier years, but these samples are relatively small (generally 2,0004,000
observations per year, compared to 10,00020,000 per year for 20032018) and contain fewer covariates.
  12 Home production includes activities like cooking and meal preparation, housework, car maintenance,
taking care of the garden or pets, travel related to household activities, other household management, taking
care of children or other household members, and shopping. Leisure time includes exercise and sports, games,
watching television or movies, computer activity, socializing, talking on the phone and other communication,
reading, listening to music or the radio, arts and entertainment, hobbies educational activities, and own
medical care. See Online Appendix B for details.




                                                        8
per week are uncategorized, on average.

   Based on the time diaries, we also determine whether time devoted to each leisure or

home production activity was spent with children, using this to dene our measure of time

with children. Additionally, we classify each ATUS time activity as either investment or

non-investment based on its likely impact on child development. Using this, we decompose

total time mothers spend with children into investment time or non-investment time. Invest-

ment time includes activities like doing homework, reading to children, children's education,

providing and obtaining medical care, playing games or sports, doing crafts, and attending

museums or events together. These activities naturally involve active interaction between

mothers and their children, often with clear learning opportunities or health benets. By

contrast, activities we classify as non-investment tend to be more passive, where there may

be very little interaction between mother and child. Their developmental benets are likely

to be relatively quite modest (Fiorini and Keane, 2014). As we document below, the non-

investment activities in which mothers spend signicant amounts of time with their children

include housework, waiting, shopping, relaxing (includes watching television), eating, and

socializing at parties and events. Since dierent investment and non-investment activities

may provide dierent benets to children, we also examine several subcategories of each. See

Online Appendix B for detailed descriptions of our activity categorization.

   A few measures of labor supply are available, some based on ATUS time-diary data and

others based on linked CPS data. Our preferred measures are labor force participation (LFP,

an indicator equal to one if employed or unemployed) and hours worked last week, both from

CPS survey data.      We use these CPS-based measures unless otherwise specied; however,

                                                        13
results are qualitatively similar across measures.

   In studying time allocated to activities not specically related to time with children (e.g.

working, home production, leisure), we sometimes use the full sample of women, since the

largest changes in incentives from EITC expansions are between women with and without

children.   For outcomes related to spending time with children, we focus exclusively on

  13 As already discussed, ATUS also asks about time spent on work activities, but this measure is noisier,
since it is based on a 24 hour period and may be collected on a weekend day. Other available measures of
labor supply in the CPS include whether mothers are currently employed and their usual weekly work hours.




                                                    9
mothers with children in the household. We also show key results for the sample of unmarried

mothers.

   Table 1 reports summary statistics for all women, all mothers, and unmarried and mar-

ried mothers ages 1849 (using ATUS weights). On average, women had 1.2 children and

were 34 years old. Roughly half of all women in our sample were married and a little less

than one-third were black or hispanic. Only 11% did not nish high school while one-third

graduated from college. Women's own earnings averaged $26,000 while total household earn-

ings averaged $66,000. On average, the maximum EITC benets available to families based

on family composition, state, and year (i.e.,   M axEIT C )   were $3,340; however, the average

EITC benets women were actually eligible for (based on their earnings) was only $668, with

                                              14
roughly one-in-four receiving some benets.         Compared to the sample of all women, moth-

ers are generally older, less-educated, more likely to be married, less likely to be employed,

and have lower individual earnings but similar levels of household earnings. Compared to all

mothers, unmarried mothers tend to be more socially and economically disadvantaged: they

are, on average, younger, less-educated, and are more likely to be nonwhite. Due to lower

household earnings, they are eligible for more in EITC benets ($1,450 vs. $1,020) and are

more likely to be eligible for at least some benets (50 vs. 34 percent).

   Based on our sample of mothers, Table 2 reports summary statistics for our main time-

use variables, reporting time allocation behavior separately by both marital status and the

number of children in the household. Consider, rst, the behavior of mothers across families

of all sizes reported in the rst two columns. Average weekly work hours (from CPS) are

quite similar for both married and unmarried mothers (2122 hours per week). Leisure hours

are also quite similar, with unmarried mothers spending 35 hour/week and married mothers

33 hours/week on leisure activities. By contrast, married mothers devote considerably more

time to home production (50 hours/week) than do unmarried mothers (40 hours/week).

While married mothers spend roughly similar amounts of their leisure and home production

time with and without their children, unmarried mothers spend much less of this time with

their children. Married mothers spend about 45 hours/week with their children, with 16% of

 14 EITC benets imputed from NBER's TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993). Details available at   https:
//www.nber.org/taxsim/.


                                                10
that time (about 7 hours/week) devoted to investment activities. Unmarried mothers spend

only about 29 hours/week with their children with only 14% (about 4 hours/week) devoted

to investments.

     Next, consider dierences in maternal time allocation across families with dierent num-

bers of children by looking across columns (3)(8) of Table 2. The patterns are qualitatively

similar for both single and married mothers. Mothers with more children spend less time in

the workforce but devote more time to home production. Time spent with children increases

substantially in the number of children, even among leisure activities, which decline slightly

overall. Time devoted to child investment activities is about 7080% higher for mothers with

3 or more children compared to those with only one child. Of course, these increases in time

with children may not imply more time with each child, as mothers often spend time with a

                            15
subset of their children.

     Figure 5 shows that both investment and non-investment time with children generally

                             16
declines as children age.         Mothers spend an average of about 60 hours/week with infants,

falling to 40 hours/week by ages 78 and 20 hours/week by age 17. Mothers with children

under age 4 typically spend slightly less than 10 hours/week on investment activities with

that time declining steadily over older ages. By age 18, investment time becomes negligible.




5.      Results


     In this section, we exploit variation in the EITC associated with the 2009 federal ex-

pansion as well as variation in state-level EITC policies over time.                 We rst establish the

exogeneity of state EITC changes.           We then examine eects of the EITC on maternal la-

bor supply before turning to impacts on other uses of time, including home production and

leisure. Our main emphasis is on the eects of the EITC on time spent with children, where

we decompose time with children into investment and non-investment activities to better

understand how changes in the EITC might impact child development via time-use deci-

  15 In Online Appendix A, we display the full distribution for each category of time use by number of children.
Appendix Figures A.2, A.3, and A.4 show the distribution of hours worked last week (CPS measure), home
production, and leisure. Appendix Figures A.5 and A.6 show the distribution of total hours with children
and investment hours in children.
  16 Specically, this gure reports the average weekly amount of time mothers spend with all children of
the reported age.



                                                      11
sions. We also explore whether there are dierential eects on time allocation on weekdays

vs. weekends, and whether the eects depend on age of the mother or on the ages of children

in the household.     Finally, we explore the robustness of our estimates to dierent sets of

controls and specications that leverage variation from state vs. federal EITC expansions.



5.1. Exogeneity of State EITCs
    We begin by examining whether state-level EITC expansions are correlated with changes

in other state policies, economic conditions, or demographic trends. To that end, Table 3

reports the results from regressions of annual state-level maximum EITC amounts or state

EITC rates (as a percent of federal EITC) on several annual state-specic characteristics, as

well as state FE and year FE. Our rst specication controls for state-level economic con-

ditions (i.e., log GDP, GDP growth rates, unemployment rates) and policies (i.e., minimum

wages and maximum TANF amounts for families of dierent sizes), as well as one-year lags

for these measures to account for the possibility that state EITCs are introduced/adjusted

                                                17
in response to trends or past conditions.            Our second specication also controls for sev-

eral state demographic measures (e.g., family composition, gender and racial composition,

average educational attainment).

    The estimates presented in Table 3 reveal no systematic relationship between state-level

EITC expansions and state economic or policy trends.              Only one of the state-level policy

variables (Max TANF with 2 Children) is signicant at the 10% level in three of the columns

(none of the lags is signicant), while 1 or 2 of the state-level demographic measures is

signicant at the 10% level, depending on the EITC measure. Most importantly, F-tests for

                                                                                                        18
joint signicance of all state-level measures yield p-values greater than 0.5 in all columns.

These results provide support for the contention that state-level EITC expansions are not

correlated with contemporaneous (or recent) state economic and policy conditions. Still, our

baseline specications will control for unobserved state-specic dierences over time.

  17 Table A.1 reports summary statistics (based on our ATUS sample) for these annual state-level measures.
  18 We obtain similar results when reducing our sample to only those states that had a state EITC at
some point during the 20032018 period. Contrary to these results, other studies have suggested that state
economic conditions/policies were associated with state EITC expansions in the 1990s (e.g., Hoynes and
Patel (2018)).




                                                     12
5.2. Labor Supply
   We begin our analysis of time allocation decisions by studying the impact of the EITC on

labor supply, earnings, and family resources for women and mothers. The impacts of earlier

EITC expansions (especially in the 1990s) on these outcomes have been the focus of much of

the prior literature. This analysis, therefore, provides an opportunity to see whether more

recent expansions had similar impacts.

   As outlined in Section 3, our estimation strategy is based on equation (1). Our baseline

specication (for all outcomes) controls for state FE          ×   year FE, as well as a rich set of

individual-specic demographic characteristics. The latter includes indicators for the num-

ber of children in the household, number of children under age 6, four indicators for years of

educational attainment (less than 12 years, 12 years, 1315 years, and 16 or more years), a

cubic polynomial in age, birth year, and separate indicators for whether the woman/mother

is married, black, or hispanic. Our baseline specication also includes interactions between

the four education indicators interacted with state FE, year FE, and number of children

indicators, as well as the married indicator interacted with state FE and year FE. These

interactions allow for dierences in labor supply patterns by education and marital status

across states and over time. The interaction between the education indicators and the num-

ber of children indicators allows for dierent eects of family size on labor supply and other

outcomes by maternal education. Finally, our baseline specication includes an indicator for

                                                                19
whether the woman/mother was surveyed on a weekday.

   Estimates for all women, reported in Table 4 Panel A, show that a $1,000 increase in

M axEIT C   signicantly increases average LFP by 2.2 percentage points, weekly work hours

                                                                               20
by 1.2, annual earnings by nearly $2,000, and EITC benets by $267.                  Here, work hours

refer to hours worked last week, as reported in CPS data. Estimating separate eects by

marital status, as in equation (1), Panel B shows larger estimated eects among unmarried

women on LFP (3.4 percentage points), weekly work hours (1.6), earnings ($2,350), and

EITC benets ($323).       Eects on married women are notably smaller, though eects on

weekly hours of work, earnings, and EITC benets are statistically signicant. Results (by

 19 In section 5.5, we separately estimate impacts on weekdays and weekends.
 20 Unless otherwise noted, statistical signicance refers to the 0.05 level.



                                                  13
                                                                                                 21
marital status) are similar when restricting the sample to mothers only in Panel C.                   In both

panels B and C, estimated eects of changes in                    M axEIT C   are signicantly dierent by

marital status for all outcomes (p-values           <   0.01), consistent with previous evidence on the

stronger positive eects of the EITC on the labor supply and incomes of unmarried mothers

(Eissa and Hoynes, 2006; Bastian and Jones, 2019).



5.3. Eects on Broad Categories of Time Allocation
    Since the EITC increased labor supply among unmarried women and mothers, it must

have led to reductions in their time allocated to at least some types of non-work activities.

Eects of the EITC on family income levels may also have led to shifts in time allocation

across non-work activities even among married women and mothers. In Table 5, we divide

each woman's 168 weekly reported hours into home production, leisure, work activities,

school, sleep, and `uncategorized' based on the ATUS time diary activity data.

    For unmarried women, Panel A shows that $1,000 in                  M axEIT C    increases work-related

activities (2.0 hours/week), reduces home production and leisure (0.9 and 1.2 hours/week,

                                                                                       22
respectively), and has little eect on school, sleep, and uncategorized time.                Among married

women, we observe qualitatively similar but weaker eects of the EITC on work, home

production, and leisure activities. Panel B reveals similar patterns for the sample of mothers.

    We next consider the impacts of EITC expansions on the distributions of weekly hours

of work, home production, and leisure. Specically, we estimate the eects of                    M axEIT C
on the probability that mothers spend more than                  X   hours/week (for several values of    X)
on each of these activities, reporting the eects for unmarried mothers in Panels AC of

           23
Figure 6.       This gure shows that EITC expansions raise the probability of working up

tobut not above40 hours/week.                   Thus, the EITC draws single women into the labor

  21 Appendix Table A.4 further shows that estimated labor supply eects among unmarried mothers do not
depend on the age of their youngest children.
  22 Estimated eects on work hours are less precise here (compared to those reported in Table 4), because
hours of work from ATUS are based on a time diary for a single day, which could be a weekday or weekend
day, while the CPS measure is based on the total hours worked over the last week. We also note that our
ATUS measure diers from the CPS measure, because it includes time allocated to all work-related activities,
including job search activities and travel related to work.
  23 In estimating these eects, we replace total hours devoted to each activity with an indicator for whether
hours exceed    X   as our dependent variable in equation (1).




                                                        14
market but does not increase work beyond full-time. An increase in              M axEIT C     signicantly

reduces home production time in the 5090 hours/week range, while it only reduces leisure

time at the low end of the distribution (i.e., 1020 hours/week).



5.4. Time With Children and Parental Time Investment in Children
    We now look specically at how mothers spend their time with children. Table 6 decom-

                                                                                                          24
poses home production and leisure activities into time spent with and without children.

Among unmarried mothers, $1,000 in            M axEIT C     signicantly reduces both home produc-

tion and leisure time with children by one hour per week (each) but has much smaller and

statistically insignicant eects on time devoted to these activities when not with children.

Married mothers appear to reduce their leisure time more when with their children than

without, but neither eect (nor eects on home production time with/without children) is

signicant.

    Reductions in time mothers spend with their children could produce undesired eects on

child development. In particular, we might expect adverse impacts on children if increased

maternal time at work substitutes for productive time investments like reading or playing

with children, helping children with their homework, or taking them to the doctor.                        Of

course, reductions in time mothers spend with their children may have little lasting impact

on children if the lost time would have been spent watching television, cleaning the house,

or doing the dishes. To investigate this issue, we decompose the eects on maternal time

spent with children into eects on investment and non-investment activities (as described in

Section 4).

    Panel A of Table 7 shows that the negative eects of EITC expansions on the time

unmarried mothers spend with their children are almost completely explained by reductions

in non-investment time.        In sharp contrast, the eects on time single mothers devote to

investment activities are negligible and statistically insignicant. While these reect average

eects for all single mothers, Figure 6 Panel D explores the eects of                  M axEIT C      on the

  24 Time with children is not a mutually exclusive category but, rather, overlaps with home production and
leisure. We do not decompose work, school, sleep, or uncategorized time into with/without children, because
time with children is negligible for these activities and pre-2010 ATUS did not collect information about who
respondents were with when they reported sleeping, grooming, personal/private activities, or working.




                                                     15
distribution of total and investment time with children (measured by the probability time

exceeds dierent thresholds). This gure shows that EITC expansions cause mothers to scale

back their total time with children throughout much of the distribution. By contrast, EITC

expansions appear to induce single mothers who spend little time on investment activities

to spend even less time, but they have no impact on the investment time of highly engaged

mothers. That reductions in investment time are observed for the most investment-deprived

families is a potential area of concern.

   Returning to Table 7, Panel B shows that the impacts on unmarried mothers are largely

the same regardless of race, while Panel C suggests stronger eects for less-educated single

mothers. Among married mothers, we nd mostly insignicant impacts on investment and

non-investment time with children; although, there is some indication that white and college-

educated married mothers increase their investment time with children in response to EITC

expansions.   Appendix Table A.4 shows that the eects of EITC expansions on mother's

time allocation are qualitatively similar regardless of the age of her youngest child; although,

unmarried mothers whose youngest child is a teenager appear to reduce their total time with

children more than mothers with at least one pre-teen child. Eects on investment time with

children are small and statistically insignicant for all unmarried mothers. Among married

mothers, investment time signicantly increases by 30 minutes/week if all children are at

least 6 years old.

   Although changes in total investment time are negligible, mothers may still choose to

adjust their time allocation across dierent types of investment activities. Given the changes

in family income induced by EITC expansions, parents may adjust the types of investment

activities they engage in depending on the income elasticities of those activities.      These

elasticities may dier, for example, due to dierent complementarities with purchased goods

and services or due to heterogeneous parental preferences for dierent types of activities (e.g.

parents may enjoy some activities more than others).

   We consider the impacts of EITC expansions on the broad investment subcategories of

academic, health, and other investment time. Column (6) of Table 7 shows negligible

and statistically insignicant eects of     M axEIT C   on academic investment time, indicating

no adjustments in time spent reading to/with children or helping them with their homework.


                                                16
By contrast, column (7) suggests modest but statistically signicant reductions in health

investment time. Rather than indicating a harmful impact of the EITC, this may simply

reect a reduced need for medical attention due to improvements in children's health (asso-

ciated with improved health care and family income) that have previously been attributed

to the EITC (Hoynes et al., 2015; Averett and Wang, 2018; Braga et al., 2019). The nal

column of Table 7 suggests an osetting (but insignicant) increase in other time invest-

ment activities. In gauging the magnitudes of these eects, it is worth noting that mothers,

on average, devote relatively little of their time each week to investment activities (see the

bottom of the table). Still, only reductions in time devoted to health care activities reect a

substantial eect when measured in percentage terms (relative to average amounts of time).

    In Table 8, we further decompose other investment time into detailed activity subcat-

           25
egories.        This table shows that increases in other investment time are entirely explained

by increases in time devoted to play and looking after children; although, neither of these

eects is statistically signicant. The moderate increases in play time could be driven by

the increased family income associated with EITC expansions if mothers view time spent

                                        26
playing with children as a luxury.

    Because non-investment activities may also provide developmental benets for children,

Tables 9 and 10 examine these activities in greater detail. Table 9 shows that much of the

time mothers spend on non-investment home production activities is devoted to waiting and

shopping (6.5 hours/week), housework (6.1 hours/week), and eating (4.1 hours/week)

with children. Of these, eating meals with children is most likely to produce developmen-

tal benets (e.g., through extended conversations), yet the EITC has negligible eects on

the time single mothers devote to this activity. Instead, we nd that a $1,000 increase in

M axEIT C         appears to reduce the weekly time single mothers spend on housework (0.6

hours), waiting and shopping (0.1 hours), and errands and travel (0.2 hours), where only

the rst of these eects is statistically signicant.           While some of this time could involve

  25 We do not decompose academic or health investment time further. The former reects time spent
reading to/with children, helping with homework, attending meetings and school conferences for children, and
home schooling; the latter reects time spent providing and obtaining medical care. (See Online Appendix B.)
  26 Indeed, Krueger et al. (2009) nd that parents enjoy time spent playing with their children relative to
nearly any other activity they study.




                                                    17
conversation and bonding between mothers and children, these activities appear to reect

mostly passive time spent together.

   Non-investment time devoted to leisure activities is decomposed in Table 10.                   Nearly

all of this time can best be categorized as socializing at parties/events (2.7 hours/week)

or waiting and relaxing (7.1 hours/week). Focusing on broader social interactions as po-

tentially benecial for children, we note that a $1,000 increase in           M axEIT C       reduces time

unmarried mothers spend with their children engaged in volunteer activities and socializ-

ing (at events/parties), each by about 0.2 hours/week. Of less obvious importance for child

development, we estimate that the same increase in EITC benets reduces the time unmar-

ried mothers devote to waiting and relaxing (including watching television) with children

by about half an hour each week. Eects of the EITC on non-investment leisure time with

children are generally smaller and statistically insignicant for married mothers; although,

estimated reductions in socializing and waiting and relaxing are moderate in size.



5.5. Weekends vs. Weekdays
   Since most jobs are Monday to Friday, we examine whether there is a larger impact

on weekday relative to weekend time use.               In Table 11, we explore the EITC's impacts

on weekend and weekday time spent on work, home production, and leisure, as well as

time spent with children.      Panel A pools mothers interviewed on weekends and weekdays

(results shown in previous tables), while Panels B and C restrict the sample to mothers who

                                                  27
were interviewed on weekdays or weekends.               We note that average hours for each activity

(reported at the bottom of each panel), as well as estimated eects, are reported in terms of

total hours per week in Panel A, total hours over all 5 weekdays in Panel B, and total hours

over the 2 weekend days in Panel C.

   For unmarried mothers, columns 1 and 2 show that $1,000 in             M axEIT C     increases week-

day work activities by 1.4 hours each week, while it reduces home production and leisure

(combined) by 2.0 hours over the work week. Columns 3 and 4 show that unmarried mothers

spend 2.3 fewer hours with children during the work week with little impact on investment

  27 The EITC does not aect the probability of responding to the survey on a weekend: estimated eects
are smaller than 0.001 and insignicantly dierent from zero (p-values are larger than 0.9).




                                                   18
time. Eects on the weekend are generally much smaller (even if considered on a per day

basis) and statistically insignicant; although, in most cases, they suggest responses that

partially compensate for adjustments made during the work week.



5.6. Heterogeneous Eects by Mother's Age
      We next explore whether there are important dierences in the way younger vs. older

mothers respond to changes in the EITC, since they have dierential labor market experience,

attachment, and opportunity costs.

      In Figure 7, we allow the eects of the EITC to vary by age for unmarried and mar-

ried mothers by replacing     M axEIT C · M ar      and   M axEIT C · U nmar    in equation (1) with


  a   M axEIT C · M ar · 1(Age  a)         and     a   M axEIT C · U nmar · 1(Age  a),        where      a
                                                                                      28
represents six age categories: 1825, 2630, 3135, 3640, 4145, and 4650.

      We rst focus on unmarried mothers. The EITC leads to signicant increases of roughly

4 percentage points in LFP for mothers of all ages. Reductions in time spent with children

associated with EITC expansions are generally declining in mother's age; however, they are

statistically signicant for almost all age groups.         Single mothers under age 30 spend 23

hours/week less with their children when the maximum EITC benet increases by $1,000;

yet, these mothers (insignicantly) reduce their child investment time by less than 15 min-

utes/week. Point estimates for unmarried mothers in their late-40s suggest modest positive

eects of EITC expansions on investment time; although, these estimates are statistically

insignicant as well.

      Eects of the EITC on married mothers LFP and time with children are generally small

and insignicant.     Perhaps most interesting, there is some suggestion that young married

mothers respond to EITC expansions by reducing their participation in the labor market

                                                                                                    29
and increasing time with children; however, both estimates are statistically insignicant.

  28 We note that our baseline demographic controls include an indicator for having a child under age 6,
accounting for the fact that younger mothers tend to have younger children.
  29 Modest negative LFP eects for these mothers would be generally consistent with previous evidence on
the labor supply impacts of EITC expansions on married mothers (Eissa and Hoynes, 2004; Bastian and
Jones, 2019).




                                                   19
5.7. Heterogeneous Eects by Child's Age
   Since mothers typically spend progressively more time working and less time with children

as their children grow older (see Figure 5), we next explore whether responses to EITC

expansions depend on children's ages. To do so, we consider the eects of total time spent

                                                                   a
with children in age group    a (i.e., ages 04, 59, 1014, 1518), Yist , by separately estimating

the following regressions for mothers with any children in each age group:


      a
    Yist = a                          a                                 a   a
           1 M axEIT Cist · M arist + 2 M axEIT Cist · U nmarist + Xist 3 + st +
                                                                                          a
                                                                                          ist .    (3)


Here,   a
        1   and   a
                  2   reect the impact of a $1,000 increase in the maximum EITC benet on

hours with (or investing in) children who are in age group          a   for married and unmarried

mothers, respectively.     These specications use our baseline set of controls, replacing the

indicator for any child under age 6 with the number of children in age group         a.
   Figure 8 reports the eects of      M axEIT C   on time spent with and investing in children in

each age group. Panel A shows strong negative eects (about 4 hours/week reductions per

$1,000 in maximum EITC benets) on total time spent with children ages 4 or less. Eects

for children ages 59 and 1014 range from -2 to -3 hours/week for unmarried mothers and

weaker eects for married mothers.         Eects on time spent with children ages 1518 are

negligible. The declining eects with age are not surprising given the declining amount of

time mothers spend with their children as they age (see Figure 5). Most importantly, Panel B

shows no evidence that the EITC reduces investment time for any age group.                   Indeed,

the most visible pattern is the modest positive eect on time married mothers devote to

investment in children ages 5 and above; although, none of these coecients is statistically

signicant.



5.8. Robustness
   In this subsection, we examine the robustness of our results to dierent sets of controls and

sources of identifying variation in   M axEIT C , alternative measures of the EITC expansions,
                                                       30
and restricting the sample to unmarried mothers.            We also provide a focused look at time

allocation decisions surrounding the 2009 federal EITC expansion.

 30 When we separately estimate eects of the EITC by month, we nd similar results across months.



                                                  20
   Dierent Controls and Sources of Identifying Variation:                We explore estimation

of equation (1) using several alternative sets of controls, presenting these results in Table 12.

These results continue to use our sample of mothers only; however, Appendix Table A.5 shows

similar results for several outcomes based on the full sample of women. All specications in

Table 12 control for the same set of family demographic characteristics used throughout the

analysis so far, with our full baseline specication that includes state    ×   year FE reported

in column (2). As noted in Section 3, this exploits variation in    M axEIT C    due to average

dierences in benets by family size across states and over time, as well as variation driven

by the eects of federal and state EITC expansions on the benets of larger vs. smaller

families. Column (1) reports estimates from a standard dierence-in-dierence specication

that includes state FE and year FE (but not their interaction), thereby exploiting time

variation in dierences in average benet levels across states (in addition to the sources

exploited by our baseline specication). Of course, these estimates may be confounded by

state-specic changes in factors aecting time allocation decisions that are correlated with

changes in state EITC rates. As previously noted, our baseline specication (including state

× year FE) in column (2) accounts for any such changes that aect all families similarly, while
column (3) uses state   × year × unmarried FE to allow for dierential eects of state-specic
time-varying unobserved factors by marital status.       The results reported in columns (1)-

(3) are all quite similar: among unmarried mothers, EITC expansions increase labor supply,

reduce home production    + leisure and time spent with children, but have negligible eects on
investment time with children; eects on married mothers are always modest and statistically

insignicant.

   The next three columns of Table 12 further restrict the sources of variation we use

for identication.   Column (4) includes interactions of year FE with an indicator for 3+

children, which absorbs the average eects, common to all states, of the 2009 federal EITC

expansion by family size and accounts for any other nationwide time-varying factors that

dierentially aect small vs. large families. This specication continues to exploit the fact

that the federal expansion increased   M axEIT C    more for families with 3+ children in states

with larger EITC rates, as well as variation derived from cross-state dierences in EITC

rates and changes in those rates over time. By contrast, column (5) includes interactions of


                                               21
state FE with the indicator for 3+ children, absorbing the long-run average dierences across

states in their benets for small vs. large families. In the absence of changes in state EITC

rates, these estimates would be identied only from the 2009 federal expansion in benets

for larger families. The fact that several states expanded their EITCs provides an important

additional source of identication, since increases in their rates generate larger changes in

M axEIT C   for families with more children. Finally, column (6) is extremely demanding and

incorporates interactions between the indicator for 3+ children and both year FE and state

FE, leaving only variation in   M axEIT C   at the stateyearnumber of children level coming

from changes in federal and state expansions. Specically, these estimates are identied only

from (i) the larger impacts of the 2009 expansion on   M axEIT C   for families with 3+ children

in states with larger EITC rates and (ii) larger eects of increases in state EITC rates on

M axEIT C   for larger families. Because column (6) controls for all two-way components of

stateyearnumber of children FE, the only remaining identication threats that we cannot

account for include factors that vary at the stateyearnumber of children level.

   Most results in columns (4)(6) of Table 12 are quite similar to those of our baseline

specication in column (2). Eects of the EITC on labor supply are positive and signicant

for unmarried mothers, while they are small and insignicant for unmarried mothers. The

increases in weekly hours worked among single mothers are roughly oset by reductions in

leisure and home production time; although, the latter are more imprecisely estimated. We

observe similar patterns for time with children, except in the nal column, which includes

all two-way interaction components. Estimated eects on investment time are quite small

and insignicant across all columns. As in our baseline specication, none of the estimates

are statistically signicant for married mothers.

   We conclude our discussion of Table 12 with a few general comments. First, estimated

eects are remarkably similar regardless of the source of EITC variation.         Second, most

standard errors increase very little when moving from column (3) to (5), suggesting that

our baseline estimates do not rely heavily on long-run dierences in state EITC rates for

identication. Third, standard errors increase noticeably more when introducing interactions

between year FE and the indicator for 3+ children in columns (4) and (6). This suggests

that variation induced by the 2009 federal EITC expansion plays an important role in our


                                              22
estimation strategy.

    Alternative Measures of the EITC: Appendix Table A.6 shows that results are robust
to alternate measures of EITC expansions, specically the total (federal plus state) EITC

                 31
phase-in rate.        We nd consistent evidence that EITC expansions lead to increases in LFP

and work hours, coupled with reductions in home production and leisure time, for unmarried

women and mothers. The expansions also cause unmarried mothers to reduce their total time

with children but have little impact on their investment time. Our estimates suggest no eect

of changes in EITC phase-in rates on the time allocation decisions of married mothers.

    Alternative Measures of Labor Supply:                The results for LFP and hours worked last

week presented in Table 4 are based on CPS data linked to ATUS. Appendix Table A.7

reports similar eects on labor supply using other measures from the CPS (usual weekly

work hours, employed, and non-self-employed LFP) or from time diary data collected as

part of ATUS (weekly work hours, working           >   0 hours/week, working      20 hours/week, and

working      40 hours/week).

    Restricting the Sample to Unmarried Mothers:                   Appendix Table A.8 shows that

our main results are similar, though less precise, when restricting the sample to unmarried

mothers only. Each $1,000 in          M axEIT C   signicantly increases LFP by 7 percentage points

and weekly work hours by 2.2, while it insignicantly reduces time with children by 1.1

hours/week and investment time by 0.4 hours/week. Little of the reduction in investment

time comes from academic activities (-0.06 hours/week), about one-quarter from health in-

vestments (-0.10 hours/week), and half from other investments (-0.21 hours/week); although,

none of these eects are statistically signicant.

  Evidence from 2009 Federal Expansion, Parallel Pre-trends and Eects Over
Time: We end with a closer look at the 2009 federal EITC expansion, which increased
M axEIT C      by about $1,000 for families with 3 or more children.            Given the important

identifying variation induced by this expansion, we briey examine the evolution of time

allocation behavior for families with 3+ children vs. families with fewer children before and

  31 Notice that if the federal phase in rate is 40 percent and the state EITC matches 20 percent of the
federal EITC, then the total phase-in rate is 0.40(1+0.20)=0.48.   M axEIT C   and the phase-in rate are
highly correlated (see footnote 8).




                                                    23
after the policy change. Specically, we estimate the following specication to explore pre-

trends and the dynamics of impacts after the expansion:


                                              
 Yist =      1(t   )(1 · 3Kidsist · M arist + 2 · 3Kidsist · U nmarist ) + Xist 3 + st +   ist , (4)
          

where   3Kidsist   is an indicator equal to one if and only if the family has 3 or more children.

We divide our sample period into six smaller periods denoted by        ,   reecting years 2003

2005, 20062008, 2009, 20102012, 20132016, and 20172018, where we omit the indicator

for 2009 so that each estimate can be interpreted relative to the year of the federal expansion.

     Using our baseline set of controls, Figure 9 reports the estimated dierences in time

allocation between mothers with 3 or more children relative to those with 12 children for

                                             
each reported time period (i.e.    1   and   2 ).   Panels AD show eects on work hours, home

production + leisure hours, total time with children, and child investment time. Consistent

with our earlier results for unmarried mothers, we observe immediate jumps up for their

labor supply and down for their time devoted to home production + leisure and time spent

with children in 2009, with the eects lasting throughout the post-expansion period. We also

observe a modest and statistically insignicant drop in time devoted to investment activities.

Importantly, we see no evidence of trends prior to 2009 that foreshadow these jumps. Indeed,

formal F-tests cannot reject parallel pre-2009 trends for unmarried mothers with 3+ vs. fewer

children for all outcomes except time with children where the modest pre-trend moves in the

opposite direction to the jump in 2009. The time patterns for dierences between married

mothers with 3+ vs. fewer children show little trend or break in 2009 when the federal

expansion took place, conrming our main results suggesting insignicant impacts on the

time allocation of married mothers.




6.      Conclusions


     Using data from the 20032018 ATUS, we study the eects of the 2009 federal EITC

expansion and several state EITC expansions on maternal time allocation decisions.            Our

results provide strong evidence that recent expansions in the EITC increase maternal work

time, while reducing time allocated to home production and leisure activities. These impacts




                                                    24
are concentrated among unmarried and otherwise economically disadvantaged women, with

our results on labor supply conrming the prior literature that considered earlier expansions

of the EITC.

   Our most novel contribution lies in our detailed analysis of maternal time allocation at

home, focusing on time spent with children. We nd robust evidence that unmarried mothers

respond to increases in the EITC by scaling back time with their children, especially pre-

schoolers. Looking at the types of activities unmarried mothers engage in with their children,

we nd that they spend less time on housework, shopping, waiting, and relaxing when with

their children. As a whole, they do not devote less time to active learning and development

activities we classify as investment-related, like reading with their children, helping them

with their homework, playing sports or engaging in arts and crafts with them. Indeed, we

nd that unmarried mothers spend more time actively playing with their children in response

to EITC expansions, although these estimates are not statistically signicant. Altogether,

these results suggest that while expansions of the EITC draw single mothers into the labor

market and away from their children, the adverse developmental consequences of this are

likely to be quite limited, since reductions in time spent with children do not appear to be

very investment-oriented.

   Three additional results add nuance to this broad conclusion. First, we nd that time

devoted to health care activities declines in response to EITC expansions. We suspect that

these modest, though statistically signicant, reductions reect diminished need for medical

services due to health benets associated with higher incomes and/or greater health care ac-

cess (Hoynes et al., 2015; Braga et al., 2019; Averett and Wang, 2018). Second, our estimates

suggest that unmarried mothers who spend little time engaged in investment activities with

their children appear to scale back this time even more in response to EITC expansions. This

suggests that while the EITC may have negligible average eects on investment activities

with children, it may adversely impact children most in need of additional active learning

time with their mothers. Third, some of the activities we classify as non-investment may still

provide developmental benets for children through socialization and broader interactions

with others. Among such activities, we nd that unmarried mothers spend about 25 min-

utes less per week volunteering and attending social events/parties with their children for


                                             25
every $1,000 increase in maximum EITC benets. While these reductions may have lasting

impacts on children, previous studies establish that the developmental benets from greater

nancial resources appear to dominate (Dahl and Lochner, 2012, 2017; Chetty et al., 2011;

Bastian and Michelmore, 2018; Manoli and Turner, 2018; Agostinelli and Sorrenti, 2018).



References

F. Agostinelli and G. Sorrenti. Money vs. time: Family income, maternal labor supply, and child
   development. Technical report, 2018.
M. Aguiar and E. Hurst. Measuring trends in leisure: The allocation of time over ve decades. The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3):9691006, 2007.
S. Averett and Y. Wang. Eects of higher EITC payments on children's health, quality of home
   environment, and noncognitive skills. Public Finance Review, 46(4):519557, 2018.
J. Bastian. The Rise of Working Mothers and the 1975 Earned Income Tax Credit. American
   Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2020.
J. Bastian and M. R. Jones. Do EITC Expansions Pay for Themselves? Eects on Tax Revenue
   and Public Assistance Spending. Working Paper, 2019.
J. Bastian and K. Michelmore. The long-term impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on children's
   education and employment outcomes. Journal of Labor Economics, 36(4):11271163, 2018.
G. S. Becker. A theory of the allocation of time. The Economic Journal, 75(299):493517, 1965.
R. Bernal. The eect of maternal employment and child care on children's cognitive development.
   International Economic Review, 49(4):11731209, 2008.
S. M. Bianchi and J. Robinson. What did you do today? children's use of time, family composition,
   and the acquisition of social capital. Journal of Marriage and the Family, pages 332344, 1997.
B. Braga, F. Blavin, and A. Gangopadhyaya. The Long-Term Eects of Childhood Exposure to
   the Earned Income Tax Credit on Health Outcomes. 2019.
J. Brooks-Gunn, W.-J. Han, and J. Waldfogel. Maternal employment and child cognitive outcomes
   in the rst three years of life: The NICHD study of early child care. Child Development, 73(4):
   10521072, 2002.
W. K. Bryant and C. D. Zick. An examination of parent-child shared time. Journal of Marriage
   and the Family, pages 227237, 1996.
P. Carneiro, K. V. Løken, and K. G. Salvanes. A ying start? Maternity leave benets and long-run
   outcomes of children. Journal of Political Economy, 123(2):365412, 2015.
E. Caucutt, L. Lochner, J. Mullins, and Y. Park. Child skill production: Accounting for parental
   and market-based time and goods investments. Technical report, 2020.
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Policy Basics: The Earned Income Tax Credit. 2019.
R. Chetty, J. Friedman, and J. Rocko. New Evidence on the Long-Term Impacts of Tax Credits.
   IRS Statistics of Income White Paper, 2011.
D. Costa. From Mill Town to Board Room: The Rise of Women's Paid Labor. Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, 14(4):101122, 2000.
L. Craig. Does father care mean fathers share? A comparison of how mothers and fathers in intact
   families spend time with children. Gender & Society, 20(2):259281, 2006.
F. Cunha, J. J. Heckman, L. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov. Interpreting the evidence on life cycle
   skill formation. Handbook of the Economics of Education, 1:697812, 2006.
G. Dahl and L. Lochner. The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement: Evidence from the
   Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Review, 102(5):19271956, 2012.


                                               26
G. B. Dahl and L. Lochner. The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement: Evidence from
   the Earned Income Tax Credit: Reply. American Economic Review, 107(2):62931, 2017.
D. Del Boca, C. Flinn, and M. Wiswall. Household choices and child development. Review of
   Economic Studies, 81(1):137185, 2014.
N. Eissa and H. Hoynes. Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married Couples: The
   Earned Income Tax Credit. Journal of Public Economics, 88(9):19311958, 2004.
N. Eissa and H. Hoynes. The Hours of Work Response of Married Couples: Taxes and the Earned
   Income Tax Credit. Tax Policy and Labor Market Performance, pages 187228, 2006.
N. Eissa and J. Liebman. Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 111(2):605637, 1996.
W. Evans and C. Garthwaite. Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of Higher EITC Payments on
   Maternal Health. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2):258290, 2014.
D. Feenberg and E. Coutts. An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model. Journal of Policy Analysis
   and Management, 12(1):189194, 1993.
R. Fernández. Cultural change as learning: The evolution of female labor force participation over
   a century. American Economic Review, 103(1):472500, 2013.
M. Fiorini and M. P. Keane. How the allocation of children's time aects cognitive and noncognitive
   development. Journal of Labor Economics, 32(4):787836, 2014.
A. H. Gauthier, T. M. Smeeding, and F. F. Furstenberg Jr. Are parents investing less time in
   children? trends in selected industrialized countries. Population and Development Review, 30
   (4):647672, 2004.
A. M. Gelber and J. W. Mitchell. Taxes and time allocation: Evidence from single women and
   men. The Review of Economic Studies, 79(3):863897, 2012.
C. Goldin. The Quiet Revolution That Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and Family.
   American Economic Review, 96(2):121, 2006.
J. Grogger. The Eects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy Changes on Welfare Use,
   Work, and Income Among Female-Headed Families. Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(2):
   394408, 2003.
J. Guryan, E. Hurst, and M. Kearney. Parental education and parental time with children. Journal
   of Economic Perspectives, 22(3):2346, 2008.
J. J. Heckman and S. Mosso. The economics of human development and social mobility. Annual
   Review of Economics, 6(1):689733, 2014.
F. Heiland, J. Price, and R. Wilson. Maternal employment and time investments in children.
   Review of Economics of the Household, 15(1):5367, 2017.
S. Homan and L. Seidman. The Earned Income Tax Credit. Upjohn Press, 1990.
H. Hoynes and A. Patel. Eective policy for reducing poverty and inequality? The Earned Income
   Tax Credit and the distribution of income. Journal of Human Resources, 53(4):859890, 2018.
H. Hoynes, D. Miller, and D. Simon. Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Infant Health.
   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1):172211, 2015.
L. Jones and K. Michelmore. Timing is Money: Does Lump-Sum Payment of Tax Credits Induce
   High-Cost Borrowing? Working Paper, 2016.
A. Kalil. Inequality begins at home: The role of parenting in the diverging destinies of rich and
   poor children. In Families in an Era of Increasing Inequality, pages 6382. Springer, 2015.
A. Kalil, R. Ryan, and M. Corey. Diverging destinies: Maternal education and the developmental
   gradient in time with children. Demography, 49(4):13611383, 2012.
J. Kimmel and R. Connelly. Mothers' time choices caregiving, leisure, home production, and paid
   work. Journal of Human Resources, 42(3):643681, 2007.
H. Kleven. The EITC and the Extensive Margin: A Reappraisal. Working Paper, 2019.


                                               27
P. Kooreman and A. Kapteyn. A disaggregated analysis of the allocation of time within the
   household. Journal of Political Economy, 95(2):223249, 1987.
A. B. Krueger, D. Kahneman, D. Schkade, N. Schwarz, and A. A. Stone. National time accounting:
   The currency of life. In Measuring the subjective well-being of nations: National accounts of time
   use and well-being, chapter 1, pages 986. University of Chicago Press, 2009.
J.-S. Lee and N. K. Bowen. Parent involvement, cultural capital, and the achievement gap among
   elementary school children. American Educational Research Journal, 43(2):193218, 2006.
D. Manoli and N. Turner. Cash-on-Hand and College Enrollment: Evidence from Population Tax
   Data and the Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2018.
R. Mendenhall, K. Edin, S. Crowley, J. Sykes, L. Tach, K. Kriz, and J. R. Kling. The Role of EITC
   in the Budgets of Low-Income Households. Social Service Review, 86(3):367400, 2012.
B. Meyer and D. Rosenbaum. Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor Supply of
   Single Mothers. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3):10631114, 2001.
C. J. Ruhm. Parental employment and child cognitive development. Journal of Human Resources,
   39(1):155192, 2004.
L. C. Sayer, S. M. Bianchi, and J. P. Robinson. Are parents investing less in children? Trends in
   mothers' and fathers' time with children. American Journal of Sociology, 110(1):143, 2004.
D. W. Schanzenbach and M. R. Strain. Employment eects of the earned income tax credit: Taking
   the long view. In Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 35. University of Chicago Press, 2020.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. American Time Use Survey User's Guide, 2019. https://www.
   bls.gov/tus/atususersguide.pdf.




                                                 28
                                 Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                           All                  All          Unmarried          Married
                                      Women               Mothers             Mothers           Mothers


                                   Mean      S.D.       Mean      S.D.      Mean      S.D.   Mean       S.D.
                                    (1)          (2)     (3)          (4)    (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)

Children                            1.20     1.25        1.86     1.10       1.75     1.13    1.92      1.07
Age                                 33.8     9.26        35.1     8.72       31.1     9.69    37.4      7.18
Birth Year                        1976.5     10.5       1975.1    9.85      1979.3    10.7   1972.7     8.38
Married                             0.52     0.50        0.64     0.48        0        0        1        0
HS Graduate                         0.89     0.32        0.86     0.34       0.80     0.40    0.90      0.30
Some College                        0.63     0.48        0.58     0.49       0.47     0.50    0.65      0.48
College Graduate                    0.33     0.47        0.29     0.45       0.13     0.33    0.39      0.49
Black                               0.13     0.34        0.14     0.34       0.26     0.44    0.071     0.26
Hispanic                            0.17     0.38        0.20     0.40       0.22     0.42    0.19      0.39
Employed                            0.71     0.45        0.67     0.47       0.68     0.47    0.67      0.47
Individual Earnings (1,000s)        25.8     30.6        23.5     30.1       19.0     23.5    26.1      33.0
Household Income (1,000s)           65.8     48.2        66.1     48.6       46.0     41.2    77.5      48.7
Max Possible EITC (1,000s)          3.34     2.47        4.86     1.68       4.63     1.66    4.99      1.68
EITC Benet Eligibility (100s)       6.68     15.2        10.2     17.9       14.5     19.3    7.79      16.6
EITC Eligible                       0.24     0.43        0.34     0.47       0.50     0.50    0.25      0.43


Observations                           58,090              43,685                 15,677            28,008

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data.     Sample includes all women 1849 years old.             All dollars are real CPI-
adjusted 2018 dollars. EITC benets calculated using TAXSIM.




                                                   29
Table 2: Weekly Hours Spent on Dierent Activities, by Number of Children

                                      All          Mothers       Mothers       Mothers
                                Mothers            with 1        with 2        with 3+
                                                    Child       Children      Children


                              Mean S.D. Mean S.D. Mean S.D. Mean S.D.
Activity                        (1)         (2)   (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)    (7)    (8)
                          Panel A: Unmarried Mothers
Work (CPS)                     21.4     19.2      22.6   19.3   21.5   19.4   18.1   18.5
Home Production                39.7     22.5      36.4   21.2   41.4   22.4   45.7   24.3
  with Children                15.3     19.2      11.0   15.8   17.7   19.8   22.5   22.9
  Not with Children            24.4     18.1      25.4   18.3   23.6   17.6   23.2   18.3
Leisure                        34.7     23.7      36.1   23.9   33.8   23.1   32.4   23.7
  with Children                12.5     18.5      10.8   17.8   13.7   18.7   15.3   19.2
  Not with Children            22.2     23.0      25.3   23.7   20.1   22.0   17.1   21.0
Total Hours with Children 28.7          31.5      22.5   28.7   32.4   31.9   39.2   34.1
  Investment into Children      3.9         8.5   3.0    7.5    4.6    9.0    5.4    9.5


Observations                     15,677             7,838         4,975         2,864
                           Panel B: Married Mothers
Work (CPS)                     21.7     19.6      24.9   19.6   21.9   19.4   16.3   19.0
Home Production                50.4     23.5      45.3   22.3   51.1   23.1   56.9   24.5
  with Children                25.9     21.1      18.8   18.7   27.4   20.3   34.2   22.2
  Not with Children            24.4     18.0      26.4   19.2   23.7   17.2   22.7   17.3
Leisure                        32.7     21.1      33.6   21.8   32.2   20.7   32.0   20.3
  with Children                17.4     18.1      15.1   18.0   18.0   18.0   19.8   18.3
  Not with Children            15.3     16.7      18.6   18.9   14.3   15.3   12.2   14.5
Total Hours with Children 44.5          30.3      34.8   29.8   46.7   28.8   55.5   29.0
  Investment into Children      7.2     10.8      5.4    9.9    7.8    10.9   9.1    11.6


Observations                     28,008             9,174        12,169         6,665

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all mothers 1849 years old. All measures
based on ATUS time-diary data except work hours, which are based on hours worked last
week in CPS.




                                             30
                       Table 3: Testing the Exogeneity of State EITCs

                                         Max State EITC Benets                   State EITC Rates
                                                (1)                  (2)             (3)              (4)
State GDP Growth Rate                    -3.1    (5.4)        -3.9    (5.9)    -7.0 (8.8)      -8.3    (9.5)
Lag State GDP Growth Rate                -0.3    (2.6)        -1.0    (2.7)    -1.7 (4.3)      -3.1    (4.4)
State Unemp Rate                         0.6    (19.3)        0.6     (20.3)   -3.1 (30.9)     -0.7 (32.4)
Lag State Unemp Rate                     -7.7 (21.7)         -10.6 (22.7)      -5.3 (34.9)     -11.6 (36.4)
Log State GDP                            2.3     (4.1)        3.5     (4.4)    2.2    (6.6)     4.2    (7.1)
Lag Log State GDP                        -4.1    (4.7)        -5.3    (4.8)    -4.4 (7.5)      -5.9    (7.7)
State Min Wage                           -4.3 (14.6)          0.5     (14.5)   -2.2 (23.2)      5.0 (23.3)
Lag State Min Wage                       7.0    (17.4)        1.6     (17.5)   25.3 (27.7)     16.0 (28.2)
Max TANF with 1 Child                    -3.4    (2.2)        -3.7    (2.2)    -6.4 (3.7)      -6.8    (3.7)
Lag Max TANF with 1 Child                -1.8    (1.7)        -1.6    (1.7)    -2.3 (2.7)      -2.2    (2.7)
Max TANF with 2 Children                 37.3 (24.5)         40.6 (23.9)       64.1 (38.5)     68.0 (37.7)
Lag Max TANF with 2 Children             30.0 (19.7)         30.1 (19.6)       45.9 (29.9)     48.3 (30.1)
Max TANF with 3 Children                 -0.8    (0.9)        -0.9    (0.8)    -1.3 (1.3)      -1.4    (1.2)
Lag Max TANF with 3 Children             -1.2    (1.0)        -1.3    (1.0)    -1.9 (1.4)      -2.2    (1.5)
Avg Family Size                                               -4.6    (3.6)                    -7.4    (5.8)
Avg Number of Kids                                           13.1     (7.9)                    20.9 (13.0)
Avg Number of Kids Under 5                                   -16.4 (10.9)                      -20.6 (17.9)
Fraction Female                                              -28.2 (19.8)                      -42.6 (31.8)
Avg Age                                                      -22.7 (38.8)                      -5.9 (66.2)
Fraction Married                                              1.7     (10.6)                    1.8 (17.8)
Fraction White                                               -14.9 (12.3)                      -25.7 (20.2)
Avg Years Education                                           -4.7    (2.1)                    -7.3    (3.6)
Fraction Born Out of State                                    5.2     (10.6)                    9.7 (17.8)
Fraction Non-Citizen                                          -5.0 (21.2)                      -22.6 (36.1)


R-squared                                    0.951               0.951           0.953            0.953
Observations                                    763                 763           763              763
Mean Dep Var                                 434.2               434.2           727.2        727.2
Testing Joint Signicance P-Value             0.946               0.528           0.899            0.695

Notes: Observations at the state-by-year level.       Each regression controls for state FE, year FE, and
state time trends. All dollars are in real CPI-adjusted 2018 dollars. EITC data from NBER and IRS.
Unemployment rates from BLS. GDP from BEA regional data. Minimum wage from the Tax Policy
Center's Tax Facts. Welfare benets from the Urban Institute's Welfare Rules Database. Maximum
state EITC benets are for families with 3 or more children. State EITC rates in percentage points.
Annual state average demographic traits calculated by authors from ACS data using the sample of all
adults at least 18 years old. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                      31
            Table 4: Labor Supply, Earnings, and EITC Benets

                           LFP      Weekly       EITC       Any     Earnings Earnings
                                    Work         Benets EITC                  and EITC
                                    Hours
                            (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)      (5)        (6)
         Panel A: Average Eects (Sample of All Women, N=58,090)
MaxEITC                    0.022     1.18         266.6     0.002    1955.9    2222.5
                          (0.007)   (0.36)       (61.2)    (0.011) (555.8)     (564.9)


R-squared                  0.129    0.184         0.346     0.338    0.253      0.244
Mean Dep Var               0.78      23.2         668.0     0.24    25782.9    26450.8
  Panel B: Eects by Marital Status (Sample of All Women, N=58,090)
MaxEITC      ×             0.010     0.73         206.6    -0.014    1536.7    1743.4
  Married                 (0.008)   (0.36)       (59.1)    (0.011) (549.5)     (556.2)
MaxEITC      ×             0.034     1.59         322.9     0.016    2350.1    2673.0
  Unmarried               (0.007)   (0.37)       (54.7)    (0.009) (578.9)     (584.1)


Equal Eects (p-val.) 0.000          0.000         0.000     0.000    0.000      0.000
R-squared                  0.132    0.187         0.353     0.344    0.254      0.245
Mean Dep Var               0.78      23.2         668.0     0.24    25782.9    26450.8
    Panel C: Eects by Marital Status (Sample of Mothers, N=43,685)
MaxEITC      ×             0.012     0.56         329.0     0.004    1656.1    1985.1
  Married                 (0.011)   (0.57)       (68.8)    (0.013) (603.3)     (564.8)
MaxEITC      ×             0.041     1.59         451.6     0.018    2378.3    2829.9
  Unmarried               (0.011)   (0.50)       (63.3)    (0.013) (577.8)     (556.5)


Equal Eects (p-val.) 0.000          0.000         0.000     0.001    0.004      0.001
R-squared                  0.127    0.162         0.306     0.313    0.231      0.219
Mean Dep Var               0.74      21.6        1021.9     0.34    23514.9    24536.9

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all women 1849 years old. Outcomes
are based on CPS data. All specications include the baseline set of controls: demo-
graphic characteristics (number of kids indicators; indicator for any kids under age 6;
four education indicators for schooling less than 12, 12, 1315, or at least 16 years;
married indicator; black indicator; hispanic indicator; age; age-squared; age-cubed; and
birth year); an indicator for being surveyed on a weekend; education indicators inter-
acted with state FE, year FE, and number of kids indicators; married indicator inter-
acted with state FE and year FE; and state FE        ×    year FE. Equal Eects reports
p-values for F-tests of equality for both coecients on MaxEITC interactions with mar-
ital status. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state
level.




                                            32
       Table 5: Decomposing All 168 Weekly Hours of Time Use

                           Work       Home       Leisure School Sleep Uncat.
                                    Production
                             (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)     (5)      (6)
                 Panel A: Sample of All Women (N=58,090)
MaxEITC      ×              1.34      -0.43       -0.92     -0.17   0.05     0.13
  Married                  (0.48)     (0.51)      (0.37)   (0.32) (0.27) (0.08)
MaxEITC      ×              1.96      -0.91       -1.16     -0.25   0.26     0.10
  Unmarried                (0.50)     (0.50)      (0.37)   (0.30) (0.31) (0.08)


Equal Eects (p-val.) 0.001            0.000       0.091    0.326    0.020   0.278
R-squared                   0.208     0.195       0.136    0.162    0.123   0.048
Mean Dep Var                26.1       41.7        34.2      3.1    61.4      1.4
                  Panel B: Sample of Mothers (N=43,685)
MaxEITC      ×              1.02       0.03       -1.01     -0.43   0.32     0.08
  Married                  (0.80)     (0.77)      (0.49)   (0.19) (0.40) (0.09)
MaxEITC      ×              1.53      -0.54       -1.26     -0.38   0.56     0.08
  Unmarried                (0.69)     (0.64)      (0.50)   (0.24) (0.51) (0.10)


Equal Eects (p-val.) 0.198            0.010       0.227    0.608    0.157   0.864
R-squared                   0.186     0.151       0.137    0.166    0.136   0.050
Mean Dep Var                23.5       46.5        33.4      2.2    60.9      1.5

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all women 1849 years old. The six
time allocation categories are mutually exclusive and add to 168 weekly hours. All
specications include the baseline set of controls (see text or Table 4 notes). Equal
Eects reports p-values for F-tests of equality for both coecients on MaxEITC
interactions with marital status. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity
and clustered at the state level.




                                        33
Table 6: Decomposing Home Production and Leisure into Time
with and without Children (Mothers)

                           Home Production                  Leisure
                            With        Without         With      Without
                          Children      Children      Children    Children
                              (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)
MaxEITC        ×             0.07          -0.05        -0.70       -0.31
  Married                   (0.55)         (0.55)      (0.40)      (0.53)
MaxEITC        ×             -1.04         0.50         -1.02       -0.24
  Unmarried                 (0.46)         (0.49)      (0.36)      (0.53)


Equal Eects (p-val.)        0.000          0.000        0.023       0.730
R-squared                   0.310          0.128        0.201       0.200
Mean Dep Var                 22.0          24.4         15.6        17.8

Notes:   20032018 ATUS data.        Sample includes all mothers 1849 years
old (N=43,685).    Home production and leisure decompose the outcomes in
Table 5 Panel B columns 2 and 3. All specications include the baseline set
of controls (see text or Table 4 notes). Equal Eects reports p-values for
F-tests of equality for both coecients on MaxEITC interactions with marital
status. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the
state level.




                                      34
          Table 7: Investment and Non-Investment Time with Children (Mothers)

                                         Non-Investment Time                 Investment Time
                               Total     Total Home       Leisure   Total Academic Health Other
                               Time               Prod
                                (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)
                                 Panel A: Eects by Marital Status
MaxEITC       ×                -0.48     -0.74    -0.10    -0.79     0.27      0.20       -0.12    0.19
  Married                      (0.78)    (0.64) (0.50)    (0.30)    (0.24)    (0.11)     (0.05)   (0.22)
MaxEITC       ×                -1.95     -1.90    -0.95    -1.06     -0.05     0.02       -0.15    0.08
  Unmarried                    (0.67)    (0.58) (0.43)    (0.31)    (0.20)    (0.09)     (0.05)   (0.20)


Equal Eects (p-val.)           0.000     0.000    0.000   0.028     0.000      0.000      0.023    0.078
R-squared                      0.365     0.323    0.306   0.152     0.157      0.088      0.035    0.143
                            Panel B: Eects by Marital Status and Race
MaxEITC       ×   Married      -0.43     -0.72    -0.10    -0.77     0.29      0.19       -0.12    0.21
  ×   White                    (0.78)    (0.63) (0.50)    (0.30)    (0.24)    (0.11)     (0.05)   (0.22)
MaxEITC       ×   Married      -0.83     -0.88    -0.09    -0.90     0.05      0.25       -0.14    -0.05
  ×   Nonwhite                 (0.83)    (0.69) (0.52)    (0.31)    (0.25)    (0.12)     (0.05)   (0.23)
MaxEITC       ×   Unmarried    -2.07     -2.03    -1.00    -1.13     -0.04     0.00       -0.15    0.11
  ×   White                    (0.69)    (0.59) (0.45)    (0.31)    (0.20)    (0.09)     (0.05)   (0.20)
MaxEITC       ×   Unmarried    -1.76     -1.65    -0.84    -0.91     -0.10     0.07       -0.16    -0.01
  ×   Nonwhite                 (0.67)    (0.58) (0.41)    (0.31)    (0.21)    (0.09)     (0.05)   (0.21)


R-squared                      0.365     0.323    0.306   0.153     0.158      0.088      0.035    0.144
                       Panel C: Eects by Marital Status and Education
MaxEITC       ×   Married       0.08     -0.28    0.05     -0.61     0.36      0.23       -0.08    0.21
  ×   >12 Yrs Educ             (0.77)    (0.74) (0.58)    (0.37)    (0.26)    (0.11)     (0.06)   (0.22)
MaxEITC       ×   Married      -1.15     -1.32    -0.30    -1.02     0.16      0.16       -0.17    0.17
  × 12     Yrs Educ            (1.16)    (0.95) (0.63)    (0.56)    (0.31)    (0.15)     (0.07)   (0.33)
MaxEITC       ×   Unmarried    -1.46     -1.42    -0.78    -0.85     -0.04     0.04       -0.11    0.03
 ×    >12 Yrs Educ             (0.72)    (0.74) (0.51)    (0.39)    (0.23)    (0.09)     (0.06)   (0.21)
MaxEITC       ×   Unmarried    -2.57     -2.48    -1.15    -1.30     -0.09     -0.01      -0.21    0.13
  × 12     Yrs Educ            (1.02)    (0.89) (0.63)    (0.54)    (0.26)    (0.13)     (0.07)   (0.30)


R-squared                      0.365     0.323    0.306   0.152     0.157      0.088      0.035    0.143
Mean Dep Var                    38.7      32.7    19.9     11.7       6.0       1.2        0.2      4.6

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all 1849 year-old mothers (N=43,685). All specications
include the baseline set of controls (see text or Table 4 notes). Equal Eects reports p-values for F-tests
of equality for both coecients on MaxEITC interactions with marital status. Standard errors are robust
to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                                    35
       Table 8: Decomposing Other Investment Time with Children (Table 7 Column 8)

                                                Arts                   Talk     Organize Look          Attend
                                     Play       and      Sports        and        and         After    Events
                                               Crafts                 Listen      Plan        Kids
                                        (1)      (2)      (3)          (4)            (5)      (6)       (7)
       MaxEITC      ×                  0.06     0.00      -0.01       -0.06       0.02        0.16      0.02
         Married                    (0.14) (0.02)        (0.07)       (0.05)     (0.02)      (0.10)     (0.09)
       MaxEITC      ×                  0.15     0.01      -0.03       -0.08       0.01        0.10      -0.08
         Unmarried                  (0.14) (0.02)        (0.06)       (0.05)     (0.02)      (0.11)     (0.07)


       Equal Eects (p-val.)         0.008       0.443    0.282        0.113      0.174        0.029     0.002
       R-squared                    0.156       0.040    0.040        0.063      0.032        0.053     0.048
       Mean Dep Var                    2.28     0.08      0.56         0.41       0.08        0.60      0.63

       Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all 1849 year-old mothers (N=43,685). All
       specications include the baseline set of controls (see text or Table 4 notes). Equal Eects
       reports p-values for F-tests of equality for both coecients on MaxEITC interactions with
       marital status.   Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state
       level.




Table 9: Decomposing Non-investment Home Production Time with Children (from Table 7
Column 3)

                              Personal        Housework Waiting, Caring for                 Civic     Eating     Errands,
                                Care                      Shopping            Others                              Travel
                                 (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)       (6)         (7)
MaxEITC         ×               -0.04           -0.16         -0.02            0.01         -0.02      0.13       -0.01
  Married                      (0.05)           (0.31)        (0.36)          (0.06)        (0.01)    (0.12)      (0.10)
MaxEITC         ×               -0.08           -0.59         -0.11            -0.02        -0.02      0.02       -0.15
  Unmarried                    (0.05)           (0.29)        (0.34)          (0.04)        (0.01)    (0.12)      (0.09)


Equal Eects (p-val.)            0.238           0.000         0.064            0.373        0.815     0.028       0.002
R-squared                       0.044           0.139         0.265            0.033        0.044     0.199       0.092
Mean Dep Var                     0.24            6.09         6.48             0.12         0.01       4.09        2.85

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data.        Sample includes all 1849 year-old mothers (N=43,685).                  All specications
include the baseline set of controls (see text or Table 4 notes).        Equal Eects reports p-values for F-tests
of equality for both coecients on MaxEITC interactions with marital status. Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                                         36
     Table 10: Decomposing Non-investment Leisure with Kids (from Table 7 Column 4)

                           Helping     Educ Socializing Waiting Religious Volunteer Phone Travel
                           Non-HH                             and
                          Members                           Relaxing
                              (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)     (8)
MaxEITC      ×               -0.04      0.00      -0.20      -0.44       -0.07      -0.10     0.05    0.01
  Married                   (0.06)     (0.01)    (0.14)      (0.26)     (0.06)     (0.07)    (0.03)   (0.05)
MaxEITC      ×               -0.04     -0.00      -0.22      -0.51       -0.11      -0.18     0.03    -0.03
  Unmarried                 (0.06)     (0.01)    (0.13)      (0.27)     (0.06)     (0.08)    (0.02)   (0.05)


Equal Eects (p-val.)         0.994     0.810      0.755      0.397       0.044      0.002    0.092    0.008
R-squared                    0.057     0.040      0.076      0.105       0.070      0.032    0.056    0.071
Mean Dep Var                 0.18       0.02      2.66        7.09       0.52       0.33      0.14    0.78

Notes:   20032018 ATUS data.        Sample includes all 1849 year-old mothers (N=43,685).    All specications
include the baseline set of controls (see text or Table 4 notes).    Equal Eects reports p-values for F-tests
of equality for both coecients on MaxEITC interactions with marital status. Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                                       37
               Table 11: Time-Use Eects: Weekends vs Weekdays

                                   Work            Home           With Children
                                                 Production     Total    Investment
                                                 + Leisure      Time         Time
                                    (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)
           Panel A: Full Sample, Includes Weekends and Weekdays
MaxEITC        ×                    1.02           -0.98        -0.48        0.27
  Married                          (0.80)          (0.95)      (0.78)       (0.24)
MaxEITC        ×                    1.53           -1.80        -1.95        -0.05
  Unmarried                        (0.69)          (0.84)      (0.67)       (0.20)


R-squared                          0.186           0.156        0.365        0.157
Observations                      43,685           43,685      43,685       43,685
Mean Dep Var (per week)             23.5            79.9        38.7          6.0
         Panel B: Restricting Sample to Weekdays (MondayFriday)
MaxEITC        ×                    0.81           -1.13        -0.90        0.11
  Married                          (0.91)          (1.01)      (0.66)       (0.21)
MaxEITC        ×                    1.40           -1.98        -2.28        -0.21
  Unmarried                        (0.79)          (0.92)      (0.63)       (0.19)


R-squared                          0.145           0.141        0.377        0.190
Observations                      21,608           21,608      21,608       21,608
Mean Dep Var (per 5 days)           21.1            53.9        25.1          4.2
       Panel C: Restricting Sample to Weekends (SaturdaySunday)
MaxEITC        ×                    0.18            0.28        0.34         0.20
  Married                          (0.23)          (0.25)      (0.32)       (0.10)
MaxEITC        ×                    0.16            0.28        0.19         0.17
  Unmarried                        (0.24)          (0.24)      (0.29)       (0.09)


R-squared                          0.086           0.132        0.355        0.161
Observations                      22,077           22,077      22,077       22,077
Mean Dep Var (per 2 days)           2.4             26.0        13.6          1.8

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Hours are reported such that Panel A reports impacts on
total hours over the full week, Panel B reports impacts on total hours over 5 weekdays,
and Panel C reports impacts on total hours over 2 weekend days. Sample includes all
women 1849 years old. All specications include the baseline set of controls (see text
or Table 4 notes). Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the
state level.




                                            38
  Table 12: Estimates Robust to Various Sets of Controls (Mothers)

                    (1)     (2)       (3)                 (4)       (5)       (6)
          Panel A: Labor Force Participation            (Mean =   0.74)
MaxEITC ×         -0.008   0.012     0.013               0.029     0.008     0.025
 Married         (0.012) (0.011) (0.012)                (0.018)   (0.011)   (0.018)
MaxEITC ×          0.022   0.041     0.044               0.060     0.039     0.055
 Unmarried       (0.010) (0.011) (0.011)                (0.016)   (0.010)   (0.015)
R-squared              0.101   0.127         0.151   0.151    0.152         0.152
                 Panel B: Weekly Work       Hours (Mean = 21.6)
MaxEITC ×              -0.24    0.56          0.57    0.98     0.41          0.77
 Married              (0.44)   (0.57)        (0.60)  (0.80)   (0.64)        (0.92)
MaxEITC ×               0.82    1.59          1.59    2.00     1.42          1.79
 Unmarried            (0.38)   (0.50)        (0.53)  (0.71)   (0.58)        (0.84)
R-squared           0.138  0.162    0.182    0.182    0.184   0.184
    Panel C: Weekly Home Production + Leisure Hours (Mean = 79.9)
MaxEITC ×            -0.21  -0.98    -1.09    -1.19   -0.67   -0.44
 Married            (0.91) (0.95)   (0.92)   (1.22)  (1.13)  (1.62)
MaxEITC ×            -1.10  -1.80    -1.84    -1.95   -1.42   -1.19
 Unmarried          (0.80) (0.84)   (0.79)   (1.07)  (1.00)  (1.45)
R-squared          0.130   0.156   0.180    0.180   0.181                   0.181
         Panel D: Weekly Hours With Children (Mean = 38.7)
MaxEITC ×           0.09    -0.48   -0.46    0.55     0.06                   1.62
 Married          (0.66)   (0.78)  (0.77)   (0.98)  (0.76)                  (0.99)
MaxEITC ×          -1.41    -1.95   -1.85    -0.83   -1.34                   0.23
 Unmarried        (0.57)   (0.67)  (0.66)   (0.91)  (0.66)                  (0.94)
R-squared            0.350   0.365   0.379    0.379   0.380   0.381
         Panel E: Investment Hours With Children (Mean = 6.0)
MaxEITC ×             0.29    0.27     0.25     0.20   0.24    0.17
 Married            (0.22)   (0.24)  (0.27)   (0.39)  (0.27)  (0.42)
MaxEITC ×            -0.02    -0.05   -0.07    -0.13   -0.08   -0.15
 Unmarried          (0.20)   (0.20)  (0.23)   (0.34)  (0.23)  (0.37)
R-squared               0.138      0.157        0.173   0.173     0.175     0.175
Controls:
State FE, Year FE  X       X                     X        X         X         X
State FE×Year FE           X                     X        X         X         X
State FE×Year FE×Unmarried                       X        X         X         X
Year FE×(3+ Kids)                                         X                   X
State FE×(3+ Kids)                                                  X         X
Notes:   20032018 ATUS data.         Sample includes all mothers 1849 years old
(N=43,685). LFP and weekly work hours from CPS survey data; home production
and leisure hours, hours with children, and investment with children from ATUS
time-diary data. All specications control for demographic characteristics (see text
or Table 4 notes); an indicator for being surveyed on a weekend; education indica-
tors interacted with state FE, year FE, and number of kids indicators; and married
indicator interacted with state FE and year FE. Standard errors are robust to het-
eroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.


                                           39
                              Fig. 1. Federal EITC Structure, 2018


Source: Authors' calculations from IRS data.




                      Fig. 2. Maximum Possible Federal EITC Over Time


Source: Authors' calculations from IRS data.




                                               40
            Fig. 3. State EITC Rates (as a Fraction of Federal Benets) Over Time


Notes:   Authors' calculations from NBER data.   https://users.nber.org/~taxsim/state-eitc.html.
Although CA has a high match rate, it only matches up to half of the maximum federal EITC benet, so in
our regressions we divide the CA state EITC rate by two.




                                                  41
          Fig. 4. CDFs for   M axEIT C   by Number of Children and Pre/Post-2009


Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all women 1849 years old.




                                               42
      Fig. 5. Investment and Non-Investment Time with Children by Children's Age


Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all mothers 1849 years old.




                                                43
  Fig. 6. Eect of the EITC on Time-Use among Unmarried Mothers: Prob(Hours                            > X)

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all mothers 1849 years old. Weekly work hours in Panel
A are from CPS survey data; outcomes in Panels BD are from ATUS time diary data (scaled to weekly
hours). Each estimate comes from a separate regression using equation (1) where the dependent variable is
an indicator for hours   >X   and the baseline set of controls is included (see text or Table 4 notes). Standard
errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                                       44
        Fig. 7. EITC Eect on LFP and Time Spent with Children, by Mother's Age


Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all mothers 1849 years old. Each estimate comes from a
single regression resembling equation (1), except MaxEITC     ×   Unmarried and MaxEITC       ×   Married are
interacted with six binary age categories of the mother. Baseline set of controls used in each regression (see
text or Table 4 notes). Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                                     45
            Fig. 8. Eects of the EITC on Time with Children, by Age of Children


Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all mothers 1849 years old. Estimates from equation (3).
These specications use our baseline set of controls (see text or Table 4 notes), replacing the indicator for any
child under age 6 with the number of children in age group   a.   Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity
and clustered at the state level.




                                                      46
           Fig. 9. Pre-trends and Eects Over Time: Evidence from 2009 Expansion


Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all mothers 1849 years old. Estimates reect dierences in
time allocation between mothers with 3+ children relative to fewer than 3 children by marital status and
are based on equation (4), which pools 20032005, 20062008, 2009, 20102012, 20132016, and 20172018
(2009 is the omitted period). Baseline set of controls used in each regression (see text or Table 4 notes).
F-tests for parallel pre-2009 trends (i.e. 20032005 and 2006-2008 eects both equal 0) in Panels AD yield
p-values for unmarried mothers of 0.77, 0.60, 0.06, and 0.76, respectively; corresponding p-values for married
mothers are 0.18, 0.01, 0.70, and 0.48. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the
state level.




                                                     47
                                Online Appendix




           The EITC and Maternal Time Use:
     More Time Working and Less Time with
                                                           1
                                            Kids?

                   Jacob Bastian and Lance Lochner




  1 Jacob Bastian, Rutgers University, Department of Economics. Address: New Jersey Hall, 75 Hamilton
Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248. Email: jacob.bastian@rutgers.edu. Phone: (848) 932-8652. Lance
Lochner, University of Western Ontario, llochner@uwo.ca.



                                                   1
Appendix A: Additional Tables and Figures




          Table A.1: Summary Statistics for State-Year Factors (ATUS Sample)

                                             All                All         Unmarried      Married
                                        Women             Mothers            Mothers       Mothers


                                     Mean      S.D.      Mean     S.D.      Mean   S.D.   Mean   S.D.
                                      (1)          (2)   (3)          (4)   (5)    (6)    (7)    (8)

 State GDP Growth Rate                4.03     2.82      4.04     2.86      3.99   2.78   4.07   2.91
 State GDP (Billions)                 13.2     0.96      13.2     0.96      13.2   0.95   13.2   0.97
 State Minimum Wage                   8.05     1.12      8.04     1.12      8.04   1.11   8.04   1.12
 State Unemployment Rate              6.21     2.10      6.22     2.10      6.29   2.11   6.19   2.09
 Max TANF with 1 Kid (100s)           4.10     1.66      4.09     1.67      4.01   1.66   4.13   1.67
 Max TANF with 2 Kids (100s)          5.06     2.06      5.04     2.07      4.95   2.08   5.09   2.07
 Max TANF with 3 Kids (100s)          5.97     2.44      5.95     2.45      5.85   2.46   6.00   2.44


 Observations                            58,090            43,685             15,677        28,008

 Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all women 1849 years old. All dollars are real CPI-
 adjusted 2018 dollars.   EITC data from NBER and IRS. EITC benets calculated using TAXSIM.
 Unemployment rates from BLS. GDP from BEA regional data. Minimum wage from the Tax Policy
 Center's Tax Facts. Welfare benets from the Urban Institute's Welfare Rules Database.




                                                     2
Table A.2: Labor Supply, Earnings, and EITC Benets: by Race, Education
(Mothers)

                                  LFP     Weekly       EITC    Any      Earnings Earnings
                                          Work Benets EITC                        and EITC
                                          Hours
                                   (1)      (2)         (3)     (4)       (5)        (6)
                    Panel A: Eects by Marital Status and Race
MaxEITC       ×                  0.012     0.54        326.9   0.004     1639.6    1966.5
  White   ×   Married           (0.011) (0.43)         (35.3) (0.009) (543.8)      (536.2)
MaxEITC  ×                       -0.008    -0.03       261.3   0.010     543.2      804.5
 Nonwhite × Married             (0.011) (0.55)         (65.5) (0.013) (587.8)      (564.7)
MaxEITC ×                        0.045     1.74        432.3   0.013     2593.0    3025.3
 White × Unmarried              (0.011) (0.50)         (64.7) (0.013) (562.8)      (538.7)
MaxEITC ×                        0.033     1.32        494.1   0.030     1952.1    2446.2
 Nonwhite × Unmarried           (0.011) (0.51)         (62.3) (0.013) (611.5)      (594.7)


Equal Eects (p-val.)             0.000    0.000        0.000   0.000     0.000      0.000
                                 0.127    0.163        0.308   0.315     0.232      0.219
                  Panel B: Eects by Marital Status and Education
MaxEITC       ×   Married        0.011     0.38        172.1   -0.009    2380.4    2552.5
  ×   >12 Yrs Educ              (0.012) (0.55)         (63.3) (0.012) (785.5)      (770.2)
MaxEITC       ×   Married        0.014     0.79        514.3   0.018     785.4     1299.7
  × 12     Yrs Educ             (0.020) (0.81)         (92.3) (0.024) (676.6)      (650.2)
MaxEITC       ×   Unmarried      0.035     1.41        336.6   0.015     2975.0    3311.6
  ×   >12 Yrs Educ              (0.014) (0.51)         (61.6) (0.011) (789.3)      (781.6)
MaxEITC       ×   Unmarried      0.047     1.81        602.2   0.025     1617.2    2219.4
  × 12     Yrs Educ             (0.018) (0.73)         (86.2) (0.023) (622.5)      (613.4)


Equal Eects (p-val.)             0.000    0.000        0.000   0.000     0.012      0.006
R-squared                        0.127    0.162        0.309   0.315     0.231      0.219
Mean Dep Var                      0.74     21.6    1021.9      0.34     23514.9    24536.9

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all mothers 1849 years old (N=43,685).
Outcomes are based on CPS data.       All specications include the baseline set of controls
(see text or Table 4 notes). Equal Eects reports p-values for F-tests of equality for both
coecients on MaxEITC interactions with marital status.         Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                              3
   Table A.3: Decomposing All Time-Use for Mothers (168 Weekly Hours)

                                Work        Home        Leisure School Sleep Uncat.
                                         Production
                                  (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)     (5)     (6)
                    Panel A: Eects by Marital Status and Race
MaxEITC       ×                  0.98        0.01        -0.94       -0.43   0.30     0.08
  White   ×   Married           (0.81)      (0.76)       (0.48)      (0.19) (0.41)   (0.09)
MaxEITC       ×                  1.28        0.21        -1.61       -0.45   0.49     0.07
  Nonwhite     ×   Married      (0.79)      (0.75)       (0.49)      (0.20) (0.42)   (0.09)
MaxEITC       ×                  1.75        -0.72       -1.26       -0.38   0.53     0.09
  White   ×   Unmarried         (0.69)      (0.63)       (0.49)      (0.25) (0.52)   (0.10)
MaxEITC   ×                      1.13        -0.15       -1.34       -0.37   0.65     0.08
  Nonwhite ×       Unmarried (0.72)         (0.65)       (0.51)      (0.26) (0.54)   (0.10)


R-squared                       0.187        0.152       0.139       0.166   0.136   0.050
                  Panel B: Eects by Marital Status and Education
MaxEITC       ×   Married        0.24        -0.05       -0.84       0.06    0.46     0.14
  ×   >12 Yrs Educ              (0.91)      (0.67)       (0.58)      (0.21) (0.45)   (0.12)
MaxEITC       ×   Married        2.03        0.07        -1.19       -1.08   0.17     0.00
  × 12     Yrs Educ             (1.39)      (1.18)       (1.00)      (0.38) (0.48)   (0.13)
MaxEITC       ×   Unmarried      0.57        -0.38       -1.19       0.27    0.61     0.13
  ×   >12 Yrs Educ              (1.00)      (0.55)       (0.63)      (0.29) (0.54)   (0.10)
MaxEITC       ×   Unmarried      2.68        -0.69       -1.36       -1.14   0.48     0.03
  × 12     Yrs Educ             (1.21)      (1.11)       (0.97)      (0.39) (0.58)   (0.15)


R-squared                       0.186        0.152       0.137       0.168   0.136   0.050
Mean Dep Var                     23.5        46.5         33.4       2.18    60.9     1.49

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all mothers 1849 years old (N=43,685).
The six time allocation categories are mutually exclusive and add to 168 weekly hours. All
specications include the baseline set of controls (see text or Table 4 notes). Standard errors
are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                              4
         Table A.4: Impacts of the EITC, by Age of Youngest Child

                                LFP       Work       Home           Time     Investment
                                         Hours Production with Kids            in Kids
                                                  and Leisure
                                 (1)       (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)
        Panel A: Eects by Whether Youngest Child is Under Age 6
MaxEITC       ×   Married       0.005     0.37        -0.81         -1.19        0.10
  ×   Child <6                 (0.012) (0.59)        (0.94)        (0.84)       (0.25)
MaxEITC  × Married              0.026     0.90        -1.21         0.85         0.50
  ×      6
      Child                    (0.012) (0.57)        (0.98)        (0.72)       (0.22)
MaxEITC × Unmarried             0.041     1.54        -1.55         -1.98        -0.22
 × Child <6                    (0.011) (0.53)        (0.84)        (0.73)       (0.21)
MaxEITC × Unmarried             0.044     1.70        -2.04         -1.68        0.13
 × Child 6                     (0.011) (0.49)        (0.86)        (0.64)       (0.20)


R-squared                       0.130     0.163      0.156          0.370       0.158
        Panel B: Eects by Whether Youngest Child is Under Age 13
MaxEITC       ×   Married       0.013     0.59        -0.98         -0.53        0.23
  ×   Child <13                (0.011) (0.57)        (0.93)        (0.76)       (0.23)
MaxEITC  × Married              0.033     1.25        -1.80         0.09         0.10
  ×      13
      Child                    (0.011) (0.60)        (0.99)        (0.75)       (0.22)
MaxEITC × Unmarried             0.041     1.59        -1.65         -1.57        -0.02
 × Child <13                   (0.011) (0.50)        (0.82)        (0.66)       (0.19)
MaxEITC × Unmarried             0.046     1.74        -2.56         -2.89        -0.12
 × Child 13                    (0.012) (0.51)        (0.89)        (0.74)       (0.19)


R-squared                       0.128     0.163      0.157          0.404       0.169

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all 1849 year-old mothers (N=43,685).
All specications include the baseline set of controls (see text or Table 4 notes). Standard
errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                            5
  Table A.5: Estimates Robust to Various Sets of Controls (All Women)

                          (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)
              Panel A: Labor Force Participation (Mean = 0.78)
MaxEITC      ×           0.006    0.010     0.018      0.018    0.036    0.014    0.032
  Married              (0.009) (0.008) (0.011) (0.011) (0.016) (0.011) (0.017)
MaxEITC      ×           0.029    0.034     0.040      0.041    0.059    0.037    0.055
  Unmarried            (0.008) (0.007) (0.010) (0.011) (0.016) (0.010) (0.016)


R-squared                0.112    0.132     0.152      0.170    0.170    0.171    0.171
                 Panel B: Weekly Work Hours (Mean = 23.2)
MaxEITC      ×           0.31      0.73     0.73       0.75     1.19     0.61     1.03
  Married               (0.35)    (0.36)   (0.51)      (0.54)   (0.71)   (0.59)   (0.84)
MaxEITC      ×           1.18      1.59     1.51       1.54     1.99     1.40     1.82
  Unmarried             (0.36)    (0.37)   (0.49)      (0.52)   (0.70)   (0.58)   (0.83)


R-squared                0.168    0.187     0.207      0.223    0.223    0.224    0.224
        Panel C: Weekly Home Production + Leisure (Mean = 75.9)
MaxEITC      ×           -0.84    -1.35     -1.12      -1.28    -1.44    -0.89    -0.76
  Married               (0.60)    (0.58)   (0.87)      (0.86)   (1.17)   (1.07)   (1.58)
MaxEITC      ×           -1.62    -2.07     -1.82      -1.95    -2.11    -1.56    -1.43
  Unmarried             (0.59)    (0.54)   (0.89)      (0.88)   (1.19)   (1.09)   (1.59)


R-squared                0.166    0.188     0.212      0.230    0.230    0.231    0.231
Controls:
State FE, Year FE          X        X           X        X        X        X        X
State FE×Year FE                    X           X        X        X        X        X
State FE×Year FE×Any Kids                       X        X        X        X        X
State FE×Year FE×Unmarried                               X        X        X        X
Year FE   ×(3+ Kids)                                              X                 X
State   FE×(3+ Kids)                                                       X        X

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all women 1849 years old (N=58,090).
LFP and weekly work hours from CPS survey data, home production and leisure hours
from ATUS time-diary data. All specications control for demographic characteristics
(see text or Table 4 notes); an indicator for being surveyed on a weekend; education
indicators interacted with state FE, year FE, and number of kids indicators; and mar-
ried indicator interacted with state FE and year FE. Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                            6
         Table A.6: Outcomes Robust to EITC Denition: Phase-in Rates

                                LFP     Work Home Prod.           Time with     Investing
                                       Hours        and Leisure   Children     in Children
                                                      Hours         Hours         Hours
                                 (1)     (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)
                    Panel A: Sample of All Women (N=58,090)
EITC Phase-In Rate             0.011     0.90          -1.98
  ×   Married                 (0.011) (0.52)          (0.94)
EITC Phase-In Rate             0.044     2.12          -2.92
  ×   Unmarried               (0.009) (0.52)          (0.89)


R-squared                      0.132    0.187          0.188
                    Panel B: Sample of All Mothers (N=43,685)
EITC Phase-In Rate             0.014     0.59          -1.54        -0.94          0.42
  ×   Married                 (0.019) (0.93)          (1.78)        (1.28)        (0.33)
EITC Phase-In Rate             0.064     2.45          -2.59        -3.69          -0.17
  ×   Unmarried               (0.017) (0.83)          (1.64)        (1.08)        (0.28)


R-squared                      0.126    0.162          0.156        0.365          0.157

Notes:    20032018 ATUS data.      Sample includes all women or all mothers 1849 years
old. Phase-in rates are in 10 percentage points and reect the combined federal plus state-
specic rates.   All specications include the baseline set of controls (see text or Table 4
notes). Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                                7
             Table A.7: Robust to Various Measuring of Labor Supply

                                ATUS Time-Use Data                         CPS Data
                          Time-Use      >0           20      40   Usual Working        LFP
                            Work       Work     Work      Work    Hours               Non-
                            Hours     Hours Hours Hours                              Self-Emp
                              (1)       (2)        (3)     (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)
      Panel A: Average Eects (Sample of All Women, N=58,090)
MaxEITC                      1.66      0.020    0.028     0.027     1.18    0.023     0.024
                            (0.47)    (0.008) (0.007) (0.008)     (0.32) (0.007)     (0.007)


R-squared                   0.208      0.187    0.197     0.191   0.187     0.144     0.121
Mean Dep Var                26.15       0.49       0.44   0.38    23.22     0.72       0.74
Panel B: Eects by Marital Status (Sample of All Women, N=58,090)
MaxEITC      ×               1.34      0.016    0.024     0.021     0.69    0.015     0.012
  Married                   (0.48)    (0.008) (0.008) (0.009)     (0.32) (0.008)     (0.008)
MaxEITC      ×               1.96      0.024    0.033     0.032     1.65    0.030     0.036
  Unmarried                 (0.50)    (0.008) (0.007) (0.008)     (0.33) (0.007)     (0.007)


Equal Eects (p-val.)        0.001      0.001    0.001     0.000   0.000     0.000     0.000
R-squared                   0.208      0.187    0.198     0.192   0.189     0.145     0.125
Mean Dep Var                26.15       0.49       0.44   0.38    23.22     0.72       0.74
  Panel C: Eects by Marital Status (Sample of Mothers, N=43,685)
MaxEITC      ×               1.02      0.015    0.018     0.016     0.52    0.013     0.022
  Married                   (0.80)    (0.012) (0.013) (0.014)     (0.58) (0.016)     (0.012)
MaxEITC      ×               1.53      0.024    0.026     0.026     1.67    0.031     0.051
  Unmarried                 (0.69)    (0.010) (0.011) (0.011)     (0.51) (0.013)     (0.011)


Equal Eects (p-val.)        0.198      0.196    0.201     0.098   0.000     0.002     0.000
R-squared                   0.186      0.172    0.180     0.174   0.167     0.140     0.118
Mean Dep Var                 23.5       0.46       0.40   0.34      21.4    0.67       0.69

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all women 1849 years old. ATUS outcomes
are based on time-diary data, while CPS outcomes are based on survey data. All specications
include the baseline set of controls (see text or Table 4 notes).    Equal Eects reports p-
values for F-tests of equality for both coecients on MaxEITC interactions with marital status.
Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                               8
                   Table A.8: Restricting the Sample to Unmarried Mothers

                    LFP     Work Time with Investment            Academic        Health         Other
                            Hours       Kids           Time      Investment Investment Investment
                     (1)      (2)        (3)               (4)       (5)           (6)            (7)
MaxEITC            0.069     2.16       -1.10          -0.38        -0.06         -0.10          -0.21
                  (0.027) (0.77)       (0.93)          (0.32)      (0.11)         (0.06)        (0.30)


R-squared          0.171    0.265       0.432          0.196        0.128         0.049          0.187
Mean Dep Var        0.79     21.4       28.7               3.9       0.7           0.1            3.1

Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all 1849 year-old unmarried mothers (N=15,677). All
specications include the baseline set of controls (see text or Table 4 notes). Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state level.




                                                       9
               Fig. A.1. Maximum Possible Federal + State EITC Over Time


Source: Authors' calculations from IRS and NBER data. Each point denotes a state by year value.




                Fig. A.2. CDF of Weekly Work Hours, by Number of Children


Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all women 1849 years old. Weekly work hours from CPS
hours worked last week.




                                                  10
              Fig. A.3. CDF of Home-Production Hours, by Number of Children


Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all women 1849 years old. Home production hours from
ATUS time diaries (scaled to weekly hours).




                Fig. A.4. CDF of Weekly Leisure Hours, by Number of Children


Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all women 1849 years old. Leisure hours from ATUS time
diaries (scaled to weekly hours).




                                               11
            Fig. A.5. CDF of Weekly Hours with Children, by Number of Children


Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all women 1849 years old. Time with kids from ATUS time
diaries (scaled to weekly hours).




        Fig. A.6. CDF of Weekly Hours Invested in Children, by Number of Children


Notes: 20032018 ATUS data. Sample includes all women 1849 years old. Investment hours from ATUS
time diaries (scaled to weekly hours).




                                               12
Appendix B: ATUS Data Activity Categories

   This appendix provides a detailed description of how we categorize all ATUS time-use
activities.
   The American Time Use Survey (ATUS) is a comprehensive survey of time use in the
U.S. and has been administered annually since 2003. The ATUS sample is drawn from the
Current Population Surveys (CPS), covering the population of non-institutionalized civilians
at least 15 years old. Typical sample sizes have been about 26,000 respondents since 2004
with surveys administered evenly throughout the year. We use sample weights designed to
adjust for stratied sampling, non-response, and to get a representative measure for each
day of the year.
   The survey asks individuals detailed information about all of their activities over the
previous day, including who they were with at the time. The survey also collects information
about the respondent and household.     It can be linked with the CPS data.    Our analysis
combines data from the 20032018 surveys.
   The following provides a detailed breakdown of how we categorized all ATUS time-use
activities based on the 2003 ATUS Data Activity Lexicon.



B.1      HOME PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES
01 Personal Care
   01.02 Grooming  all subcategories
   01.03 Health-related Self Care  all subcategories
   01.05 Personal Care Emergencies  all subcategories
   01.99 Personal Care, n.e.c*  all subcategories
02 Household Activities
   02.01 Housework  all subcategories
   02.02 Food and Drink Preparation, Presentation, and Clean-up  all subcategories
   02.03 Interior Maintenance, Repair, and Decoration  all subcategories
   02.04 Exterior Maintenance, Repair, and Decoration  all subcategories
   02.05 Lawn, Garden, and Houseplants  all subcategories
   02.06 Animals and Pets  all subcategories
   02.07 Vehicles  all subcategories
   02.08 Appliances and Tools  all subcategories
   02.09 Household Management  all subcategories
   02.99 Household Activities, n.e.c*  all subcategories
03 Caring For and Helping Household Members
   03.01 Caring For and Helping Household Children
       03.01.01 Physical care for household children
       03.01.06 Talking with/listening to household children
       03.01.07 Helping/teaching household children (not related to education)
       03.01.08 Organization and planning for household children
       03.01.09 Looking after household children (as a primary activity)
       03.01.11 Waiting for/with household children
       03.01.12 Picking up/dropping o household children (as a primary activity)



                                            13
         03.01.99 Caring for and helping household children, n.e.c.*
   03.02 Activities Related to household Children's Education  all subcategories
   03.03 Activities Related to household Children's Health  all subcategories
   03.04 Caring for Household Adults  all subcategories
   03.05 Helping Household Adults  all subcategories
   03.99 Caring for and Helping Household Members, n.e.c.*  all subcategories
04 Caring For and Helping Nonhousehold Members
   04.01 Caring For and Helping nonhousehold Children
         04.01.01 Physical care for nonhousehold children
         04.01.06 Talking with/listening to nonhousehold children
         04.01.07 Helping/teaching nonhousehold children (not related to education)
         04.01.08 Organization and planning for nonhousehold children
         04.01.09 Looking after nonhousehold children (as primary activity)
         04.01.11 Waiting for/with nonhousehold children
07 Consumer Purchases  all subcategories
08 Professional and Personal Care Services  all subcategories
09 Household Services  all subcategories
10 Government Services and Civic Obligations  all subcategories
11 Eating and Drinking  all subcategories
16 Telephone Calls
   16.01 Telephone Calls (to or from)
         16.01.03 Telephone calls to/from education services providers
         16.01.04 Telephone calls to/from salespeople
         16.01.05 Telephone calls to/from professional or pers. care svcs providers
         16.01.06 Telephone calls to/from household services providers
         16.01.07 Telephone calls to/from paid child or adult care providers
         16.01.08 Telephone calls to/from government ocials
   16.99 Telephone Calls, n.e.c*  all subcategories
17 Traveling
   17.01 Travel Related to Personal Care  all subcategories
   17.02 Travel Related to Household Activities  all subcategories
   17.03 Travel Related to Caring For and Helping household Members  all subcategories
   17.04 Travel Related to Caring For and Helping Nonhousehold Members  all subcate-
gories
   17.07 Travel Related to Consumer Purchases  all subcategories
   17.08 Travel Related to Using Professional and Personal Care Services  all subcategories
   17.09 Travel Related to Using Household Services  all subcategories
   17.10 Travel Related to Using Government Services and Civic Obligations  all subcate-
gories
   17.11 Travel Related to Eating and Drinking  all subcategories
   17.16 Travel Related to Telephone Calls  all subcategories
   17.17 Security Procedures Related to Traveling  all subcategories
   17.99 Travel n.e.c.*  all subcategories




                                               14
B.2    SCHOOL ACTIVITIES
06 Education
  06.01 Taking Class
      06.01.01 Taking class: degree
      06.01.03 Waiting associated with taking classes
      06.01.04 Security procedures related to taking classes
      06.01.99 Taking class, n.e.c.*
  06.03 Research/Homework
      06.03.01 Research/homework: class for degree
      06.03.03 Waiting associated with research/homework
      06.03.99 Research/homework n.e.c*
  06.04 Registration/Administrative Activities
      06.04.01 Administrative activities: class for degree
      06.04.03 Waiting associated with administrative activities (education)
      06.04.99 Administrative for education, n.e.c*
  06.99 Education, n.e.c*  all subcategories
17 Traveling
  17.06 Travel Related to Education  all subcategories



B.3    WORK ACTIVITIES
05 Working and Work-Related Activities  all subcategories
17 Traveling
  17.05 Travel Related to Work  all subcategories



B.4    LEISURE ACTIVITIES
01 Personal Care
  01.04 Personal Activities  all subcategories
03 Caring For and Helping Household Members
  03.01 Caring For and Helping Household Children
      03.01.02 Reading to/with household children
      03.01.03 Playing with household children, not sports
      03.01.04 Arts and crafts with household children
      03.01.05 Playing sports with household children
      03.01.10 Attending household children's events
04 Caring For and Helping Nonhousehold Members
  04.01 Caring For and Helping nonhousehold Children
      04.01.02 Reading to/with nonhousehold children
      04.01.03 Playing with nonhousehold children
      04.01.04 Arts and crafts with nonhousehold children
      04.01.05 Playing sports with nonhousehold children
      04.01.10 Attending nonhousehold children's events
      04.01.12 Dropping o/picking up nonhousehold children



                                            15
       04.01.99 Caring for nonhousehold children n.e.c.*
   04.02 Activities Related to Nonhousehold Children's Education  all subcategories
   04.03 Activities Related to Nonhousehold Children's Health  all subcategories
   04.04 Caring For Nonhousehold Adults  all subcategories
   04.05 Helping Nonhousehold Adults  all subcategories
   04.99 Caring for and Helping Nonhousehold Members, n.e.c.*  all subcategories
06 Education
   06.01 Taking Class
       06.01.02 Taking class: personal interest
   06.02 Extracurricular School Activities (Except Sports)  all subcategories
   06.03 Research/Homework
       06.03.02 Research/homework: class for personal interest
   06.04 Registration/Administrative Activities
       06.04.02 Administrative activities: class for personal interest
12 Socializing, Relaxing, and Leisure  all subcategories
13 Sports, Exercise, and Recreation  all subcategories
14 Religious and Spiritual Activities  all subcategories
15 Volunteer Activities  all subcategories
16 Telephone Calls
   16.01 Telephone Calls (to or from)
       16.01.01 Telephone calls to/from family members
       16.01.21 Telephone calls to/from friends, neighbors, or acquaintances
17 Traveling
   17.12 Travel Related to Socializing, Relaxing, and Leisure  all subcategories
   17.13 Travel Related to Sports, Exercise, and Recreation  all subcategories
   17.14 Travel Related to Religious/Spiritual Activities  all subcategories
   17.15 Travel Related to Volunteer Activities  all subcategories



B.5     SLEEP ACTIVITIES
01 Personal Care
   01.01 Sleeping  all subcategories



B.6     INVESTMENT TIME
   Our measure of child investment time sums all of the time mothers report spending with
children in each of the following (leisure and home production) activities.    The following
reports all investment activities decomposed into academic, health, and other investment
activities as reported in Table 8.


ACADEMIC INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES

   The following activities are included in our measure of academic investment time (see
Table 7, column 6):




                                              16
03.01 Caring For and Helping Household Children: (03.01.02) Reading to/with non-household
children
03.02 Activities Related to Household Children's Education: (03.02.01) Homework (house-
hold children); (03.02.02) Meetings and school conferences (household children); (03.02.03)
Home schooling of household children.


HEALTH INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES AND SUBCATEGORIES

   The following activities are included in our measure of health investment time (see Ta-
ble 7, column 7):


03.03 Activities Related to Household Children's Health: (03.03.01) Providing medical care
to household children; (03.03.02) Obtaining medical care for household children.


OTHER INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES AND SUBCATEGORIES

   The following activities are included in our measure of other investment time (see Table 8,
columns 39):


Column 3: Play
03.01 Caring For and Helping Household Children: (03.01.03) Playing with household chil-
dren, not sports.
12.03 Relaxing and Leisure: (12.03.07) Playing games.


Column 4: Arts and Crafts
03.01 Caring For and Helping Household Children: (03.01.04) Arts and crafts with house-
hold children.
12.03 Relaxing and Leisure: (12.03.09) Arts and crafts as a hobby.


Column 5: Sports
03.01 Caring For and Helping Household Children:     (03.01.05) Playing sports with house-
hold children.
13.01 Participating in Sports, Exercise, and Recreation: All subcategories.


Column 6: Talk and Listen
03.01 Caring For and Helping Household Children: (03.01.06) Talking with/listening to house-
hold children.


Column 7: Organize and Plan
03.01 Caring For and Helping Household Children:     (03.01.08) Organization and planning
for household children.


Column 8: Look After Kids


                                             17
03.01 Caring For and Helping Household Children: (03.01.09) Looking after household chil-
dren (as a primary activity).


Column 9: Attend
03.01 Caring For and Helping Household Children: (03.01.10) Attending household children's
events.
12.04 Arts and Entertainment (other than sports):     (12.04.01) Attending performing arts;
(12.04.02) Attending museum; (12.04.03) Attending movies/lm.
13.02 Attending Sporting/Recreational Events: All subcategories.



B.7       NON-INVESTMENT TIME WITH CHILDREN
   Non-investment home production and leisure time with children is decomposed into sev-
eral activity detailed subcategories in Tables 9 and 10.


HOME PRODUCTION NON-INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES AND SUBCATEGORIES

   The following activities are included in our measure of home production non-investment
time (see Table 9):


Column 1: Personal Care
01.02 Grooming: All subcategories.
01.03 Health-related Self Care: All subcategories.
01.05 Personal Care Emergencies: All subcategories.
01.99 Personal Care, n.e.c*: All subcategories.
08 Professional and Personal Care Services: All subcategories.


Column 2: Housework
02.01 Housework: All subcategories.
02.02 Food and Drink Preparation, Presentation, and Clean-up: All subcategories.
02.03 Interior Maintenance, Repair, and Decoration: All subcategories.
02.04 Exterior Maintenance, Repair, and Decoration: All subcategories.
02.05 Household Activities  Lawn, Garden, and Houseplants: All subcategories.
02.06 Household Activities  Animals and Pets: All subcategories.
02.07 Household Activities  Vehicles: All subcategories.
02.08 Household Activities  Appliances and Tools: All subcategories.
02.09 Household Management: All subcategories.
02.99 Household Activities, n.e.c*: All subcategories.
16.01 Telephone Calls (to or from):   (16.01.03) Telephone calls to/from education services
providers; (16.01.04) Telephone calls to/from salespeople; (16.01.05) Telephone calls to/from
professional or personal care services providers; (16.01.06) Telephone calls to/from house-
hold services providers; (16.01.07) Telephone calls to/from paid child or adult care providers;
(16.01.08) Telephone calls to/from government ocials.
16.99 Telephone Calls, n.e.c*: All subcategories.




                                              18
Column 3: Waiting, Shopping
03.01 Caring For and Helping Household Children:      (03.01.01) Physical care for household
children; (03.01.11) Waiting for/with household children; (03.01.12) Picking up/dropping
o household children (as a primary activity); (03.01.99) Caring for and helping household
children, n.e.c.*
03.02 Activities Related to household Children's Education:    (03.02.04) Waiting associated
with household children's education; (03.02.99) Activities related to household child's edu-
cation, n.e.c.*
03.03 Activities Related to household Children's Health: (03.03.03) Waiting associated with
household children's health; (03.03.99) Activities related to household child's health, n.e.c.*
07 Consumer Purchases: All subcategories.
09 Household Services: All subcategories.


Column 4: Caring for Others
03.04 Caring for Household Adults: All subcategories.
03.05 Helping Household Adults: All subcategories.
03.99 Caring for and Helping Household Members, n.e.c.*: All subcategories.
04.01 Caring For and Helping non-household Children: (04.01.01) Physical care for non-household
children; (04.01.06) Talking with/listening to non-household children; (04.01.08) Organiza-
tion and planning for non-household children; (04.01.09) Looking after non-household chil-
dren (as primary activity); (04.01.11) Waiting for/with non-household children.
04.99 Caring For and Helping Non-household Members, n.e.c.*: All subcategories.


Column 5: Civic
10 Government Services and Civic Obligations: All subcategories.


Column 6: Eating
11 Eating and Drinking: All subcategories.


Column 7: Errands, Travel
17.01 Travel Related to Personal Care: All subcategories.
17.02 Travel Related to Household Activities: All subcategories.
17.03 Travel Related to Caring For and Helping household Members: All subcategories.
17.04 Travel Related to Caring For and Helping Non-household Members: All subcategories.
17.07 Travel Related to Consumer Purchases: All subcategories.
17.08 Travel Related to Using Professional and Personal Care Services: All subcategories.
17.09 Travel Related to Using Household Services: All subcategories.
17.10 Travel Related to Using Government Services and Civic Obligations: All subcategories.
17.11 Travel Related to Eating and Drinking: All subcategories.
17.16 Travel Related to Telephone Calls: All subcategories.
17.17 Security Procedures Related to Traveling: All subcategories.
17.99 Travel n.e.c.*: All subcategories.




                                              19
LEISURE NON-INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES AND SUBCATEGORIES

   The following activities are included in our measure of leisure non-investment time (see
Table 10):


Column 1: Helping Non-HH Members
04.01 Caring For and Helping Non-household Children: (04.01.02) Reading to/with non-household
children; (04.01.03) Playing with non-household children; (04.01.04) Arts and crafts with
non-household children; (04.01.05) Playing sports with non-household children; (04.01.10)
Attending non-household children's events; (04.01.12) Dropping o/picking up non-household
children; (04.01.99) Caring for non-household children n.e.c.*
04.02 Activities Related to Non-household Children's Education: All subcategories.
04.03 Activities Related to Non-household Children's Health: All subcategories.
04.04 Caring For Non-household Adults: All subcategories.
04.05 Helping Non-household Adults: All subcategories.


Column 2: Education
06.01 Taking Class: (06.01.02) Taking class: personal interest.
06.02 Extracurricular School Activities (Except Sports): All subcategories.
06.03 Research/Homework: (06.03.02) Research/homework: class for personal interest.
06.04 Registration/Administrative Activities: (06.04.02) Administrative activities: class for
personal interest.


Column 3: Socializing
12.01 Socializing and Communicating: All subcategories.
12.02 Attending or Hosting Social Events: All subcategories.


Column 4: Waiting and Relaxing
12.03 Relaxing and Leisure: (12.03.01) Relaxing, thinking; (12.03.02) Tobacco and drug use;
(12.03.03) Television and movies (not religious); (12.03.04) Television (religious); (12.03.05)
Listening to the radio; (12.03.06) Listening to/playing music (not radio); (12.03.08) Com-
puter use for leisure (except games); (12.03.10) Collecting as a hobby; (12.03.11) Hobbies,
except arts and crafts and collecting; (12.03.12) Reading for personal interest; (12.03.13)
Writing for personal interest; (12.03.99) Relaxing and leisure, n.e.c.*
12.04 Arts and Entertainment (other than sports): (12.04.04) Attending gambling establish-
ments; (12.04.05) Security procedures related to arts and entertainment; (12.04.99) Arts and
entertainment, n.e.c.*
12.05 Waiting Associated with Socializing, Relaxing, and Leisure: All subcategories.
12.99 Socializing, Relaxing, and Leisure, n.e.c.*: All subcategories.
13.03 Waiting Associated with Sports, Exercise, and Recreation: All subcategories.
13.04 Security Procedures Related to Sports, Exercise, and Recreation: All subcategories.
13.99 Sports, Exercise, and Recreation, n.e.c.*: All subcategories.


Column 5: Religious

                                              20
14 Religious and Spiritual Activities: All subcategories.


Column 6: Volunteer
15 Volunteer Activities: All subcategories.


Column 7: Phone
16.01 Telephone Calls (to or from): (16.01.01) Telephone calls to/from family members; (16.01.02)
Telephone calls to/from friends, neighbors, or acquaintances; (16.01.99) Telephone calls,
n.e.c.*


Column 8: Travel
17.12 Travel Related to Socializing, Relaxing, and Leisure: All subcategories.
17.13 Travel Related to Sports, Exercise, and Recreation: All subcategories.
17.14 Travel Related to Religious/Spiritual Activities: All subcategories.
17.15 Travel Related to Volunteer Activities: All subcategories.




                                              21
