                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  WHEN TARIFFS DISTURB GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAINS

                                     Gene M. Grossman
                                     Elhanan Helpman

                                     Working Paper 27722
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27722


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




We are grateful to Pol Antràs, Harald Fadinger, Chaim Fershtman, Jerry Green, Faruk Gul,
Gregor Jarosch, Edi Karni, Robin Lee, Mihai Manea, Emanuel Ornelas, Gianmarco Ottaviano,
Steve Redding, Richard Rogerson and Dan Trefler for helpful comments and suggestions and to
Chad Bown and Steve Redding for kindly sharing their tariff data. Benjamin Niswonger and Sean
Xiang provided superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Tariffs Disturb Global Supply Chains
Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman
NBER Working Paper No. 27722
August 2020
JEL No. F1,F13

                                          ABSTRACT

We study unanticipated tariffs on imports of intermediate goods in a setting with firm-to-firm
supply relationships. Firms that produce differentiated products conduct costly searches for
potential input suppliers and negotiate bilateral prices with those that pass a reservation level of
match productivity. Global supply chains are formed in anticipation of free trade. Once they are
in place, the home government surprises with an input tariff. This can lead to renegotiation with
initial suppliers or new search for replacements. We identify circumstances in which
renegotiation generates improvement or deterioration in the terms of trade. The welfare
implications of a tariff are ambiguous in this second-best setting, but plausible parameter values
suggest a welfare loss that rises rapidly at high tariff rates.


Gene M. Grossman
International Economics Section
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
grossman@princeton.edu

Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ehelpman@harvard.edu
1        Introduction
Intermediate inputs now comprise as much as two thirds of world trade (Johnson and Noguera,
2012). Although ...rms purchase some of these inputs on anonymous international markets, many
transactions take place within global supply chains. The 2020 World Development Report high-
lights the distinctive features of such supply chains. They derive from technological advances that
make feasible the fragmentation of production processes. They impose non-trivial search costs on
participants, as downstream ...rms hunt for suitable suppliers and upstream ...rms seek customers.
They require matching of compatible partners to ensure productive exchanges. They often are
governed by incomplete contracts that give rise to frequent renegotiation. And yet they typically
involve durable relationships, because the sunk nature of search and customization costs impart
"stickiness" to the pairings.1
        A burgeoning literature examines ...rms'participation in global supply chains, the geography of
international sourcing, the implications of these arrangements for productivity and market struc-
ture, and the persistence and economic signi...cance of ...rm-to-...rm networks.2 Yet with just a
few exceptions (that we discuss below), little attention has been paid to how trade policies might
disrupt supply chains and with what implications for consumer prices and welfare. A prominent
feature of the trade policy landscape pre-2018 readily explains this lacuna: in almost all countries,
tari¤s and non-tari¤ barriers were notably escalated, with much greater protection a¤orded to ...nal
goods than to intermediate inputs. Bown and Crowley (2018, p.20) report, for example, that MFN
tari¤s applied by G20 countries to imports of ...nal goods are 70-75% higher than those levied on
imports of intermediate goods. Using the tari¤ schedules published by the U.S. International Trade
Commission and import data from the U.S. Census Bureau, we calculate that tari¤ protection ap-
plied to consumption goods in the United States during the period from 2010 to 2017 was more
than four times as high as that applied to intermediate inputs. The average U.S. tari¤ applied to
imports of intermediate goods was a miniscule 0.9% percent in 2017.3
        But history changed course with the policies introduced by the Trump administration beginning
in 2018, especially those imposed as "special protection"against imports from China. By September
2018, new tari¤s levied by the United States covered 82% of intermediate goods imported from
China, but only 29% of ...nal consumer goods and 38% of capital equipment (Bown, 2019a). Under
the phase one trade deal between the two countries that went into e¤ect in early 2020, 93% of
intermediate goods from China continue to be subject to special tari¤s (Bown, 2019b).
        Figure 1 plots the average tari¤ rates applied by the United States to imports from China of
intermediate goods and of ...nal goods for the period from 2010 to 2019. To calculate these averages,
we used the MFN tari¤ schedules reported annually by the U.S. International Trade Commission,
    1
     See also Antàs (2020), upon which parts of the World Development Report are based.
    2
     See, for example, Antràs and Helpman (2004), Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008), Antràs and Chor (2013),
Baldwin and Venables (2013), Halpern et al. (2015), Antràs et al. (2017), Bernard and Moxnes (2018), and many
others.
   3
     Excluding oil and petroleum products, the weighted average U.S. tari¤ on intermediate goods was still only 1.05%
in 2017. See the appendix for details about the data and the averaging.



                                                         1
the tari¤ data collected by Fajgelbaum et al. (2020) for the early rounds of Trump tari¤s, and
the data assembled by Chad Bown for subsequent tari¤ hikes. We weighted HTS10 tari¤ rates
by the value share of each category in total U.S. imports from China for the year. As the ...gure
shows, tari¤s on imports of intermediate goods from China rose dramatically with the introduction
of the Trump tari¤s from an average of less than three percent in 2017 to almost 24% by the end
of 2019. Those on consumer goods increased as well, but by considerably less. The disruption of
supply chains and the decoupling of integrated production processes were very much a part of the
administration'
              s intention with these aggressive policies. In fact, in August 2019, President Trump
advised U.S. ...rms to "immediately start looking for an alternative to China" (Breuninger, 2019).




                       Figure 1: Average U.S. Tari¤s on Imports from China


      Anecdotes abound that reorganization of supply chains indeed took place in response to the
large and unanticipated U.S. tari¤s. The business press reported shifts in sourcing away from China
toward Vietnam, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Cambodia, and others. Relocation of import
supply allegedly was undertaken by companies such as Samsonite, Cisco Systems, Macy'
                                                                                   s, Ingersoll-
Rand, and the Fossil Group, and in diverse industries such as electronics, furniture, hand luggage,
and auto parts.4
      Slightly less anecdotally, we can adapt the di¤erence-in-di¤erence methodology proposed by
Amiti et al. (2019, 2020) in their investigations of the price and volume e¤ects of the Trump tari¤s
to hunt for evidence of supply-chain reorganization in the U.S. trade data. To this end, we use
monthly U.S. customs data for imports of intermediate goods at the HTS10-country-of-origin level
for the period from January 2016 through October 2019. We regress the log of the value of imports
from China and the log of the value of imports from a group of 13 Asian low-cost countries (LCC)
  4
    See Master et al. (2018), Bloomberg News (2019), Huang (2019), Hu¤ord and Tita (2019), Kawanami and
Shiraishi (2019), Reed (2019), and Soon (2019).


                                                  2
on product ...xed e¤ects, month ...xed e¤ects, and the log di¤erence between one plus the ad valorem
tari¤ rate on imports from China and one plus the weighted-average tari¤ rate on imports from
these other sources.5 The results presented in Table 1 provide suggestive evidence of the relocation
of supply chains from China to the other LCCs. Imports of intermediate inputs from China were
signi...cantly lower for goods that experienced large tari¤ hikes, and imports from the other Asian
countries were correspondingly higher.




       Motivated by these observations, we aim to study the e¤ects of unanticipated input tari¤s
on sourcing and pricing in global supply chains. In Section 3, we develop a model of trade in
intermediate inputs that captures many of the de...ning characteristics of supply chains mentioned
in the 2020 World Development Report. Firms search for partners to form their chains. Search is
costly. Matches vary in productivity. Relationships are governed by short-term contracts that can
be renegotiated at any time. Sunk costs generate stickiness in relationships, but renewed search
occurs in response to some shocks.
       The model builds on Venables (1987). There are two sectors, one that produces a homoge-
neous good with labor alone and another that produces di¤erentiated products. Firms enter the
latter sector in anticipation of some initial trade policy, which we take to be one of free trade.
Entrants produce unique varieties by combining labor and a composite intermediate input. The
latter comprises a unit continuum of di¤erentiated inputs in ...xed proportions. Each producer can
manufacture the set of inputs it needs using a backstop technology, but we focus on circumstances
in which they prefer to engage input suppliers in a low-wage country. The ...rms pay search costs
that deliver draws from a known distribution of productivities for each of the inputs they require.
   5
    The thirteen LCCs include Bangladesh, Cambodia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam. These are the countries identi...ed by Kearney (2020), in
addition to China, as "traditional o¤shoring trade partners,"when calculating their annual Reshoring Index. See the
appendix for more detail on the data sources and regression procedures that underlie Table 1.


                                                        3
Once they identify a potential supplier of an input, they learn the productivity of the pairing and
decide whether to negotiate a renewable short-term contract or resume their search for a better
match. When a match is acceptable, the buyer and supplier conduct Nash-in-Nash bargaining (i.e.,
pairwise Nash bargaining that takes other bargaining outcomes as given) that determines the set
of input prices and thus the perceived marginal cost of the composite intermediate good. This and
the wage rate govern the optimal production technique, which yields the minimum unit cost. Con-
sumers demand the di¤erentiated products with a love of variety and producers engage in markup
pricing, as usual, under monopolistic competition with a constant elasticity of substitution between
brands. The model determines the mass of varieties and the prices and quantities of each, along
with the optimal search strategy and the negotiated input prices that reect the extant trade policy
and the match-speci...c productivities.
   In Section 3, we consider the introduction of small tari¤s that were not anticipated at the time
of entry. By "small", we mean two things. First, the tari¤s do not induce exit, considering that
entry and search costs have already been sunk and ...rms need only cover their operating costs
in order to remain active. Second, the tari¤s do not alter the ideal destination for search should
...rms contemplate replacing any of their initial suppliers. For example, if the supply chains initially
were located in China, then China remains the optimal place for search despite the added cost
of the tari¤. We show that the e¤ects of the tari¤ depend on the elasticity of demand for the
group of di¤erentiated products. If demand for di¤erentiated products is elastic, all initial supply
relationships survive. However, suppliers renegotiate their short-term contracts in the shadow of
the tari¤. The renegotiations generate higher ex-factory prices for all inputs and an increase in
the cost of intermediates that is proportionately greater than the tari¤ rate. The input price hikes
reect the deterioration of the bargaining position of downstream producers, who ...nd their outside
option of renewed search to be less attractive with the tari¤ in place. The rise in input prices
represents a deterioration in the home country's terms of trade.
   In contrast, when demand for di¤erentiated products is inelastic, the tari¤s create opportunities
for pro...table entry by new ...nal producers. The tari¤s raise input costs for potential entrants, but
they also dampen competition from existing producers who face similarly higher costs, and the
latter e¤ect dominates when demand is inelastic. The new entrants seek and ...nd suppliers of the
inputs they need using the same search strategy that was optimal pre-tari¤s. The original suppliers
preserve their supply chains and ...nd no pressures to renegotiate their contracts. Consumer prices
rise, but the terms of trade are not a¤ected.
   With elastic demand, tari¤s reduce output of di¤erentiated products from the sub-optimally low
levels caused by markup pricing. For this familiar reason, they impose a welfare cost on the home
country. We also identify two new elements in the welfare calculus that are unique to a setting with
global supply chains. First, the deterioration in the terms of trade resulting from renegotiation of
supply contracts harms welfare. As we have just noted, the terms of trade respond to changes in
the attractiveness of search, which determines the outside option for the downstream buyers. These
terms-of-trade e¤ects are present even though no new searches take place. Second, a distortion in


                                                   4
the mix of factors used to produce di¤erentiated products results from the bargaining process, and
tari¤s alleviate this distortion. All told, we cannot rule out the possibility of welfare-enhancing
tari¤s, but we provide su¢ cient conditions and plausible parameter values under which welfare
falls. Importantly, our analysis implies that the usual welfare analysis of tari¤s is bound to miss
important channels when imports take place within supply chains.
   A di¤erent welfare calculus applies when demand for di¤erentiated products is inelastic. Then,
the impact on the operating pro...ts of initial producers is neutralized by entry, and new producers
earn zero pro...ts. Moreover, the terms of trade do not change. The welfare e¤ect of input tari¤s
combines the adverse implications for consumer surplus with the positive tari¤ revenue collected
by the government. We ...nd that tari¤s harm welfare when the buyers have most of the bar-
gaining power in their procurement relationship, when di¤erentiated products are relatively poor
substitutes, and when match productivities are not widely dispersed.
   Section 4 addresses larger tari¤s, those that alter the ideal location for search. The new optimal
search destination might be another low-wage country, if the tari¤ discriminates against the original
suppliers but exempts other potential sources. The evidence suggests that this has happened in
response to the recent U.S. tari¤s on China, which apparently led companies to consider moving
parts of their supply chains to other Asian countries. Alternatively, the new optimal search desti-
nation might be the home country, in which case ...nal producers might choose to "reshore" some
inputs initially sourced from abroad. Some e¤ects of these larger tari¤s are analogous to those for
smaller tari¤s, but new forces come into play. First, the implications for renegotiation with ongoing
suppliers may be quite di¤erent. Whereas with small tari¤s and elastic demand there is a positive
relationship between the size of the tari¤ and the ex-factory price of inputs, the relationship is neg-
ative for a range of tari¤s that are large enough to alter the optimal destination for search. With
small tari¤s, the incentive for renewed search in the original location diminishes with the size of
the tari¤, thereby tilting bargaining power in favor of suppliers. But with larger tari¤s, the threat
to search in a new location becomes ever more credible, tilting the renegotiation in the opposite di-
rection. Consequently, we establish a non-monotonic relationship between the size of the tari¤ and
the terms of trade. Second, tari¤s that induce partial relocation of supply chains generate switches
from low-cost to higher-cost sources. When the new destination for search is a di¤erent foreign
country, this relocation amounts to Vinerian trade diversion, with the usual adverse implications
for the terms of trade and welfare. The welfare implications are less severe when tari¤s induce
reshoring, because the pro...t losses su¤ered by downstream producers from higher input prices are
o¤set by higher pro...ts for upstream ...rms, which are also a component of home welfare in this case.
   In a setting with global supply chains, the welfare analysis of large tari¤s can be quite complex.
Changes in output levels, factor mix, negotiated prices, and search costs all must be taken into
account. Analytical results remain elusive. But numerical calculations with plausible parameter
values suggest that 25 percent tari¤s on inputs imported through global supply chains impose
sizable welfare losses on the country that levies them and that the losses escalate rapidly at high
tari¤ rates.


                                                  5
   As we noted at the outset, our paper contributes to a small literature on the e¤ects of tari¤s
that are applied to intermediate inputs and an even smaller literature that considers trade policy
in the context of global supply chains. The earliest papers on input tari¤s focused on e¤ective rates
of protection; see, for example, the various papers collected in Grubel and Johnson (1971). The
e¤ective rate of protection adjusts the nominal tari¤ on a ...nal good for the cost of tari¤s levied on
the imported inputs used to produce that good. Ru¢ n (1969) and Casas (1973) study second-best
tari¤s on intermediate goods in small countries that protect their ...nal producers, while Das (1983)
considered optimal tari¤s on intermediate and ...nal goods in a large country, all in neoclassical
settings with perfect competition and constant returns to scale. Blanchard et al. (2017) represents
a more recent e¤ort in this same vein. Using an approach that emphasizes the national origin of
the value-added content of traded goods, they relate the structure of optimal protection to the
sources of value added. Caliendo and Parro (2015) is a well-known paper that brings input tari¤s
and input-output linkages to quantitative modeling of multi-country trade so as to conduct welfare
analysis of trade liberalization.
   The papers most closely related to ours are by Ornelas and Turner (2008, 2012) and Antràs and
Staiger (2012). These authors focus on the hold-up problems that arise when relationship-speci...c
investments occur with incomplete contracts. Ornelas and Turner (2008) study bilateral relation-
ships in which a foreign supplier must make a relationship-speci...c investment to sell an input to a
downstream, home producer. Tari¤s dampen the foreign ...rm's incentive to do so, thereby exacer-
bating the underinvestment problem that results from the incomplete contracting. The endogenous
investment responses make trade ows more sensitive to trade policy than they would be with
conventional, anonymous trade. In Ornelas and Turner (2012), in contrast, specialized inputs are
provided by domestic suppliers, whereas imports o¤er a more generic alternative. In such a setting,
tari¤s reduce the attractiveness of the outside option to the downstream ...rm and thereby enhance
incentives for relationship-speci...c investment by the domestic upstream ...rm. Tari¤s on cheap but
generic inputs can improve home welfare by mitigating the hold-up problem.
   Antràs and Staiger (2012) study a setting with two small countries and a single, homogeneous
good sold at a ...xed world price. The producer of the ...nal good is located in the home country,
whereas the input supplier is located abroad. The input must be customized for the buyer, so that
it has no value outside the relationship. Due to incomplete contracting, the terms of exchange
are negotiated after the inputs have been customized and produced. In this setting, the authors
identify the optimal input and output taxes and subsidies and the policies that result from non-
cooperative policy setting in the two countries. E¢ ciency can be achieved by an input subsidy that
resolves the hold-up problem together with free trade in the ...nal good. But the governments have
unilateral incentives to invoke sub-optimal policies, because the bene...ts of any subsidy paid by
the home country are shared by ...rms in the foreign country. As in our model below, trade policy
inuences the bilateral negotiations between suppliers and buyers, and thereby impacts the terms
of trade. But the focus on relationship-speci...c investments, as opposed to search, and the very




                                                  6
di¤erent market environment, make the two papers complements rather than substitutes.6
        A recent paper by Ornelas et. al (2020) examines the reorganization of supply chains induced
by preferential trading arrangements. As in their earlier work, they focus on relationship-speci...c
investment in a world of incomplete contracts. Like us, they consider discriminatory trade policies
that can divert trade away from the lowest-cost sources. They allow for matching of buyers with
heterogeneous suppliers, albeit in a frictionless setting that yields globally-e¢ cient pairings and
lacks any stickiness from sunk costs. Their welfare analysis has a second-best avor similar to ours,
although their ine¢ ciencies arise from a di¤erent source, namely the insu¢ ciency of investment
owing to the hold-up problem. Interestingly, a preferential trade agreement might generate welfare
gains in their setting even in the absence of any trade creation.
        The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops our model of global
supply chains with costly search and negotiated input prices. Section 3 analyzes unanticipated
tari¤s that do not change the ideal local for supply chains. In Section 4 we study larger tari¤s that
render some exempted foreign country or the home market a better place for new searches. Section
5 concludes.


2        Foreign Sourcing with Search and Bargaining
In this section, we develop a simple model of global supply chains. Firms in a monopolistically
competitive industry combine labor and a composite intermediate good to produce di¤erentiated
products. The intermediate good requires a continuum of inputs in ...xed proportions. Each ...rm
can produce any input it needs using a "backstop" technology or it can search for an external
supplier of that input at home or in its choice of foreign markets. When a ...rm locates a supplier,
it learns the productivity of the potential match. Then it can bargain with the supplier over a
short-term (but renewable) contract, or it can choose to resume its search. Time is continuous and
the interest rate is equal to the subjective discount rate.
        In this section, we characterize an initial, long-run equilibrium. We assume that entry takes
place in anticipation of free trade, although we could just as easily use any ...xed tari¤ rate as the
starting point. In succeeding sections, we introduce small and large tari¤ shocks and study how
they impact the supply-chain relationships.

2.1       Preferences and Demands
We adapt a familiar model of monopolistic competition from Venables (1987). Consumers demand
a homogeneous good and an array of di¤erentiated products. Preferences are characterized by

                                            (X; Y ) = Y + U (X ) ,
    6
    In an appendix, Antràs and Staiger (2012) introduce search costs. But they focus on whether search yields a
match or not, and optimal search determines how many buyers search in each of several foreign markets, not the
intensity of search or the productivity of the resulting matches.




                                                      7
where     (X; Y ) is the quasi-linear utility of the representative individual, Y is her consumption of
the homogeneous good, and X is an index of consumption of di¤erentiated varieties. We take the
mass of consumers to measure one and the subutility U ( ) to have constant elasticity, i.e.,
                                            (                     " 1
                                                   "
                                                  " 1        X     "         1                for " 6= 1
                                 U (X ) =                                                                  .        (1)
                                                  log X                                       for " = 1

The consumption index takes the familiar form,
                                              Z     n                                 1
                                                                     1
                                      X=                x (! )            d!              ,       > 1,
                                                0

where x (! ) is consumption of variety ! , n is the measure of varieties available in the home country,
and     is the constant elasticity of substitution between any pair of brands. The corresponding real
price index is
                                                        Z    n                            1
                                                                                              1
                                                                         1
                                           P =                   p (! )          d!               ,                 (2)
                                                         0

where p (! ) denotes the per-unit price of brand ! .
    In order to focus most sharply on the supply chains, we assume that the di¤erentiated ...nal
goods are not tradable; this allows us to ignore the determinants of foreign demand for home
brands.7 The representative home consumer purchases di¤erentiated products up to the point
where U 0 (X ) = P or X = X (P ) = P              ".     Each individual demands variety ! as a function of its
price and the aggregate price index according to

                                                                                 p (! )
                                        x [p (! ) ; P ] = X (P )                                      .             (3)
                                                                                   P

This is also the aggregate demand for variety !; in view of the unit mass of consumers.
    The demand for brand ! declines, of course, with own price. We want the demand for an
individual brand to be increasing in the price index for competitor brands, so we henceforth assume
that    > ".

2.2     Production
The homogeneous good is produced competitively with labor alone and is freely tradable. By choices
of units and numeraire, one unit of good Y requires one unit of labor and bears a normalized price
of one. This ...xes the home wage rate at one in units of the homogeneous good.
    Firms in the imperfectly-competitive sector produce unique varieties of the di¤erentiated ...nal
good using labor, `, and bundles of a composite intermediate good, m, subject to a constant-
   7
     We could, alternatively, consider a home country that is small in the market for di¤erentiated products, as in, for
example, Demidova and Rodriguez-Clare (2009). They assume that the prices and variety of home products have no
e¤ect on either foreign expenditures on these products nor on the foreign price index. Introducing such ...xed export
demand would have little e¤ect on our analysis.



                                                                    8
returns-to scale production function z (`; m). The composite intermediate good comprises a unit
continuum of inputs indexed by j in ...xed proportions, with one unit of each input needed for each
unit of the composite.8
    In the main text, we will often invoke a Cobb-Douglas form for the technology for producing
...nal goods. Then we will refer to

Assumption 1 The marginal cost of any di¤ erentiated product takes the form c ( ) =                            , with
0<      < 1.

Here,    represents the cost to the producer of a marginal unit of m. Clearly, c ( ) =                     is dual to
a Cobb-Douglas production function with exponents 1                     and      on ` and m, respectively, when
the wage rate is one.
    In addition to variable costs, a ...rm producing any variety ! bears a one-time entry cost of Fe
units of home labor, as well as a recurring ...xed operating cost of fo . Moreover, it bears a cost of
...nding partners for its global supply chain, which we describe in the next section.

2.3     Search
The creation of supply chains requires that producers locate suppliers. The cost of search can be an
important component in the response to changes in trade policy. We suppose that ...rms can search
for potential suppliers in one or more of several countries, i 2 f1; : : : ; I g. One value of i represents
the home country, so that producers of di¤erentiated products might seek out domestic outsourcing
relationships. With the symmetry that we impose across inputs, it is always optimal for a ...rm
to search for all of its suppliers in a single country, although that target country might change
following the imposition of a tari¤. With free trade and the other assumptions described below,
the optimal location for any supply chain is the country that has the lowest (e¢ ciency-adjusted)
wage. For now, we take the foreign country A to have the lowest wage, i.e., wA = min fw1 : : : ; wI g.
All home producers conduct their searches in country A, so we describe the search process without
reference to the i index and write w instead of wA . However, once the home country introduces a
tari¤ on inputs imported from country A, producers might seek out new suppliers at home or in
some other country (if there is any) that is exempt from the tari¤.
    Search requires home labor. A ...rm ! seeking a supplier for input j can take a draw from a
cumulative distribution G ( ) at a capital cost of F . The realization of this draw, a, reveals the
quality of the match between the producer and the particular supplier. Speci...cally, a potential
supplier with match-speci...c (inverse) productivity a can produce a unit of input j for brand !
at a cost of aw. The ...rm producing ! decides whether to negotiate a short-term but renewable
contract to buy input j from the potential supplier or whether to continue its search by taking
another, independent draw from G ( ) at an additional cost of F . For simplicity, we abstract from
   8
     Inasmuch as the input suppliers must be identi...ed through search and they provide match-speci...c productivity
at a negotiated price, it is immaterial whether the inputs used by di¤erent ...nal producers are physically the same or
not, so long as all aspects of the search, matching and bargaining are symmetric across producers.


                                                          9
the time that may elapse between draws and assume, instead, that all search takes place in an
instant. We assume that g (a)           G0 (a) > 0 for all a 2 (0; 1] and g (a) = 0 for all a > 1. The ...rm
producing brand ! also has access to an inferior but viable backstop technology for producing every
input j that requires one unit of labor per unit of output. As we shall see, this option-- that might
be a fallback in case of a sequence of failed negotiations-- proves to be irrelevant to the equilibrium
outcome whenever supply chains form.
         The optimal search strategy, as usual, involves a reservation stopping rule.9 Let a be the
reservation level, which the ...rms choose optimally. Then a ...rm takes another draw for the input
j if and only if all of its prior draws for that input had inverse match productivities that exceed a.
Ultimately, all of a ...rm's suppliers will have inverse productivities in the range [0; a]; with densities
given by g (a) =G (a). Given the continuum of inputs and the independence across them, the
search process (plus bargaining) leads to a deterministic cost for a given quantity of the composite
intermediate.
         We can readily calculate the total cost of a ...rm's search e¤ort, S (a), as a function of the
stringency of its stopping rule. When a ...rm takes its ...rst draw, it pays F . Then, with probability
G (a) it achieves at least its reservation level of match productivity, in which case there are no further
search costs. With the remaining probability, 1 G (a), it encounters a supplier with a > a, in which
case it ...nds itself facing again a search cost of S (a). It follows that S (a) = F + [1              G (a)] S (a),
or
                                                             F
                                                  S (a) =         .
                                                            G (a)
This is the expected capital cost of search for any one input as well as the aggregate cost of search
for the measure one of inputs in the bundle.
         As with the cost function, it will prove useful to posit a convenient functional form for G ( ). In
the main text, we shall often make use of

Assumption 2 The distribution function G (a) takes the form G (a) = a ,                      > 1,

where         captures (inversely) the spread of productivities in this Pareto distribution.

2.4         Bargaining
In principle, a downstream ...rm might bargain with its suppliers over both prices and quantities.
However, full e¢ ciency would require a joint negotiation of quantities with all suppliers and this
would be quite impractical with many of them. Instead, we invoke simultaneous but separate
("Nash-in-Nash") bargaining; i.e., each negotiation between a buyer and a potential supplier takes
all other bargaining outcomes as given.10 In our setting with a Leontief technology, this takes
bargaining over quantities o¤ the table; once a ...rm has decided to purchase m units of every input
     9
    See, for example, Benkert et al. (2018) for proof that a reservation stopping rule is optimal in this environment.
  10
    Note that a Stole-Zwiebel (1996) protocol would not yield di¤erent results in our setting, because with every
input j essential to production, a failed negotiation would result in a potential supplier being replaced by another,
with negligible impact on the other bargains.


                                                         10
from its many other suppliers, it has no use for any more than this amount from the individual
supplier with whom it is bargaining, nor can it manage with less without wasting the purchase
of other inputs. Inasmuch as the price of a single input has a negligible e¤ect on the cost of the
bundle, the buyer and each of its suppliers have no conict over quantity given the outcome of the
other negotiations. Instead, each pair takes m as given and the parties haggle only over price. We
assume Nash bargaining with exogenous weights                    for the buyer and 1              for the seller and denote
the agreed price per unit of an input produced with inverse productivity a by                            (a).11
       The seller has no outside option. Therefore a seller with match productivity a earns a surplus
from the relationship equal to the di¤erence between its revenues                         (a) m and its production costs,
wam, considering that the m units of the composite require m units of each of its components.
The buyer, in contrast, has two options should the negotiation break down. It can produce input j
using its backstop technology, with a labor coe¢ cient of one and a wage of one. Or it can resume
its search for an alternative supplier. Clearly, the latter option dominates, or else it would not have
begun to search in the ...rst place. Therefore, the outside option for the buyer is the expected cost of
...nding a new supplier plus the payment it would expect to make to that supplier. Continued search
engenders an expected capital cost of S (a), or a ow cost of rS (a), where r is the constant interest
rate, equal to the representative individual'
                                            s subjective discount rate. The expected payment to an
alternative supplier is       (a) m, where
                                                             Z   a
                                                    1
                                            (a) =                        (a) g (a) da
                                                  G (a)      0

is the expected price of an input drawn randomly from the truncated distribution with domain
[0; a]. Thus,
                           (a) = arg max (qm      wam)1              [    (a) m + rS (a)         qm] .
                                       q

       The Nash bargaining solution implies

                                                                               1         f
                                 (a) = wa + (1          )w       a (a)     +                                               (4)
                                                                                        mG (a)

and that
                                                                  1          f
                                           (a) = w   a (a)   +                     ;
                                                                            mG (a)
where      a (a)   is the conditional mean of a for a            a and f           rF is the debt service on the capital
expenditure F . When the producer follows the same search strategy and bargaining process for all
of its inputs, it pays      (a) per unit for its composite intermediate good plus
                                                                              h the ...xed cost of search,
                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                               1    f
f =G (a). Thus, the total cost of m units of the intermediate good runs to w                       a (a)   +       mG(a)   m+
  11
    Technically speaking, there exist many Nash-in-Nash equilibria, because once all other negotiations have generated
a quantity of some m~ , an individual pair of buyer and supplier has every incentive to agree to this same quantity.
Among the Nash-in-Nash equilibria, we focus on the one most preferred by the buyer, who is the only party engaged
in multiple negotiations. This amounts to the same as allowing the buyer to specify the quantity of each input in
advance of the individal, bilateral negotiations.



                                                          11
f =G (a) = w        a (a) m    + f = G (a).12 Note that each ...rm perceives a constant marginal cost of
  =w    a (a)   for each unit of the composite intermediate good.

2.5     Cost Minimization
To minimize cost, the ...rm chooses the optimal search strategy a for producing m units of the
intermediate, and the optimal factor mix, m and `; for producing x units of its brand. The factor
mix minimizes ` + w           a (a) m + f =     G (a), subject to z (`; m)            x. Notice that the third term in the
minimand is independent of ` and m. Evidently, the ...rm perceives a ...xed search cost (including
the fact that the search costs weaken the buyer's bargaining position) of f = G (a) and a constant
marginal cost of c [1; w         a (a)],   where c ( ) is the unit cost function dual to z ( ). We shall henceforth
suppress the ...rst argument in c ( )-- which is the constant, unitary home wage-- and write the unit
cost more compactly as c ( ), where                  = w       a (a)    is the perceived marginal cost of a unit of m.
Shephard's Lemma then gives us the factor demands, so that m = xc0 and ` = x (c                                   w      0
                                                                                                                      a c ).
    Turning to the optimal search strategy, the total (ow) cost of m units of the composite inter-
mediate comprises the aggregate payment to suppliers, m                             (a) = mw   a (a)   + (1       ) f = [ G (a)],
and the debt service on the capital cost of search, f =G (a). The tradeo¤ facing each ...rm is clear.
On the one hand, a more exacting strategy generates a better average match productivity and thus
a lower variable component in the payment to suppliers. On the other hand, a more stringent
search strategy spells higher ...xed costs of search and a larger ...xed component in the payment
to suppliers. Each ...rm chooses a to minimize the sum, i.e., a = arg mina [mw                            a (a)   + f = G (a)].
Then, if an interior solution exists, the ...rst-order condition implies

                                                          0             f g (a)
                                                   mw     a (a)    =            .                                              (5)
                                                                         G (a)2

Noting that         0 (a)   = g (a) [a
                    a                        a (a)] =G (a),    and substituting (5) into (4), we can write the nego-
tiated price of an input with inverse productivity a as

                                                  (a) = wa + (1              ) wa ,                                            (6)

a weighted average of the supplier's production cost and the cost of producing the input with the
reservation match productivity.
    We can gain further insight into the optimal search strategy by applying Assumption 2. In this
case,   a (a)   =    +1 a    and g (a) =G (a)2 = =a        +1 .    Then, the ...rst-order condition can be written as

                                                          +1       f ( + 1)
                                                      a        =            :
                                                                      mw

Intuitively, the stopping rule is more tolerant (higher a) when search draws are more costly or
  12
     Inasmuch as the ...rm can produce the inputs in-house at a cost of m, outsourcing proceeds if and only if there
                                    f
exists an a for which w a (a) + 1 mG (a)
                                         < 1.



                                                                   12
the distribution of productivities is tighter. Search e¤ort is greater (lower a) when the foreign
wage is higher, the scale of production is larger, or the buyers have more bargaining power; in
these situations, the producers have more at stake in the search process. The greater is the search
e¤ort, the lower are the resulting transaction prices of all inputs, per (6). Of course, the scale of
production and the demand for intermediates are endogenous in the full equilibrium, so the total
e¤ect of the parameters f , , , and w must include the indirect e¤ects that operate through m.

2.6      Pro...t Maximization and Monopolistically-Competitive Equilibrium
The ...rms in the di¤erentiated-products sector face a constant elasticity of demand, per (3). They
maximize pro...ts, as usual, by charging a proportional markup over marginal cost,

                                                    p=              c( ).                               (7)
                                                                1

These prices yield operating pro...ts of
                                               1
                                  (       1)                                     (1       )f
                          o   =                    X (P ) P c ( )1                             fo .     (8)
                                                                                      G (a)

The ...rst term in (8) is the di¤erence between revenues and variable costs when the marginal cost
of production is c ( ),   =w      a (a)   and ...rms practice the pricing rule in (7) subject to the demands
in (3). The second term represents the sum of ongoing ...xed payments to suppliers that result from
the Nash bargains prescribed by (4). The last term in (8) is the recurring, ...xed operating cost.
   In a symmetric equilibrium, all ...rms charge the same price, p. Then (2) implies
                                                                    1
                                                         P =n           1   p.

As usual, the index increases linearly with the price of a typical brand, but decreases with the
number of brands. This reects the "love of variety" inherent in the Dixit-Stiglitz formulation.
   Finally, in a monopolistically-competitive equilibrium with free entry, the present value of op-
erating pro...ts matches the ...xed costs of entry and of search, or

                                                                   f
                                                     o   = fe +         ,
                                                                  G (a)

where fe = rFe denotes the debt service on the one-time entry cost and f =G (a) represents the debt
service on the sunk search costs. Together, the model determines n; x; and p, as in the original
Venables (1987) setting, as well as the demand for intermediates per brand, m, and the search
intensity, a, that result from the formation of supply chains. The equilibrium described in this
section will serve as the initial condition when we study unanticipated tari¤s in Sections 3 and 4
below.




                                                             13
2.7   Properties of the Initial Equilibrium
To elucidate some of the properties of the free-trade equilibrium, we invoke Assumptions 1 and 2
that posit common and convenient functional forms for the production function and the distribution
of match productivities.
   First, we examine the conditions for an interior optimal stopping rule in the low-wage country;
i.e., when is 0 < a < 1? For this, we need the second-order condition also to be satis...ed at
the a that satis...es (5) and we need the solution for a to be less than one when m takes on its
equilibrium value. In the appendix, we prove that the second-order condition is satis...ed at a under
Assumptions 1 and 2 if and only if         >    (    1). This condition is more likely to be satis...ed if
the dispersion of productivities is relatively low ( high), if output is relatively unresponsive to the
volume of intermediates (     low) and if the di¤erentiated varieties are relatively poor substitutes
for one another. Otherwise, costs may be monotonically increasing with a and it may be optimal
to search inde...nitely despite the prohibitive ...xed cost of doing so, because operating pro...ts rise
even faster than ...xed costs as production costs go to zero. To abstract from such an unrealistic
situation, we label for future reference

Assumption 3 When the production function satis...es Assumption 1 and the productivity distri-
bution satis...es Assumption 2,   >    (       1).

   However, as we also show in the appendix, when the second-order condition is satis...ed, a higher
value of   generates a greater cuto¤, a. This makes intuitive sense, inasmuch as a less dispersed
distribution of productivities implies a smaller return to search. For      su¢ ciently large, ...rms take
only a single draw from G (a) and accept any outcome; i.e., a = 1. An interior value for a thus
requires that   should be neither too small nor too large.
   Under Assumptions 1 and 2, we can solve explicitly for a. We ...nd

                                                  f           (    1)
                                      a =                             .                               (9)
                                               fo + fe    (       1)

The right-hand side of (9) is positive under Assumption 3. It is less than one if the cost of search
is not too large compared to the one-time cost of entry and the ...xed cost of operation and if the
buyers'bargaining power is not too low. We henceforth assume parameter values that ensure a < 1.
   Using the value of a in (9), we can solve for the price index P and the number of varieties n
from a system of two equations; see the appendix. As in other models of monopolistic competition,
variety is greater and the price index of di¤erentiated products is lower when the one-time cost of
entry and the ...xed cost of operation are small. A lower value of the price index P corresponds to
a higher level of welfare. As for the search costs, a lower value of f also implies a lower equilibrium
price index and greater welfare. The equilibrium number of ...rms may increase or decrease with f ,
according to whether " < 1 or " > 1.




                                                     14
                                    Figure 2: Sourcing Patterns



2.8    Departing from Free Trade
We are now ready to introduce tari¤s on imported inputs. We will study tari¤s that come as a
surprise to downstream producers who have already formed their supply chains. Once the tari¤s
have been implemented, ...rms expect them to persist inde...nitely. Let         denote one plus the ad
valorem tari¤ rate. We assume that         is not so large as to induce exit by any of the original
producers. These ...rms have already borne the sunk costs of entry and search, so they need only
cover their ...xed and variable operating costs to remain active. Since   o   = fe + f =G (a) > 0 in the
initial equilibrium, there is room for input costs to rise without their causing exit.
     We distinguish two sizes of tari¤s. In the next section, we consider "small" tari¤s that do not
alter the preferred location for search by any suppliers, while in Section 4 we study "large" tari¤s.
Under free trade, the price distribution of inputs sourced from country A dominates that for any
other country. However, a tari¤ raises the potential cost of importing from country A. If there
happens to exist another country B that is exempt from the tari¤ (including the home country)
such that wB < wA , then country B takes over as the destination for all prospective searches once
the tari¤ is put in place. Thus, small tari¤s are those that satisfy   < wB =wA whereas large tari¤s
are those such that    > wB =wA , for some country B that is not subject to the tari¤.
     As a guide to what follows, it is helpful to consider Figure 2, in which we show various sizes
of the tari¤ and further distinguish ...nal goods facing elastic demand (" > 1) from those facing
inelastic demand (" < 1). In either case, the demarcation between small and large tari¤s comes
at    = wB =wA . When demand is elastic, we will ...nd that a small tari¤ reduces operating pro...ts
for all actual and potential ...nal-good producers, so that no new entry occurs. Moreover, the
initial producers see a diminished incentive for search relative to free trade, so none resume their
searching. For large tari¤s, the ideal destination for potential new searches shifts from country



                                                  15
A to some country B . When the tari¤ rate is only slightly greater than wB =wA , no new searches
actually take place. For still larger tari¤s in excess of some      c,   renegotiation takes place in enduring
relationships, but producers also replace their least-productive initial suppliers.
     The case of inelastic demand is rather di¤erent. Then incentives for search intensify given
n, and potential pro...ts rise. The rise in potential pro...ts induces entry by new producers of
di¤erentiated products. The sti¤er competition chokes o¤ incentives for more stringent search. In
the equilibrium with a small tari¤, the original producers maintain their relationships with all of
their initial suppliers at the initial terms of trade. The new entrants ...nd their suppliers in country
A and negotiate prices similar to those paid by the original producers. Large tari¤s also induce
entry. Then the original producers replace their least productive suppliers in country A with new
suppliers in country B . New entrants form their supply chains entirely in country B . We will
elaborate all of these claims in what follows.


3     Small, Unanticipated Tari¤s
We begin by examining the renegotiation that takes place in enduring relationships under the
shadow of a small tari¤. We then address the decision by original producers to engage in renewed
search to replace relatively unproductive suppliers and the decision by potential entrants to bear
the ...xed cost of entry and of establishing a supply chain. Later in this section, we study the e¤ects
of small tari¤s on input prices, output prices, and welfare.

3.1     Renegotiation in Enduring Relationships
A small tari¤ alters the parties'bargaining positions in two ways. First, it imposes a direct burden
that must be borne by one or both parties. Second, it alters a producer's optimal search strategy
and thereby its outside options. If the initially agreed price does not exactly balance these new
considerations, then renegotiation generates new terms.
     Let   (a; ) denote the renegotiated price that a producer pays to its supplier of some input j
when the inverse match productivity is a and the ad valorem tari¤ rate is                 1. Upon importing
the input, the producer incurs a customs charge of (                1) (a; ). The outside option for the
producer is to conduct a new search in country A-- with optimal stopping rule a ( )-- and to pay
an expected tari¤-inclusive price to a new supplier of             [a ( ) ; ], where    [a ( ) ; ] is the mean
of    (a; ) conditional on a        a ( ). The producer'
                                                       s net bene...t from remaining with its original
supplier amounts to       [a ( ) ; ] m ( )+ f =G [a ( )]         (a; ) m ( ), where m ( ) is the quantity of
the composite intermediate good that the ...rm assembles with the tari¤ in place. For the supplier,
the surplus is simply the di¤erence between revenue and production cost, or [ (a; )                wa] m ( ),
as before. Therefore, renewed Nash bargaining yields

                                                                f
                 (a; ) = arg max           [a ( ) ; ] +                        q   (q   wa)1
                                q                         m ( ) G [a ( )]


                                                      16
which implies that

                                                                       1                f
                      (a; ) = wa + (1          )w      a [a (   )] +                                                (10)
                                                                                  m ( ) G [a ( )]

and
                                                                1                f
                            [a ( ) ; ] = w    a [a (    )] +                               .
                                                                           m ( ) G [a ( )]
   We can ...nd the optimal search strategy as before. A ...rm that conducts new searches after
the small tari¤ has been introduced will choose a ( ) to minimize m ( )                        [a ( ) ; ] + f =G [a ( )],
the sum of procurement costs and the debt burden imposed by search costs. The new ...rst-order
condition becomes
                                                0                   f g [a ( )]
                                    m( )w       a [a (    )] =                                                      (11)
                                                                     G [a ( )]2
which, after rearranging terms, can be written as

                                                                               f
                              w fa ( )       a [a (    )]g G [a ( )] =              .                               (12)
                                                                               m( )

Note that left-hand side of (12) is increasing in a ( ); the derivative is G [a (t)] > 0. It follows that
a ( ) > a if and only if m ( ) < m; more on the conditions for this below.
   Now we can substitute (12) into (10) to derive

                                     (a; ) = wa + (1                 ) wa ( ) .                                     (13)

Evidently, if   < 1, all input prices rise in enduring relationships if a ( ) > a and all prices fall if
a ( ) < a. Only if bargaining power rests entirely with the buyer are the negotiated prices immune
to changes in the outside option. Adjustments in the negotiated prices amount to changes in the
terms of trade, much as in Antràs and Staiger (2010) and Ornelas and Turner (2012).

3.2   Replacing Unproductive Suppliers
In response to a tari¤, producers might choose to end some of their supply relationships and
recommence search for better matches. If so, they will terminate the relationships that had the worst
initial match productivities. With this strategy in mind, we denote by ac the inverse productivity of
the marginal match, so that producers retain their supply relationships for all inputs with a 2 [0; ac ],
while replacing suppliers with a 2 (ac ; a]. Of course, if ac = a, ...rms preserve their original global
supply chains in their entirety.
   As we noted above, there are two possibilities for the new, optimal search strategy should a
...rm choose to re-engage in search. First, a ( ) might be (weakly) greater than a, as it will be if
 m( )     m. Alternatively, a ( ) might be smaller than a, as it will be if m ( ) > m. In the ...rst
scenario, all existing supply relationships already meet or surpass the reservation level of match
productivity; there is nothing to be gained by resuming search for any of them. In the second


                                                        17
scenario, there exists a set of inputs for which a 2 (ac ; a]. For all of these, the ...rms opt to renew
searches until they achieve match productivities at least as good as a ( ). In short, each producer
minimizes the cost of procuring m ( ) units of every input by setting ac = min fa ( ) ; ag.
       To identify circumstances in which supply chains are disturbed by the introduction of a small
tari¤, we must examine whether a ( ) is ever strictly less than a. To this end, we consider the
marginal cost of a composite intermediate good in the tari¤ equilibrium. For the fraction of inputs
G (ac ) =G (a), the producers retain their initial suppliers. For these inputs, they perceive an average
marginal cost of         w   a (ac )   + (1        ) w      a [a (   )], according to (10). For the remaining inputs (if
any), they perceive an average marginal cost of                            w   a [a (       )]. The weighted average gives the
marginal cost of m that ...rms use in making their decisions about production techniques and
consumer prices, which we denote by                    ( ). After collecting terms, we have13

                                         G (ac )                                G (ac )
                                     =           w         a (ac )   + 1                          w     a (a   )                    (14)
                                         G (a)                                  G (a)

and then optimal pricing implies
                                                           p =            c(    ).                                                  (15)
                                                                      1
       In Figure 3, the kinked curve labeled M M depicts the relationship between                                        and a implied
by (14) for a particular value of , when ac = min fa ; ag and demand for di¤erentiated products
is elastic (" > 1). We illustrate for the case of a Pareto distribution, namely
                                     (
                                          +1   wa                                             for a < a
                                 =                                                                                  .               (16)
                                              +1   wa + (1            )   +1   wa            for a         a

Here, we have drawn the curve associated with                             = 1 (i.e., a tari¤ rate of zero). Evidently, the
M M curve is piecewise linear with a kink at a.
       We can derive a second relationship between                           and a by using the ...rst-order condition for
a in (12), the ...rst-order condition for m = x                       c0 (     ), the expression for demand for variety !
                                                                                            1=(    1)
in (3), and the expression for the price index; P = p (n )                                              . Combining these equations,
                             1
using    c0 (   )=   (   )       and p =           1   (    ) ; and hypothesizing that there is no induced entry of
...nal producers (i.e., n = n), we have under Assumptions 1 and 2,

                                                                                 "
                                 ( + 1) f                      "
                                                                                                  (1 ") 1
                                          +1
                                                   = n         1                        (     )                 ,                   (17)
                                 w (a )                                    1

which we have depicted by the curve N N in Figure 1. The left-hand side of (17) is a decreasing
function of a , while the right-hand side is a decreasing function of                                          . Thus, the N N curve is
upward sloping. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, it has a constant elasticity of ( + 1) = [1                                         (1   ")].
For      = 1, the two curves intersect at a (1) = a and                      (1) = [ = ( + 1)] wa. When the second-order
  13
   To reduce notational clutter, we will sometimes write the value of a variable y in the tari¤ equilibrium as y . For
example,   = ( ) and a = a ( ).



                                                                     18
          Figure 3: Small-Tari¤ Equilibrium with Elastic Demand for Di¤erentiated Products



condition for a is satis...ed, the slope of N N must be steeper than that of M M at the point of
intersection, as drawn.14
       Now suppose that a positive tari¤ is introduced, so that         rises proportionately by d = = ^ > 0
from an initial value of        = 1. The ...gure illustrates the resulting shift in the curves. The M M curve
shifts upward at every point in proportion to ^, with a kink still at a. The N N curve also shifts
                                                       1
upward, but in proportion to [1 +           ("   1)]       ^ < ^. Therefore, the intersection of the new M M
curve and the new N N curve must come to the right of the kink in the former, which implies that
a > a. The stopping rule becomes less stringent in this case, because, as we have seen, the bene...t
from search is proportional to m , the stake that ...rms have in ...nding more productive matches.
When demand for di¤erentiated products is elastic, the derived demand for the intermediate good
declines more than in proportion to , so m falls. The search e¤ort follows the change in the
marginal bene...t from search. Operating pro...ts fall, but remain positive for small enough . The
fall in pro...ts validates our hypothesis of no induced entry.
       Now consider Figure 4, which depicts the case of inelastic demand (" < 1). The solid M M and
N N curves again intersect at a, because they apply to                = 1. Once the tari¤ is introduced, the
M M curve again shifts up in proportion to ^. Now, however, the upward shift in the N N curve
                       1
is [1       (1   ")]       ^ > ^. So the new intersection of the dashed M M curve and the dashed N N
curve falls to the left of the kink in the former, which suggests an enhanced incentive to search and
a more stringent stopping rule than a.
       However, this is not the end of the story. If the new search strategy were to invoke a stopping
rule more stringent than a-- as at the intersection of the two dashed curves-- the balance of power
  14
     The elasticity of the N N curve at a is ( + 1) = [1 (1 ")], while that of the steeper branch of the M M curve
is 1. But ( + 1) = [1      (1 ")] > 1 when > " and Assumption 3 holds.



                                                            19
          Figure 4: Small-Tari¤ Equilibrium with Inelastic Demand for Di¤erentiated Products



in the price negotiations would tilt in favor of the buyers. The marginal cost of the composite
intermediate would rise, but by proportionally less than ^, thanks to a fall in the ex-factory price.15
Meanwhile, the price index P would rise, because marginal costs would be higher for all ...rms and
they would pass along their increased costs to consumers. A potential entrant would face a higher
cost of intermediates than , but would also experience greater demand for its product as a function
of price than in free trade. As we show in the appendix, with " < 1 and when                                                >   (   1) per
Assumption 3, the latter e¤ect        dominates.16           In other words, the tari¤ equilibrium cannot remain at
the intersection of the dashed M M and N N curves in Figure 4, because that point implies positive
pro...t opportunities for potential entrants.
       Entry pushes the N N curve downward (see (17)) until it reaches the place of the dotted curve.
At the intersection of this curve and the dashed M M curve, a = a,                                =         , and m = m.17 The
original producers see their stake in search restored to its free-trade level, so their outside option is
to use the same search strategy as before. They do not replace any of their suppliers, nor do they
re-negotiate any input prices. Their operating pro...ts remain unchanged, as their higher costs are
  15
      The less than proportionate rise in the marginal cost of inputs can be seen in Figure 2 from the fact that the
M M curve shifts up in proportion to ^ and the N N curve shifts up by proportionally more. The fact that ^ > 0 in
this case follows from the fact that the leftward shift in M M is in proportion to ^, whereas the leftward shift in N N
is in proportion to ^= ( + 1) < ^.
   16
      A new entrant foresees potential pro...ts of

                                  (   1)(    1)
                                                         "                      (1   )    f
                            max                   P( )        [ w   a    (a)]                    fo   fe,
                              a                                                          G (a)

while taking P ( ) as given. By the envelope theorem, potential pro...ts are a rising function of if and only if
P ( ) " (1 ) is a rising function of . In the appendix, we show that the second-order condition, > (        1) ;
ensures that this is so.
                                                                                                      (1    ")(    1)
  17                                         "       (   1)              "
       Note that entry proceeds until (P )                    =P             , which implies n = n             "        .


                                                                    20
o¤set by a higher, post-entry price index, P , that boosts demand at any price. Meanwhile, the new
entrants adopt the same search strategy as that previously used by the original producers. They
achieve the same distribution of input prices, the same marginal cost of the composite intermediate,
and an operating pro...t that just covers their ...xed entry-plus-search costs. The greater is the tari¤
rate, the larger is the number of new entrants.

3.3     E¤ect of Small Tari¤s on Input Prices, Output Prices, and Search
We have just seen that a tari¤ reduces the stringency of optimal search when demand for di¤er-
entiated products is elastic, but ultimately leaves the search strategy unchanged when demand is
inelastic. In either case, ac = a, which means that the original producers do not replace any of their
initial suppliers. With elastic demand, the extant suppliers insist on renegotiating prices, which,
according to (13), generates a price hike for all inputs in the new Nash bargains. With inelastic
demand, by contrast, the optimal stopping rule post entry remains at a, leaving outside options
and negotiated prices as before. Entrants introduce new varieties in the latter case, but not the
former.
   We can use (11), (12), and (17) to calculate the e¤ect of a small tari¤ on the marginal cost of
the composite intermediate good. We ...nd

                               ^ =             +1
                                                                         ^   ^,                    (18)
                                         +1                  ("    1)

                (1 )a
where      =   a+(1 )a    and thus 0               1. The average price paid to foreign suppliers can
be computed using (10) and the fact that a is distributed on [0; a] according to the truncated
distribution, G (a) =G (a). This gives       = w    a (a)   + (1        ) wa or

                                         d    = (1          ) wda .

Finally, markup pricing according to (15), the expression for the price index (2), and a ...xed number
of producers imply
                                 ^ =P
                                    ^ =                     +1
                         p
                         ^ =                                                      ^.               (19)
                                                +1                      ("   1)
   In contrast, when demand for di¤erentiated products is inelastic and entry takes place until
pro...t opportunities are eliminated,
                                                ^ = ^,

                                               d     = 0,

                                               p
                                               ^ = ^,




                                                     21
and18
                                                         ^=       (         1)
                                                         P                     ^.                                    (20)
                                                                           "
We summarize in

Proposition 1 Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold. (i) If " > 1, a small tari¤ generates no new
searches and no entry or exit, but renegotiation with suppliers leads to higher input prices. Con-
sumer prices rise and the price index rises. (ii) If " < 1, a small tari¤ generates no new searches by
the original producers and no changes in the f.o.b. prices they pay to their suppliers. Entry occurs
and new producers adopt the same search strategies as the original producers. Consumer prices rise
and the price index rises despite the increase in product variety.

3.4          Welfare E¤ects of Small Tari¤s
Welfare comprises total income (the sum of labor income, dividends paid by ...rms from their
operating pro...ts net of interest payments, and rebated tari¤ revenue) plus consumer surplus. We
let V ( ) =          ( )+ T ( )+ ( ) represent the sum of the three components of aggregate welfare that
might vary with a small tari¤, where                    ( ) denotes aggregate variable pro...ts net of debt service on
any new capital costs induced by the tari¤ , T ( ) denotes tari¤ revenue, and                           ( ) represents the
aggregate consumer surplus from purchases of di¤erentiated products. In this section, we invoke
Assumptions 1 and 2 to derive explicit expressions for each component of V ( ) and then calculate
how aggregate welfare responds to a small but positive tari¤ in the presence of global supply
chains. We consider separately the cases of elastic and inelastic demand for di¤erentiated products
inasmuch as the welfare calculus di¤ers in these alternative scenarios.

3.4.1          Elastic Demand for Di¤erentiated Products: " > 1

When demand for di¤erentiated products is elastic, operating pro...ts for existing producers fall,
...rms undertake no novel searches and so bear no new capital costs, and no costly entry takes
place. Aggregate variable pro...ts net of debt service on new capital costs amount to                              ( ) =
n (p x               m        ` ), the di¤erence between revenues and input costs of active ...rms. The gov-
ernment collects and rebates tari¤ revenue of T ( ) = n (                                1)   m on the nm units of im-
ports by downstream producers at an average price of                                 . Consumer surplus can be written as
     ( ) = U (X )           np x . Summing these components, we have

                                                 V ( ) = U (X )            n m        n` ,                           (21)
     18
          The fact that d   o =d   = 0 implies
                                                    (       ^ +
                                                         ") P         (1       )^ =0
or
                                                          ^ = a(
                                                          P
                                                                            1) ^
                                                                                 .
                                                                           "




                                                                  22
the di¤erence between aggregate utility from consuming di¤erentiated products and the real re-
source cost of producing them.
      Di¤erentiating (21), we ...nd

                       1 dV                       d`                          dm           d
                               =              1      +                                 m     ,                   (22)
                       n d               1        d              1             d           d

where we have used the fact that ...rms hire labor and purchase intermediate goods up to the point
at which marginal revenue product of each factor equals its marginal cost. The ...rst term on the
right-hand side of (22) represents the net social bene...t that results from a change in labor input in
the di¤erentiated-products sector. Since = (               1) > 1, an increase in employment raises welfare,
all else the same; the monopoly pricing of di¤erentiated varieties drives a positive wedge between
the marginal social product of labor and the market wage. In the Cobb-Douglas case, employment
is proportional to aggregate spending on di¤erentiated products, which falls when demand is elastic.
The induced drop in employment contributes to a decline in aggregate welfare, much as in other
settings with markup pricing.19
      The second term represents the welfare e¤ect of reduced purchases of intermediate goods. Here,
there are o¤setting considerations at work. On the one hand,                  =(      1) > 1 suggests underutil-
itization of intermediate goods, for much the same reason that market-generated employment is
suboptimally low with markup pricing. This adverse e¤ect of a tari¤ would be present even if
inputs were purchased on anonymous markets. On the other hand, ...rms base their input demands
on      , the perceived marginal cost of a unit of the composite intermediate good. But for                  close to
one,       <    , where       is the average amount actually paid to foreign suppliers for the inputs that
comprise m. The excess of resource cost over perceived marginal cost suggests that ...rms might
overutilize intermediate goods. A tari¤ that discourages input usage could actually contribute to
higher welfare in this context, if all else remains constant. This novel e¤ect of the tari¤ is speci...c
to settings in which prices are negotiated bilaterally within multi-input supply chains.
      How can we understand this potential bene...t of a tari¤ on inputs purchased from supply chains?
We recognize that, if buyers could negotiate collectively with all their suppliers at the same time,
they would agree on a jointly-optimal choice of m and would share the gains from productive ef-
...ciency. But joint negotiations are impractical with large numbers of suppliers. Instead, we have
assumed "Nash-in-Nash" bargaining whereby ...rms negotiate individually with each of their sup-
pliers, taking the outcome of their other negotiations as given.20 Buyers cannot discuss separately
with each supplier the choice of m, because the technology requires that all inputs be used in ...xed
proportions. Instead, the buyer chooses m unilaterally and negotiates prices for this quantity of
each input. In such circumstances, the downstream ...rm has an incentive to "overuse"intermediates
in order to enhance its bargaining position vis-à-vis each of its suppliers. From (13) we see that
the price falls with m; therefore, each buyer recognizes that it enjoys monopsony power through
 19
      See, for example, Helpman and Krugman (1989, pp. 137-145) or Campolmi et al. (2018).
 20
      For a discussion of the game-theoretic foundations of Nash-in-Nash bargaining, see Collard-Wexler et al. (2019).




                                                          23
bargaining and sets its input demands accordingly.
       Note, however, that the government also has a tool to inuence the negotiated prices. From
(13), we see that the bargaining outcomes respond to m , the total stake that buyers have in their
negotiations. By introducing a tari¤, the government can tilt the bargaining in favor of home ...rms
and alleviate their incentive to demand extra intermediate goods for that purpose. In other words,
a tari¤ allows the home country to achieve a given ex-factory price at lesser resource cost. This
positive e¤ect of a small tari¤ is strongest when the home ...rms' bargaining position is weak (
small), as that creates the largest gap between                and       . In fact, the potential e¢ ciency-enhancing
role of the tari¤ disappears entirely as              approaches one, because         and     are approximately the
same when          = 1 and      is close to one.
       Finally, the third term on the right-hand side of (22) manifests yet another consideration that
arises in supply chain relationships but is absent with arms-length purchase of intermediate goods.
As in other settings with imperfect competition, trade policy redistributes pro...ts from one party
to the other.21 Here, this works through the bilateral negotiations. As we have seen, any tari¤ that
reduces m also dampens the incentives for search. But a less stringent stopping rule a carries
with it a less imposing threat if a negotiation collapses, so a tari¤ tilts the table in favor of the
suppliers. In short, any positive tari¤ delivers higher ex-factory prices for all inputs than under
free trade, which imposes a terms-of-trade loss on the home country.
       We can combine the three terms on the right-hand side of (22) to derive a necessary and su¢ cient
condition for welfare to be declining in               at   = 1. This requires some algebra, which we relegate
to the    appendix.22     There, we prove

Proposition 2 Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold. If " > 1, dV =d < 0 locally at t = 1 if and only if

                                                 "( + )
                                                                       > (1   )(     1) .                        (23)
                                        +         (" 1) (1         )

       Clearly, (23) is satis...ed if       = 1; indeed, if all bargaining power resides with the home producers,
then any positive tari¤ reduces home welfare. The condition also is satis...ed if = (                  1) > (1     ),
which is equivalent to [ = (                 1)] (1) >      (1); i.e., the middle term in (22) is negative when
evaluated at        = 1. Another su¢ cient condition is " > (1                  ).23 Moreover, for parameter values
typically found in the literature, the inequality is satis...ed with slack.24
       A point worth emphasizing, however, is that the usual welfare cost of an input tari¤ that reects
the underproduction of di¤erentiated varieties in a setting of monopolistic competition is augmented
  21
     See the seminal papers on the use of tari¤s to extract monopoly rents by Katrak (1977) and Svedberg (1979),
and subsequent work by Brander and Spencer (1984), Helpman and Krugman (1989), and many others.
  22
     In the appendix, we also provide su¢ cient conditions for welfare to be declining in for all 1.
  23
     Inequality (23) is equivalent to
                                           "                  (" 1) (1      )2
                                               > (1     )
                                             1                      +
and Assumption 3 ensures that "= (       1) > ".
  24
     For example, if = 5; = 4, " = 1:5, and = = 1=2, the left-hand side of (23) is equal to 216=35         6:17,
whereas the right-hand side is equal to 2.


                                                              24
by two additional considerations when producers create supply chains via costly search. First, a
tari¤ alleviates misallocation associated with ine¢ cient overuse of intermediates relative to labor
in the production of ...nal goods. This ine¢ ciency results from a process of piecemeal negotiations
with multiple suppliers. Second, a tari¤ worsens the terms of trade when producers negotiate with
suppliers over input prices and resuming search becomes less attractive. The overall welfare cost
may be larger or smaller than with competitive input markets and, under some unlikely conditions,
a small tari¤ might even increase home welfare.

3.4.2        Inelastic Demand for Di¤erentiated Products: " < 1

When demand for di¤erentiated products is inelastic, a small tari¤ induces entry by producers of
new varieties. Then

                                                                                         f
                       V ( ) = U (X )      n      m   n `           (n      n) fe +           + fo ,                      (24)
                                                                                        G (a)

where (24) is just like (21), except that we have added a term capturing the debt service on ...xed
costs paid by new entrants. Di¤erentiating (24), and noting that d                       = 0 in this case, we ...nd

                         1 dV          1    d`                            dm
                                   =           +                               +
                         n d               1d             1                 d
                                   1                                            f               dn
                                                p x   m         `        fe               fo       .                      (25)
                                   n        1                                 G (a)              d

Now, the fact that             m is constant and ` =           m = (1         ) imply that d` =d = 0, so the ...rst
term in (25) vanishes; with no change in employment per ...rm, there is no welfare gain or loss
from this source. The second term has the same interpretation as before, and since dm =d =
   1=    2    < 0, it contributes to a welfare gain or loss according to whether                                  exceeds or
                                                                                                            1
falls short of . Again, this requires a comparison of the socially suboptimal use of intermediate
inputs due to markup pricing versus the socially excessive use of intermediates due to the di¤erence
between the perceived marginal cost and the true social cost. Finally, the third term represents
the welfare change generated by new entry. The zero-pro...t condition for new entrants implies
                                                                                                  1
p x          m      ` = fe f =G (a) fo , so the term in square brackets is equal to                   1p   x +(       1) m .
This is always positive; the entry induced by a positive tari¤ contributes to aggregate welfare,
because entrants do not capture all of the social gain from expanded variety.
      We can compare the terms in (25) by expressing V ( ) in an equivalent, but somewhat di¤erent
manner. The operating pro...ts generated by entrants just cover the debt service on their entry and
search costs and thus contribute nothing to national income. Meanwhile, the original producers see
their operating pro...ts restored to the initial levels, so there is no change in this component of income
either. What remains is revenue generated by the tari¤, T ( ) = (                              1) n m , and consumer
                                                                                  "                                      "
surplus,       ( ) = U (X )         P X . Using (1) and X                = (P )       , we can express          ( ) =   1 "
 1
1 "   (P )1    "
                   . Also, n     m =        1
                                                P X and        m =          m, so T ( ) = (            1)         1
                                                                                                                      (P ) 1 "
                                                                                                                                 .


                                                          25
Thus, we can write

                                       "                                     1           1
                         V ( )=                    + (        1)                                      (P )1   "
                                                                                                                  .            (26)
                                   1           "                                     1       "

Di¤erentiating (26), using = = ( + 1                        ) = , and evaluating at                     = 1, we ...nd

                                           dV                      +1            (           1)
                             (P )"     1
                                                            =                                     ^     ^ .
                                                                                                        P
                                            d          =1

But (20) relates the increase in the price index generated by a tari¤ hike to the increase in the
                   ^ = ( 1) ^. It follows that the introduction of an in...nitessimal tari¤ reduces
tari¤ rate, namely P         "
welfare if and only if      > (1           )       "   1 . In the appendix, we show that if welfare declines at
    = 1, it also declines with the tari¤ rate for all                   > 1. We then have

Proposition 3 Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold. If " < 1, dV =d < 0 for all                                                 1 if

                                                       > (1        )         1 .
                                                                         "

Evidently, tari¤s harm welfare when the downstream buyers hold most of the bargaining power
in their procurement relationships, when di¤erentiated products are relatively poor substitutes for
one another, and when match productivities are not widely dispersed.


4      Larger, Unanticipated Tari¤s
In the last section, we studied small tari¤s. By small, we meant both that the tari¤ does not
displace country A as the ideal location for producers'supply chains and that it does not induce
exit from the industry. In this section, we consider larger tari¤s, ones that make some other market
the preferred place to search for suppliers. If the tari¤ is discriminatory and some other low-wage
source is exempt, ...rms might relocate part of their supply chains to a di¤erent country. Or, if
 wA > 1 and there are no better foreign alternatives, ...rms might bring parts of their supply chains
home. We attach the label B to the country that becomes the optimal destination for search once
the tari¤ is introduced. We will consider both situations where B identi...es a foreign country that
is exempt from the tari¤ and where it represents the home country. In any case, we shall continue
to assume that, despite the higher cost of inputs, all ...rms are able to cover their ...xed operating
costs and the debt service on new searches. Thus, the number of ...rms does not fall below that in
the free-trade equilibrium.
     We now must distinguish wages in the location of the original supply chains from those where
new searches may take place. The fact that country A was the ideal destination for search before the
tari¤ but country B becomes so afterward implies wA < wB < wA . Firms that conduct searches
in country B draw match-speci...c (inverse) productivities from the distribution G ( ), which is the
same as for country A. We let b denote the realization of such a draw and b = b ( ) denote the


                                                                   26
optimal stopping rule in the tari¤ equilibrium, analogous to a and a , respectively.25
    When a large tari¤ is introduced, producers might nonetheless retain some of their most pro-
ductive suppliers in country A, while replacing others that are less productive. All new search takes
place in country B and bargaining occurs in the shadow of potential searches there. Let aB be the
inverse productivity of the marginal supplier that is retained after the tari¤ comes into e¤ect, so
that ...rms renegotiate with suppliers in country A that have a 2 (0; aB ] and replace their original
suppliers that have match productivities a 2 (aB ; a] with new partners in country B . Of course, it
may be that aB = a, in which case there are no new searches.
    We can calculate the optimal stopping rule as we have done before, to derive an equation that
relates b to the derived demand for the composite intermediate good, analogous to that for a
in (5); see the appendix for details. Then we substitute this ...rst-order condition for b into the
Nash bargaining solution to obtain negotiated prices for inputs imported from countries A and B ,
respectively, as functions of the inverse match productivities, a and b.26 This gives

                                                                            wB b
                                         A (a;   ) = wA a + (1          )                                           (27)

and
                                         B   (b; ) = wB b + (1          ) wB b :                                    (28)

These bargaining outcomes imply that tari¤-inclusive prices,                      A (a;   ) and   B   (b; ), are weighted
averages of the unit cost of production-cum-delivery and the unit cost of an input that could be
produced by a supplier in country B with the reservation level of productivity. In this sense, (27)
and (28) are analogous to (13). Moreover, these price equations imply that two inputs with the
same unit cost of production-cum-delivery but di¤erent countries of origin carry the same delivered
price. Notice that, if wB b = < wA a, suppliers in country A bear some of the burden of the tari¤.
    Facing these potential input prices, producers can make their optimal sourcing decisions. By
de...nition, the stopping rule identi...es the worst match that a buyer would accept conditional on
searching in country B and recognizing the costliness of further search. This worst match yields
an opportunity to purchase an input at delivered price                 B    b ;      = wB b . However, even before
commencing a new search, the buyer has access to a supplier from whom it can buy at delivered
price     A (a;   )=      wA a + (1        ) wB b for a match with productivity a. If wA a < wB b , the
  25
     We use b ( ) to express the reservation level as a function of the tari¤ rate, and b to denote the value of b ( ) in
the cum-tari¤ equilibrium.
  26
     The Nash bargain with a supplier in country A with inverse match productivity a yields a price
                                           "                                   #
                                                                 f
                          (a; ) = arg max wB b b +                            q (q wA a)1 .
                                        q                   m( )G b

The Nash bargain with a supplier in country B with inverse match productivity b yields a price
                                        "                              #
                                                            f
                        (b; ) = arg max wB b b +                      q (q wB b)1 .
                                      q                 m( )G b




                                                           27
original supplier o¤ers a better deal than the reservation match. Conversely, if wA a > wB b ,
search in country B yields a cost saving even if the ...rm realizes the worst possible match among
those it will accept. It follows that aB = min wB b = wA ; a and that producers retain suppliers
                wB                                                               wB
with a          wA b   while replacing those (if any) with a >                   wA b      .
      We are ready to examine the equilibrium e¤ects of larger tari¤s, i.e., those with                                                   wB =wA .
Again, we invoke Assumptions 1 and 2 and distinguish cases of elastic and inelastic demand. We
use      , as before, to denote the tari¤-inclusive marginal cost of the composite intermediate good
for the original producers of ...nal goods. Recall that these producers perceive a lower marginal
cost of inputs than the average price that they pay for them, because they recognize that price
per unit falls with the volume m . For a fraction G (aB ) =G (a) of inputs, the original producers
continue to buy from their existing suppliers in country A and perceive an average marginal cost
of      w   a (aB ) + (1       ) wB    b       b . For the remaining fraction 1                    G (aB ) =G (a) of inputs (if any),
they source from country B and perceive an average marginal cost of wB                                             b       b . After collecting
terms, the weighted average becomes

                                       G (aB )                                   G (aB )
                                 =             wA        a (aB )    + 1                  wB            b   b           .
                                       G (a)                                     G (a)

      In Figures 5 and 6, the solid curve M M depicts the relationship between                                                        and b       for
     = wB =wA . Under Assumption 2 of a Pareto distribution for match productivities, the curve
is piecewise linear, with
                               (
                           =          +1 wB b                                         for b < wA a=wB
                                                                                                                            .                    (29)
                                      +1         wA a + (1          ) wB b            for b > wA a=wB

For b < wA a=wB , it has a slope of                   +1 wB ,   whereas for b > wA a=wB , it has the shallower slope
of (1       )   +1 wB .   With       = wB =wA , the curve kinks at b = a.
      As before, we need a second relationship between                           and b to locate the equilibrium. We begin
with the case of elastic demand, as depicted in Figure 5. Recall that n (wB =wA ) = n, because
operating pro...ts per ...rm are smaller when                       = wB =wA than when                     = 1, and thus there is no
entry beyond the free-entry level. We use the ...rst-order condition for m = x c0 (                                             ), the expression
for the demand for variety ! in (3), and the expression for the price index, P = p n                                               1= (   1) ,   much
as we did in constructing the N N curve in Figure 3. Combining these equations, and applying
Assumption 1 of a Cobb-Douglas technology and Assumption 2 of a Pareto distribution of match
productivities, we ...nd the new N N curve,
                                                                                  "
                                   ( + 1) f                     "
                                                                                                   (1 ") 1
                                                 +1
                                                      =n        1                      (       )               .                                 (30)
                                 wB        b                                 1

      We have seen that the stopping rule with a large tari¤                           = wB =wA is the same as the stopping
rule with a small tari¤ of this size, and that both are less stringent than under free trade; i.e.,



                                                                    28
                           Figure 5: Large-Tari¤ Equilibrium with Elastic Demand



b (wB =wA ) = a (wB =wA ) > a. It follows that the intersection of the M M curve and the new N N
curve in Figure 5 takes place to the right of the kink in the former curve, as drawn. Now let
be something larger than wB =wA . The tari¤ rate does not appear in (30), except insofar as it
inuences the variables on the axes or the number of active ...rms. But as we raise                               above wB =wA ,
the portion of the M M curve to the right of the kink shifts upward, as can be seen from (29).
For      somewhat greater than wB =wA , the equilibrium occurs at the intersection of N N and the
lowermost dashed curve in the ...gure. Here, b > a, but wA a < wB b , so the original producers
preserve the entirety of their supply chains. The parties renegotiate the terms of their exchange
against the new outside option of search in country B . Moreover, since operating pro...ts are a
declining function of        in this range, no entry takes place.
      For some still-higher tari¤ rate, the original producers of di¤erentiated products are indi¤erent
between relocating their worst matches to country B and continuing on with their original suppliers.
This tari¤, which we denote by           c   in the ...gure, is de...ned implicitly by             c wA a    = wB b ( c ). Tari¤s
                                                                             wB
larger than     c   disrupt the supply chains. For             c,   aB =     wA b ( c )   =     c a=    and so     =   +1 c wA a.
Further tari¤ hikes do not generate any further shifts in the M M curve at the equilibrium point.
Rather, the stopping rule remains b = b ( c ) and aB declines with the size of the tari¤. In other
words, the higher the tari¤ for         >     c,   the more extensive is the reorganization of the supply chain.
In this range, operating pro...ts remain constant but pro...ts net of additional search costs fall.27
      Figure 6 depicts the equilibrium for a large tari¤ when demand for di¤erentiated products is
inelastic. The curves are drawn for            = wB =wA . The M M curve is the same as in Figure 5, but the
N N curve is somewhat di¤erent. Recall that input tari¤s induce entry of new ...nal producers when
demand is inelastic. When           = wB =wA , all producers face the same distribution of prices in country
 27
      In the appendix, we derive an explicit expression for    c,   namely    c   = (wB =wA )      ("   1)




                                                              29
                     Figure 6: Large-Tari¤ Equilibrium with Inelastic Demand



A as in country B . It follows that they use the same stopping rule, i.e., b (wB =wA ) = a (wB =wA ),
but a (wB =wA ) = a, so the new N N curve must intersect the M M curve at this point, as drawn.
To ...nd the shape of this curve, we ...rst combine the zero-pro...t condition for new entrants and the
...rst-order condition for their optimal search strategy to derive an expression for the price index; see
the appendix. Then we use this value of P for         = wB =wA together with the ...rst-order conditions
for the choice of b and m by the original producers to derive the N N curve for this case,

                          ( + 1) f                "                          (1   ) 1
                                   +1
                                        = (P )                     (     )              .                  (31)
                         wB    b                           1

Notice that the elasticity of this curve is ( + 1) = [1 +      (       1)] > 1, so N N intersects the lower
branch of M M from below.
   Now suppose that      exceeds wB =wA . The tari¤ rate does not appear separately in (31), because
the price index P    that is consistent with zero pro...ts for new entrants does not depend on the
tari¤. This in turn reects the fact that the new entrants search only in country B; so their input
costs are independent of the tari¤ rate. But with P ...xed for all values of                > wB =wA , so too is
the location of the N N curve. Similarly, the left-most branch of M M is independent of . The
right-most branch of M M shifts up, as in Figure 5, but this is irrelevant because the intersection
of the two curves stays put at the point vertically above a. In other words, the marginal costs for
the original producers and their optimal search strategies are independent of the tari¤ rate for all
values of   > wB =wA .
   With inelastic demand, larger tari¤s greater than wB =wA              1 induce the original suppliers to
replace ever larger portions of their supply chains. The inverse productivity of their marginal
                                   wB         wB
supplier in country A is aB =      wA b   =   wA a.   The new entrants search for all their suppliers in
country B , using the reservation inverse-productivity level bnew = a. Since the costs and demands

                                                      30
facing the entrants are the same for all tari¤ levels, so too are their operating pro...ts, and n =
n (wB =wA ) for all           wB =wA .
     We recap the e¤ects of larger tari¤s on the number and organization of supply chains in

Proposition 4 Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold and that                            > wB =wA for some country B that is
exempt from the tari¤ (possibly the home country). (i) For " > 1, there is no new entry and
the original producers preserve their entire supply chains in country A for all                    <    c   de...ned by
 c wA a   = wB b ( c ); for    >    c,   these producers retain their initial suppliers in country A for a             a,
                                                                                                                   c


while replacing those with a             a>    c
                                                   a. The number of active ...rms is n = n(1) for all       > wB =wA .
                                                                                                                 wB
(ii) For " < 1, the original producers of ...nal goods retain their suppliers in country A for a                 wA a,
                                                   wB
while replacing those with a              a>       wA a   with suppliers in country B . The number of active ...rms
is n = n (wB =wA ) > n (1) for all              > wB =wA and the entrants source all of their inputs in country
B.

4.1       E¤ect of Larger Tari¤s on Input Prices, Output Prices, and the Terms of
          Trade
In this section, we discuss the implications of larger tari¤s for input prices, output prices, and the
terms of trade. We begin with the case of elastic demand.

4.1.1      Larger Tari¤s with Elastic Demand

For tari¤s in the range            2 [wB =wA ; c ], there is no entry of new brands. The original producers
continue to procure all of their inputs in country A, paying the prices recorded in (27). We see
here the o¤setting forces at work on the negotiated price. On the one hand, a higher tari¤ directly
raises the value of a buyer's outside option to search in a tari¤-free location. On the other hand,
a higher tari¤ means that buyers would have less incentive to search intensely in country B , were
they to undertake such searches. In the appendix we show that b rises less than in proportion to
 , so b = declines with . It follows that higher tari¤s improve the buyers' bargaining position
vis-à-vis all of their suppliers and so reduce net-of-tari¤ input prices. The average price becomes

                                                                               wB b
                                                = wA        a (a)   + (1   )          ;

which is a declining function of . Inasmuch as all inputs continue to be sourced in country A, the
fall in      represents an improvement in the home country's terms of trade.
     Next consider tari¤s large enough to induce partial relocation of supply chains to country B .
We have seen that search intensity is not a¤ected by the size of the tari¤ in such circumstances;
rather b = b ( c ) for all          >    c.   Nonetheless, the terms of trade respond to two o¤setting forces.
From (27), we see that the prices of all inputs that continue to be imported from country A fall with
the tari¤, as the option to shift production to a tari¤-free source strengthens the buyers'bargaining
position. Meanwhile, parts of the supply chain move from a relatively low-cost source to one with


                                                                31
                                   Figure 7: Terms of Trade for Di¤erent Tari¤ Rates



higher wages. When the best alternative to the original source is another foreign country, this
amounts to Vinerian trade diversion, and it contributes to a deterioration in the overall terms of
trade. We write the weighted average of inputs from the alternative sources as

            G (aB )                                     wB b                    G (aB )
        =                wA     a (aB )    + (1     )             + 1                          wB   b   b   + (1      ) wB b   , (32)
            G (a)                                                               G (a)
                      wB
where aB =            wA b ( c )   in these circumstances. In the appendix we show that the fall in prices
from country A outweighs the shift in production to the higher-cost country B if and only if
  < ( + 1) = . If          c   < ( + 1) = , then there exists a range of tari¤s above                       c   in which higher tari¤s
imply better terms of trade. Moreover,                         (tc ) = ; i.e., at         c   the terms of trade are the same as
when         =    1.28   So, when      c   < ( + 1) = , there also exists a range of tari¤s for which the home
country enjoys better terms of trade than with zero tari¤s. For su¢ ciently high tari¤s, however,
most imports are sourced from country B , where ex-factory prices are higher than those in country
A, so the terms of trade must be worse than those under free trade.
       Figure 7 highlights the non-monotonic relationship between the size of the tari¤ and the home
country's terms of trade when the best alternative to searching in the original location of supply
chains is another foreign country and " > 1.29 The ...gure shows the entire range of positive tari¤s,
including those we have termed small and large. For                              < wB =wA , country A remains the preferred
location for search, and larger tari¤s result in higher import prices as the buyers' outside option
  28
       At   c,   aB = a and b =     c wA a=wB .   Therefore, (32) implies

                                                  ( c ) = wA     a   (a) + (1      ) wA a = .

  29
    The ...gure uses the same, "plausible" parameter values described in footnote 24, along with wA = 0:5, wB = 0:6,
f = 5, and fe = fo = 10. However, the qualitative features of Figure 7 apply more generally.


                                                                       32
deteriorates. For wB =wA <            <   c,   the best search option switches to country B . Although no
new searches actually take place, the threat to do so becomes more credible for higher tari¤ rates,
which shifts the bargaining outcomes in favor of the buyers. Finally, for                   >    c,   higher tari¤s further
enhance the buyers'bargaining power vis-à-vis their original suppliers, but they also generate costly
trade diversion that raises real input costs. The latter force must eventually dominate, although it
need not do so for tari¤s just above           c,   as illustrated in the ...gure.
       What if the label B refers to the home country, rather than to some foreign country that is
exempt from the tari¤? The identity of country B makes no di¤erence to ...rms'optimal sourcing
decisions nor to their bargaining position vis-à-vis their original and new suppliers. Input prices
are the same no matter whether country B is a foreign country or not. The only di¤erence is that
higher prices paid to home suppliers are not generally considered a deterioration in the terms of
trade, nor do they have the same adverse implications for home welfare (as we discuss below). In
fact, when ...rms reshore portions of their supply chains, it becomes di¢ cult to de...ne a meaningful
measure of changes in the terms of trade. Firms negotiate better prices for those inputs they
continue to import, but other inputs-- for which they pay higher prices than before-- disappear
from the import basket. Thus, the terms of trade apply to a changing bundle of goods, which poses
the usual challenge for de...ning an appropriate price index.
       Finally, we turn to output prices. Producers of di¤erentiated varieties set these prices, as before,
at a ...xed markup over their perceived marginal costs. As we have seen in Figure 5, when demand
for ...nal goods is elastic,       is an increasing function of             for all   2 (wB =wA ; c ). So, higher input
tari¤s give rise to higher output prices throughout this range. For still higher tari¤s such that
  >      c,   ...rms'perceive marginal costs of the composite intermediate to be independent of the tari¤
rate. Since consumer prices are a ...xed markup over perceived marginal costs, higher tari¤s do not
generate higher consumer prices when                  >   c,   although the level of these prices must be higher
than under free trade.

4.1.2         Larger Tari¤s with Inelastic Demand

When demand is inelastic, downstream producers' optimal stopping rule is b = b (wB =wA ) = a
                                                                                                               wB
for all tari¤s with       > wB =wA . The original producers retain their suppliers with a                      wA a,   while
replacing the rest. The negotiated prices obey (27) for the former group and (28) for the latter.
Meanwhile, new producers enter and form supply chains in country B . For them, input prices are
given by (28) for all relevant realizations of b.
       As with the case of elastic demand and             >    c,   there are two o¤setting inuences of higher tari¤s
on the terms of trade. The higher is the tari¤, the better is the price that the original producers
negotiate with their retained suppliers in country A, as the outside option to search in country B is
more attractive for greater . But higher tari¤s induce greater reorganization of the supply chains
by the original producers and the switch in sourcing represents diversion to a higher-cost supplier.
On net, the former e¤ect dominates for                < ( + 1) = and the latter for             > ( + 1) = .30 The real
  30
       Note to EH: Is this correct? I'm not sure that we looked at the correct weighted average. On the other hand,


                                                               33
cost of inputs may fall and then rise as a function of the tari¤ rate in the range of large tari¤s, or
it may rise monotonically.
      With a larger tari¤ in place and " < 1, ...rms perceive a marginal cost of intermediate goods of
   =     +1 wB b (wB =wA )   =   +1 wB a.   Under free trade, the perceived marginal cost is                 =   +1 wA a.
Since wages are higher in country B than in country A,                      >    for all     > wB =wA . The tari¤
raises the perceived (tari¤-inclusive) marginal costs of intermediate goods relative to that under
free trade, so prices paid by ...nal consumers are correspondingly higher.

4.2     Welfare E¤ects of Larger Tari¤s
We begin our welfare analysis by identifying again the components of aggregate utility that vary
with the tari¤ rate. Recall that V ( ) =               ( )+T( )+          ( ), the sum of variable pro...ts net of
debt service on new capital costs, tari¤ revenues and consumer surplus. We can evaluate V ( )
                                                 R
for   > wB =wA using V ( ) = (1) + (1) + wB =wA V 0 (t) dt. In Section 3.4, we examined
V 0 ( ) for     < wB =wA . In this section, we consider V 0 ( ) for                 > wB =wA , making use once
again of Assumptions 1- 3. As before, we distinguish the cases of elastic and inelastic demand for
di¤erentiated products.

4.2.1     Elastic Demand for Di¤erentiated Products

For      2 (wB =wA ; c ), there are no new searches and no entry. Recognizing that supply chains
remain in country A and thus tari¤s are applied to all imports in this case, we can write V ( ) =
U (X )         nm      n` , as in (21). Then, di¤erentiating this expression, we have

              1 dV         1    d`                            dm          d
                     =             +                                  m     , for wB =wA <         <    c,
              n d              1d              1               d          d

which has the same form as (22). It is not necessary to repeat the arguments from Section 3.4.1,
except to note that the ...rst term again is negative, the second can be negative or positive according
to the sign of the expression in parenthesis, and the last term is positive now, because higher tari¤s
in this range improve the terms of trade.
      Turning to still larger tari¤s with          >   c,   we have several new considerations in the welfare
analysis. First, tari¤s apply only to imports from country A and thus only for inputs with a 2
(0; aB ]. Second,      is independent of       in this range, so that d` =d = dm =d = 0 and dX =d =
dP =d = 0. Third, if the label B identi...es the home country, then the ...nal producers'payments
to suppliers net of production costs contribute to home welfare. Finally, fresh searches in country
B forge new debts that must be serviced.
      Suppose ...rst that B denotes a foreign country. New searches are conducted by all n original
producers for a fraction 1         G (aB ) =G (a) of their inputs. These searches each have an expected
ow cost of f =G b ( c ) . Tari¤ revenues collected by the home government exactly o¤set the tari¤s
it is only the original suppliers that see their ex-factory prices change as rises in the range of large tari¤s; the new
producers source only in B , their stopping rule doesn'   t change and so their average price doesn't change with .


                                                            34
payments made by home producers. So, using Assumption 2, we can write
                                                                            "                        #
                                                                                  wA             1
                         V ( ) = U (X )    n m             n`       nf                                   .
                                                                                  wB             a

Since the tari¤ revenues collected by the home government exactly o¤set the tari¤s payments made
by home producers, we can write          ( )+T( ) = P X                         n m         n` . With b = b ( c ) for all
 >     c,   perceived marginal costs, prices and factor demands are independent of . Only the terms
of trade and the search costs vary with the tari¤ rate. Substituting m = m= , we have

                               dV              d            wA
                                     =    m            f                        , for   >   c.
                              n d              d            wB

   We have already observed that the terms of trade might improve or deteriorate with the size
of the tari¤, according to whether        < ( + 1) = or                 > ( + 1) = . Of course, the search costs
only grow with higher tari¤s, as they induce more new searches. In the appendix, we show that
aggregate welfare increases with the tari¤ rate for             >   c       if and only if

                                                       +1
                                                   <                    .                                           (33)

Note that a higher tari¤ might improve the terms of trade and nonetheless reduce welfare, because
the searches for new suppliers impose additional costs. The greater is the buyers' bargaining
weight, the smaller is the terms of trade e¤ect, although the direction of the price movement does
not depend on        . Meanwhile, the responsiveness of search costs to the tari¤ rate increases with
 . From (33) we see that higher tari¤s in this range are more likely to harm welfare when the
distribution of match productivities is less dispersed ( is large). The same is true when the buyers
secure a greater share of the bargaining surplus; indeed a larger tari¤ must result in lower welfare
when        = 1.
   Figure 8 plots the change in welfare (expressed as a fraction of free-trade spending on di¤eren-
tiated products) as a function of the tari¤ rate, using the plausible parameter values that we have
described before. Notably,       = 5;     = 4, " = 1:5,             =        = 0:5, and wages in country B are 20
percent higher than those in country A. We see that welfare falls with the tari¤ over the range
of small tari¤s, with a welfare loss that reaches approximately 2.7 percent of initial spending for
  = 1:2. (Note that        = 1:2 implies an ad valorem tari¤ of 20% on inputs that comprise 40% of
the value of output.) There is a slight rebound in aggregate welfare, thanks to the terms of trade
improvement, for large tari¤s up to       c.   Then welfare falls again as a function of the tari¤ rate,
reaching losses of 3.06 percent of initial spending for             = 1:25. If wages in country B are only 10
percent higher than those in country A, the welfare loss from a 25% tari¤ is only 1.86 percent; see
the appendix for the corresponding ...gure. In either case, the marginal e¢ ciency cost of a higher
tari¤ expands as the tari¤ rate increases.
   Now suppose that B denotes the home country, so that the reorganization of the supply chain


                                                       35
                  Figure 8: Welfare E¤ects of Unanticipated Tari¤s: Elastic Demand



involves the reshoring of some inputs. In such circumstances, home welfare should include the
pro...ts earned by home input suppliers. The social cost of inputs then becomes

                          G (aB )                              b             G (aB )
                      =             wA   a (aB )   + (1    )       + 1               wB   b   b    ,
                          G (a)                                              G (a)

where the second term now represents the cost of producing inputs at home rather than the prices
that buyers pay for them. Using this expression for                 , we ...nd that d =d > 0 if and only if
        +1       +1
  >                   . Since ( + 1         ) = > 1, this condition leaves more room for the real cost
of inputs to fall when pro...ts are shared domestically rather than with foreign suppliers. The
calculations in the appendix prove that aggregate welfare increases with the tari¤ rate in this case
if and only if
                                                     +1        +1
                                            <                            .
                                                                +
Comparing this inequality to (33), we see that welfare increases for a wider range of tari¤s when
the disruption of supply chains induces reshoring than when it encourages relocation abroad. Still,
even with reshoring, a larger tari¤ results in lower welfare when              = 1.

4.2.2   Inelastic Demand for Di¤erentiated Products

When demand for di¤erentiated products is inelastic, a tari¤ greater than                         = wB =wA always
disrupts the supply chains. Moreover, the optimal stopping rule for searches in country B is given
by b = b (wB =wA ), which is independent of the tari¤ rate. Then                      =   +1 b    for both original
and new producers of di¤erentiated varieties, which also is independent of the tari¤ rate. Output
prices and factor demands are linked to perceived marginal costs. With no variation in                      , there
is no variation in ` , m , P , or X . With no change in P , there is no room for entry by ...rms


                                                          36
                  Figure 9: Welfare E¤ects of Unanticipated Tari¤s: Inelastic Demand



that would search for suppliers in country B beyond the entry that occurs for                = wB =wA . Higher
tari¤ rates a¤ect welfare for            > wB =wA through two channels: they inuence the terms of trade
via renegotiation and trade diversion and they generate additional search costs.
     Indeed, there is no need for further analysis. The comparative statics with respect to changes
in     for   > wB =wA and " < 1 are identical to those for            >   c    and " > 1 that we studied in the
last section. If the new searches take place in a foreign country B , higher tari¤s result in better
home terms of trade if and only if             < ( + 1) = and they generate greater home welfare on the
                                    +1
margin if and only if       <             . If new searches instead take place in the home country, higher
                                                                 +1       +1
tari¤s reduce the real cost of inputs if and only if         <                     and they boost welfare if and
                 +1    +1
only if      <          +       .
     Figure 9 depicts the relationship between social welfare and the tari¤ rate for the same parameter
values used in Figure 8, except that " = 0:5. In this example, welfare rises imperceptibly above
the free-trade level for a range of small tari¤s up to about 10.3 percent. Here, the social bene...t
from added variety nearly perfectly o¤sets the net social loss from reduced output by the original
producers; the net welfare gain is less than 0.1% of initial spending at the peak. Once supply chains
begin to relocate to country B , welfare falls precipitously with the tari¤ rate due to the socially-
wasteful added search costs and the induced Vinerian trade diversion. Moreover, the marginal
harm from the tari¤ grows larger as the tari¤ rate increases.
     Finally, Figure 10 in the appendix illustrates a case where protection is clearly bene...cial, espe-
cially if protection induces reshoring of input supply to the home country. There, wA = 0:9; wB =
1:0,      = 0:3; and the other parameters are the same as in Figure 9. This is a case where the wage
gap between the cheapest and second cheapest suppliers is only ten percent and suppliers enjoy
more of the bargaining power in their bilateral relationships with downstream producers. If country
B is a foreign country (which requires wB a bit below one), a large tari¤ can be used to extract some

                                                        37
    Figure 10: Welfare E¤ects of Unanticipated Tari¤s with Inelastic Demand and Weak Buyer
                                        Bargaining Power



of the rents that the downstream ...rms concede to suppliers in their price negotiations. A tari¤ of
20% generates a modest welfare gain of about 0.46% of initial spending. If country B instead is
the home country, then the optimal tari¤ is approximately 36.7% and it generates a welfare gain
of more than 3.33% of initial spending. These welfare gains reect the substantial pro...t shifting
from foreign suppliers to domestic suppliers that occurs in this case.


5    Conclusions
Traditional tari¤ analysis focuses on supply and demand elasticities and Harberger triangles. Of
course, subsequent literature has addressed many types of market imperfections, including those
arising from monopoly power and from factor-market distortions. Yet, the rise of global supply
chains introduces some novel considerations to the evaluation of trade barriers, especially when
tari¤s are applied to imports of intermediate goods.
    In this paper, we have stressed the relational aspects of supply chains, as highlighted in the
2020 World Development Report. The formation of supply chains often requires costly search.
Partnerships may vary in productivity. Supply relationships might be governed by imperfectly-
enforceable contracts that can be renegotiated when circumstances change. Bargaining might take
place separately with many, independent suppliers.
    We have identi...ed several new mechanisms by which unanticipated tari¤s on intermediate
inputs impact prices and welfare. First, negotiations with suppliers may be conducted in the
shadow of renewed search. When the outside option for a buyer is to ...nd an alternative supplier,
the negotiated price depends upon the factors that govern the intensity of search and its eventual
prospects. If a tari¤ weakens the incentives for search, the bargaining table tilts in favor of suppliers.


                                                   38
In contrast, if a tari¤ makes search in some di¤erent destination relatively more attractive, the
negotiations may result in shared incidence of the levy.
   Second, bargaining can drive a wedge between the marginal cost of inputs as perceived by
...nal-good producers and their true social cost. When a downstream ...rm bargains independently
with many suppliers, it becomes impractical to negotiate levels of input demands that are jointly
e¢ cient. If, instead, the downstream ...rm decides its factor demands unilaterally, it will recognize
a connection between that choice and the eventual per-unit price. The ...rm will perceive a mar-
ginal cost of inputs di¤erent from their average cost, which generates an ine¢ cient (but privately
pro...table) choice of production technique.
   Third, large tari¤s can induce ...rms to replace their least e¢ cient suppliers with alternatives at
home or in countries that are exempt from the tari¤. In the latter case, the relocation of portions
of the supply chain amounts to Vinerian trade diversion. In both cases, the additional search costs
become a hidden component of the welfare calculus.
   We have analyzed tari¤s that are introduced after global supply chains are already in place.
With original search and entry costs sunk, ...rms remain active as long as they can cover their
operating costs and supply relationships endure in the face of shocks. We consider tari¤s that are
small enough to leave the location of the supply chain as originally situated and larger tari¤s that
make a new destination more attractive. We identify the elasticity of demand for di¤erentiated
products as an important parameter in determining the impacts of an input tari¤, so we analyze
separately cases with elastic and inelastic demand.
   In our second-best setting, input tari¤s generate positive and negative e¤ects on home welfare.
Measurement requires attention to numerous details, including some that leave no visible trail in
the trade data. Although the theoretical analysis leaves open the possibility of welfare-improving
tari¤s, this does not seem to be the likely outcome for plausible parameter values. In fact, we ...nd
that the marginal welfare cost of protection grows with the size of the tari¤, so large tari¤s such
as those recently implemented by the United States.
   More generally, our paper contributes a tractable analytic framework for studying the com-
plex adjustments that occur when various unanticipated shocks disrupt global supply chains. Our
framework can be extended to allow for heterogeneous suppliers who enjoy comparative advantage
in di¤erent parts of the production process. Comparative advantage would provide a ready expla-
nation for multi-country sourcing, as in Blaum et al. (2017) and Antràs et al. (2017). And whereas
we have set aside the holdup problems emphasized by Ornelas and Turner (2008) and Antràs and
Staiger (2012) in order to focus on costly search, it should be possible to combine these features in
a fuller analysis.




                                                 39
References
 [1] Amiti, Mary, Redding, Stephen J., and David E. Weinstein, 2019. "The Impact of the 2018
    Tari¤s on Prices and Welfare," Journal of Economic Perspectives 33:4, 187-210.

 [2] Amiti, Mary, Redding, Stephen J., and David E. Weinstein, 2020. "Who's Paying for the US
    Tari¤s? A Longer-Term Perspective," AEA Papers and Proceedings 110, 541-546..

 [3] Antràs, Pol, 2020, "Conceptual Aspects of Global Value Chains," The World Bank Economic
    Review 34, forthcoming.

 [4] Antràs, Pol and Davin Chor, 2013. "Organizing the Global Value Chain," Econometrica 81:6,
    2127-2204.

 [5] Antràs, Pol, Fort, Theresa, and C. and Felix Tintelnot, 2017. "The Margins of Global Sourcing:
    Theory and Evidence," American Economic Review 107:9, 2514-2564.

 [6] Antràs, Pol and Elhanan Helpman, 2004. "Global Sourcing," Journal of Political Economy
    112:3, 552-580.

 [7] Antràs, Pol and Robert W. Staiger, 2012. "O¤shoring and the Role of Trade Agreements,"
    American Economic Review 102:7, 3140-3183.

 [8] Baldwin, Richard E. and Anthony J. Venables, 2011. "Spiders and Snakes: O¤shoring and
    Agglomeration in the Global Economy," Journal of International Economics 90:2, 245-254.

 [9] Benkert, Jean-Michel, Letina, Igor, and Georg Nödeke, 2018. "Optimal Search from Multiple
    Distributions with In...nite Horizon," Economic Letters 164, 15-18.

[10] Bernard, Andrew B. and Andreas Moxnes, 2018. "Networks and Trade," Annual Review of
    Economics 10, 65-85.

[11] Blanchard, Emily J., Bown, Chad P and Robert C. Johnson, 2017. "Global Value Chains and
    Trade Policy," Dartmouth College, mimeo.

[12] Blaum, Joaquin, Lelarge, Clair and Michael Peters, 2018. "The Gains from Input Trade with
    Heterogeneous Importers," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 10:4, 77-127.

[13] Bloomberg News, 2019."Trump Tari¤s Seal the Deal for Companies Looking to Quit
    China," Bloomberg News May 16, 2019, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-05-
    16/trump-tari¤s-seal-the-deal-for-companies-looking-to-quit-china.

[14] Bown, Chad P., 2019a. "The 2018 US-China Trade Conict After 40 Years of Special Protec-
    tion," Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper 19-7.




                                                40
[15] Bown, Chad P., 2019b. "Phase One China Deal: Steep Tari¤s are the New Normal," Trade
    and Investment Policy Watch, Peterson Institute of International Economics, December 19,
    2019.

[16] Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley, 2016. "The Empirical Landscape of Trade Policy,"
    in K. Bagwell and R.W. Staiger eds., Handbook of Commercial Policy Volume 1A, Amsterdam:
    North Holland.

[17] Brander, James A. and Barbara Spencer, J. "Trade Warfare: Tari¤s and Cartels," Journal of
    International Economics 16:3, 227-242.

[18] Breuninger, Kevin, 2019. "Trump says He's Ordering American Companies to Im-
    mediately Start Looking for an Alternative to China," CNBC, August 23, 2019,
    https://www.cnbc.com/2019/08/23/trump-says-hes-ordering-american-companies-to-
    immediately-start-looking-for-an-alternative-to-china.html.

[19] Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, 2015. "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare E¤ects of
    NAFTA," Review of Economic Studies 82:1, 1-44.

[20] Campolmi, Alessia, Fadinger, Harald, and Chiata Forlati, 2018. "Trade and Do-
    mestic Policies in Models with Monopolistic Competition," http://fadinger.vwl.uni-
    mannheim.de/Research_. . . les/CFF_2018_1004.pdf.

[21] Casas, Francisco R., 1973. "Optimal E¤ective Protection in General Equilibrium," American
    Economic Review 64:3, 714-716.

[22] Collard-Wexler, Allan, Gowrisankaran, Gautam, and Robin S. Lee, 2019. "`Nash-in-Nash'
    Bargaining: A Microfoundation for Applied Work," Journal of Political Economy 127:1, 163-
    195.

[23] Das, Satya, 1983. "Optimal Tari¤s on Final and Intermediate Goods," International Economic
    Review 24:2, 493-508.

[24] Demidova and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, 2013. "The Simple Analytics of the Melitz Model in
    a Small Open Economy," Journal of International Economics 90:2, 266-272.

[25] Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Goldbeg, Pinelopi K., Kennedy, Patrick J. and Amit K. Khandelwal,
    2020. "The Return to Protectionism," Quarterly Journal of Economics 135:1, 1-55.

[26] Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, 2008. "Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of
    O¤shoring," American Economic Review 98:5, 1978-1997.

[27] Halpern, László, Koren, László, and Adam Szeidl, 2015. "Imported Inputs and Productivity,"
    American Economic Review 105:12, 3660-3703.



                                               41
[28] Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R. Krugman, 1989. Trade Policy and Market Structure, Cam-
    bridge, MA: The MIT Press.

[29] Huang, Eustance, 2019. "Thailand is a `Leading Bene...ciary'of the Trade War, says Standard
    Chartered", CNBC Nov 4, 2019, https://www.cnbc.com/2019/11/05/thailand-is-a-leading-
    bene...ciary-of-the-us-china-trade-war-stanchart.html.

[30] Hu¤ord, Austen and Bob Tita, 2019. "Manufacturers Move Supply Chains Out of China,"
    The Wall Street Journal July 14, 2019, https://www.wsj.com/articles/manufacturers-move-
    supply-chains-out-of-china-11563096601.

[31] Katrak, Homi, 1977. "Multi-National Monopolies and Commercial Policy," Oxford Economic
    Papers 29:2, 283-291.

[32] Kawanami, Takeshi and Takeshi Shiraishi, 2019. "Trump's Latest China Tari¤s to Shock Global
    Supply Chains," Nikei Asian Review May 12, 2019, https://asia.nikkei.com/Economy/Trade-
    war/Trump-s-latest-China-tari¤s-to-shock-global-supply-chains.

[33] Kearney, 2020. Trade War Spurs Sharp Reversal in 2019 Reshoring Index, Foreshadowing
    COVID-19 Test of Supply Chain Resilience, Washington DC: Kearney.

[34] Master, Farah, Sriring, Orathai, and Anne Marie Roantree, 2018. "Supply Chain Reac-
    tion: Trade War Refugees Race to Relocate to Vietnam, Thailand," Reuters November
    28, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trade-china-vietnam/supply-chain-reaction-
    trade-war-refugees-race-to-relocate-to-vietnam-thailand-idUSKCN1NX2XZ.

[35] Ornelas, Emanuel and John L. Turner, 2008. "Trade Liberalization, Outsourcing, and the
    Hold-up Problem," Journal of International Economics 74:1, 225-241.

[36] Ornelas, Emanuel and John L. Turner, 2012. "Protection and International Sourcing," The
    Economic Journal 122:559, 26-63.

[37] Ornelas, Emanuel, Turner, John L. and Grant Bickwit, 2020. "Preferential Trade Agreements
    and Global Sourcing," mimeo.

[38] Reed, J.R., 2019. "President Trump Order Firms to Ditch China, but Many Already Have and
    More are on the Way," CNBC September 1, 2019, https://www.cnbc.com/2019/09/01/trump-
    ordered-us-...rms-to-ditch-china-but-many-already-have.html.

[39] Ru¢ n, Roy J., 1969. "Tari¤s, Intermediate Goods and Domestic Protection," American Eco-
    nomic Review 59:3, 261-269.

[40] Soon, Stella, 2019. "Investors Have Set Their Eyes on Thailand as the Trade War Deepens,
    says CEO," CNBC August 27, 2019, https://www.cnbc.com/2019/08/27/us-china-trade-war-
    companies-looking-to-invest-in-thailand-vietnam.html.


                                                42
[41] Stole, Lars A. and Je¤rey Zwiebel, 1996. "Infor-...rm Bargaining under Non-Binding Con-
    tracts," Review of Economic Studies 63, 375-410.

[42] Svedberg, Peter, 1979. "Optimal Tari¤ Policy on Imports from Multinationals," Economic
    Record 55,148, 64-67.

[43] Venables, Anthony J., 1987. "Trade and Trade Policy with Di¤erentiated Products: A
    Chamberlinian-Ricardian Model," The Economic Journal 97:387, 700-717.

[44] World Bank, 2020. World Development Report 2020: Trading for Development in the Age of
    Global Value Chains, Washington DC: The World Bank.




                                              43
                                           Appendix
                     When Tari¤s Disturb Global Supply Chains
                                        by
                     Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman

Section 1 Introduction
   For applied tari¤s, we used the Harmonized Tari¤ Schedule (HTS) of the United States prepared
by the U.S. International Trade Commission and available at https://dataweb.usitc.gov/tari¤/annual.
Since these tari¤ rates are reported at the HTS8 level, we assumed that all HTS10 items in the
same HTS8 category were subject to the average tari¤ for that category. We calculated the ad val-
orem equilibrium of speci...c tari¤s using reported unit values and we accounted for "special rates"
due to preferential trade agreements and administered protection. For the ...rst wave of U.S. tari¤
increases in February 2018 and the second wave of tari¤ increases in March 2018, we used the tari¤
data from Fajgelbaum et al. (2020). For subsequent tari¤ hikes that began in July 2018, we used
data kindly provided to us by Chad Bown.
   Import data are from the U.S. Census Bureau, available at https://usatrade.census.gov/.
   To compute average applied tari¤s on intermediate goods and ...nal goods, we categorized HTS10
products according to the Broad Economic Categories provided by the United Nations. The cross-
walk     between      HTS10      codes      and       end-use   categories    is    available    at
https://unstats.un.org/unsd/tradekb/Knowledgebase/50090/Intermediate-Goods-in-Trade-Statistics.
We weighted the applied tari¤s by the annual import shares in 2015 at the HTS10 level. Figure
A1 presents the results of these calculations.




                                                  1
Figure 1 in the main text uses the tari¤ rates applicable to China, weighted by the annual imports
shares in 2015 at the HTS10 level.
   To construct Table 1, we estimated

                                                                             i;China;t
                                   ln Mijt =   i   +    t   +       j   ln               +     ijt
                                                                              i;LCC;t

where Mijt is the value of imports of intermediate good i from country j in month t,                                i   is an HTS10-
product ...xed e¤ect,    t   is a month ...xed e¤ect, and                i;j;t   is one plus the ad valorem tari¤ on good i
from country j in month t. In the case of the low-cost countries (j = LCC ), we aggregated the im-
ports from Bangladesh, Cambodia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam and we weighted the applicable tari¤ rates by
the HTS10 import values shares in 2017. We used only product-month pairs with positive imports
from both China and the LCC countries. Following Amiti et al. (2019), we excluded petroleum
products due the sensitive response to volatile oil products. To allow comparability with Amiti et
al. (2019), we classi...ed goods according to the end-use codes provided by the U.S. Census Bureau at
https://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/schedules/b/2015/imp-code.txt. However, using the slightly
di¤erent categorization provided by the United Nation yields qualitatively similar results. Standard
errors are clustered at the HTS8 level.

Section 2 Foreign Sourcing with Search and Bargaining
   We start from the bargaining game, which determines the payment to a supplier with inverse
match productivity a for one unit of the intermediate input. The Nash bargaining solution solves

                                                                                              f
                        (a) = arg max (qm          wam)1                         (a) m +               qm       .
                                     q                                                       G (a)

The ...rst-order condition for the maximization on the right-hand side yields

                                       1
                                                   =                          f
                                      (a)   wa                  (a) +                        (a)
                                                                             mG(a)

and therefore
                                                                                              f
                                (a) = wa + (1               )           (a) + (1         )          :
                                                                                             mG (a)
Taking the conditional mean of both sides of this equation for a                                   a, we have

                                                                         1         f
                                         (a) = w       a (a)     +                       .                                      (34)
                                                                                  mG (a)

Substituting this result back into the         (a) function then gives

                                                                                     1        f
                                (a) = wa + (1               )w          a (a)    +                  ;                           (35)
                                                                                             mG (a)


                                                                2
which is equation (4) in the main text. Next we use (5), the ...rst-order condition for a. This states

                                                      0                        f g (a)
                                                mw    a (a)       =                    :                               (36)
                                                                                G (a)2

Note, however, that                                                        Z    a
                                                      1
                                            a (a) =                                 ag (a)da
                                                    G (a)                  0

and therefore
                                          0
                                          a (a) G (a)     = g (a) [a                     a (a)] :                      (37)

Substituting this into (36), we obtain

                                                                                  f
                                           w [a          a (a)]        =                :                              (38)
                                                                                 mG (a)

Substituting (38) into (35) then yields equation (6),

                               (a) = w [a            a (a)]       + w                a (a)   + (1               ) wa
                                    = wa + (1                 ) wa:

    We next use the demand equation (3), the pricing equation (7), and (34) to compute operating
pro...ts. These pro...ts are
                                                                   1                  f
                                      o   = x (p         c)                                          fo ;
                                                                                     G (a)
where
                                                     p=                         c;
                                                                           1
                                                p
                                    x=X                   = XP                                   c          ;          (39)
                                                P                                            1
and the aggregate cost of m units of the intermediate input is

                                                                       1              f
                                            w   a (a) m       +                            :
                                                                                     G (a)

Therefore,
                                                              1
                                            (       1)                               1            f
                               o   = XP                           c1                                            fo ;   (40)
                                                                                                 G (a)
where
                                                    c = c [w           a (a)] ;

as stated in equation (8). By Shephard'
                                      s Lemma, m is given by

                                                              (                1)
                                            m = XP                                   c   c0 :                          (41)



                                                                  3
A ...rm chooses a to maximize pro...ts net of search costs, taking P and X as given. That is,
                                                          1
                                         (          1)                       1                     1             f                  f
                a = arg max XP                                c [w     a (a)]                                                              fo
                           a                                                                                    G (a)              G (a)
                                                          1
                                         (          1)                       1                          f
                   = arg max XP                               c [w     a (a)]                                           fo :
                           a                                                                           G (a)

For an interior solution, the ...rst-order condition is

                               (    1)                                                                                 f g (a)
                     XP                      c [w     a (a)]          c0 [w                0
                                                                                  a (a)] w a (a)                +              = 0;
                                                                                                                        G (a)2

which is the same as (5) in view of (41). Using Assumptions 1 and 2, this condition can be written
as
                                                                          (       1) 1
                               (    1)                                                                                          f
                      XP                          w           a                                w                  +                 = 0:
                                                         +1                                            +1                      a +1
Therefore the second-order condition for pro...t maximization is satis...ed at the optimal choice of
a if and only if     >    (        1), as stipulated in Assumption 3. This ...rst-order condition can be
expressed as
                                                                                           (       1)
                                    (        1)                   f           w
                               a                  XP =                                                                         :                (42)
                                                                              +1                                    1
Substituting this expression into (40) yields

                                                   f                          (      1)
                                        o               =                               fa                      fo :
                                                  G (a)                   (         1)

     The free entry condition is
                                                                       f
                                                          o                 = fe ;
                                                                      G (a)
which, together with the previous equation, yields equation (9):

                                                             f                         (        1)
                                                  a =                                              .                                            (43)
                                                          fo + fe                  (           1)

The solution to this cuto¤ is interior if and only if

                                                      f                       (      1)
                                                                                        < 1:
                                                   fo + fe                (         1)

Substituting (43) and XP           = P            "   into (42) provides a solution for P . And substituting this
equation into
                                                                                                        1
                                              P =                     w             a          n            1
                                                              1               +1




                                                                          4
provides a solution for n. Note that

                                         n
                                         ^=(              1)       b
                                                                   a        ^ ;
                                                                            P

where a hat over a variable represents a proportional rate of change, e.g., y
                                                                            ^ = dy=y . For an increase
in the search cost f we have, from (42),

                                          ^                                  1)] b
                                        ^=f
                                        P
                                                      [            (             a
                                                                       "

and from (43),
                                                     1^
                                                   b
                                                   a= f :

Therefore,
                                            ^=            (        1) ^
                                            P                         f;
                                                          (        ")
                                                  (            1) 1         "^
                                         n
                                         ^=                                   f:
                                                                            "
These results are summarized in

Lemma 1 Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold and

                                           f                   (        1)
                                                                           < 1:
                                        fo + fe            (           1)

Then lower search costs f lead to a lower cuto¤ a and a lower price index P . They also generate
more variety n if and only if " > 1.


Section 3 A Small, Unanticipated Tari¤
   In this case, the ex-factory price paid to a foreign supplier with inverse match productivity a is
 (a; ), which is the solution to

                                                                    f
                 (a; ) = arg max        [a ( ) ; ] +                                      q    (q         wa)1   :
                              q                               m ( ) G [a ( )]

This f.o.b. price excludes the tari¤ levy. The ...rst-order condition for this maximization problem is

                           1
                                        =                                      f
                                                                                                      ;
                         (a; )     wa           [a ( ) ; ] +                                  (a; )
                                                                           m( )G[a( )]

which yields
                                                                                               f
                    (a; ) = wa + (1         )      [a ( ) ; ] + (1                   )                   :           (44)
                                                                                         m ( ) G [a ( )]



                                                           5
Taking conditional expectations on both sides of this equation for a                         a ( ), we ...nd

                                                                  1                 f
                             [a ( ) ; ] = w    a [a (    )] +                                 :                (45)
                                                                              m ( ) G [a ( )]

Next, substituting this expression into (44), we obtain

                                                                          1                f
                      (a; ) = wa + (1           )w      a [a (     )] +                              ;         (46)
                                                                                     m ( ) G [a ( )]

which is equation (10) in the main text. As explained in the text, using the optimal search cuto¤
a ( ) yields
                                                                           f
                              w fa ( )        a [a (    )]g =                          :                       (47)
                                                                       m ( ) G [a ( )]
Now substitute this equation into (46) to obtain

                                       (a; ) = wa + (1                    ) wa ( ) :                           (48)

   Next note that it is cheaper to sources inputs from the original supplier a whenever

                                                                             f
                                 (a; )           [a ( ) ; ] +                          :
                                                                       m ( ) G [a ( )]

Using (45) and (47), the right-hand side of this inequality equals wA a ( ). Therefore this inequality
can be expressed as
                                                  a       a( ):

From this result, we have

Lemma 2 For a given a ( ) the cost minimizing cuto¤ ac is

                                             ac = min fa ( ) ; ag :

   As explained in the main text, the marginal cost of m is given by equation (14),

                                 G (ac )                                  G (ac )
                             =           w     a (ac )   + 1                           w   a (a   )
                                 G (a)                                    G (a)

and then optimal (mark-up) pricing implies

                                              p =                 c(    ):
                                                              1

Using Assumption 2 and Lemma 2, the marginal cost can be expressed as
                             (
                                  +1    wa                                          for a < a
                         =                                                                            .        (49)
                                    +1   wa + (1           )      +1   wa           for a > a


                                                          6
This is the M M curve in Figures 3 and 4.
   We next derive the N N curve, using the ...rst-order condition for a in (47), Shephard'
                                                                                         s Lemma
m = x c0 (     ), the expression for the demand for variety ! in (39), and the expression for the
                             1=(     1)
price index; P = p (n )                   . This expression of the price index assumes that all ...rms, new
and old, charge the same price p , which we verify below. First, in the Pareto case (47) becomes

                                                                +1         f ( + 1)
                                                wa ( )                =             :                                                      (50)
                                                                              m( )

Second,

                                           p
                         m =X                             c0 (        )                                                                    (51)
                                           P
                                                                                         "
                             = X (n )                 1   c0 (        ) = (P )               (n )        1   c0 (   )
                                                            "
                                           "
                             = (p )            (n )         1    c0 (      )

Combining these equations, we obtain

                                   ( + 1) f                                    "
                                                                                              " 0
                                                +1
                                                      = (n )                   1   (p )        c (       ) ,
                                w (a )

which is equation (17) in the main text. Using p = c (                                         ) =(              1) and c (   ) = (   ) , this
equation becomes
                                                                                          "
                         ( + 1) f                                 "
                                                                                                         (1 ") 1
                                     +1
                                          = (n )                  1                            (     )                  .                  (52)
                        w (a )                                                     1
This implies that the N N curve is higher the greater is the tari¤ rate and that all along this curve,

                                                 ^ =                      +1
                                                                                b
                                                                                a :
                                                            1             (1 ")

The denominator is positive for all " > 0, and since " <                                 and         >       (      1),     +1 > 1+   ("    1).
Therefore the elasticity of the N N curve is larger than one. The upward shift of the curve in
response to a rise in   satis...es
                                                 ^ =                      1
                                                                                        ^:
                                                            1             (1       ")
Therefore,     rises proportionately more than                            if " < 1 and proportionately less if " > 1. As a
result, the marginal cost       declines in the inelastic case and rises in the inelastic case, holding
constant the number of ...rms.
   Now consider the incentives for entry by new ...rms in response to the tari¤. We begin with the
inelastic case, " < 1. In this case,
                                                           =w                      a ;                                                     (53)
                                                                          +1
                                                                      +1
                                                          =w                           a :                                                 (54)
                                                                       +1

                                                                      7
Therefore, holding constant the number of ...rms, (16)-(17) imply

                                                       ^ =                                    ^;                                                             (55)
                                                                                ("      1)
                                                                           ("     1)
                                                       b
                                                       a =                            ^:                                                                     (56)
                                                                                (" 1)
It follows that         rises less than proportionately to , while a declines. A new entrant seeks to
maximize operating pro...ts minus search costs and entry costs. Using (40) and (49), the highest
pro...t such an entrant can achieve as a function of the tari¤ is
                                                                   1
                                              "   (      1)                                      (1        )             f
                      ( ) = max P ( )                                  [ w           a (a)]                                           fo      fe :           (57)
                                 a                                                                                      G (a)

For   = 1, the solution to the problem on the right-hand side of this equation is a = a and                                                               (1) = 0.
Therefore there is new entry as long as                  0(       ) > 0. Using the Envelope Theorem,                                             0(   ) > 0 if and
                  "     (1   )
only if P ( )                    is increasing in . Using (55) and                                   >          (               1), we obtain

                       (        ^
                             ") P         (           1) ^        (            ") ^
                                                                                  (   1) ^
                                                             =
                                      ^                                        ^
                                                                         (   ")
                                                             =                      (    1)
                                                                       + (1 ")
                                                                         (   1) (    ")
                                                             >                              (                                       1) = 0:
                                                                       (   1) + (1 ")

It follows that there is entry of new ...rms as long as a < a. The entry of new ...rms reduces the
price index and entry proceeds until

                                                             "         (       1)                "
                                              P( )                                   =P              ;
                                                                                             (        1)
                                                                      P( )=                          "     P;

at which point
                                                                  a ( ) = a:

Using the equation for the price index,
                                                                                                                    1
                                     P( )=                       cf w          a [a (     )]g n ( )                     1   ;
                                                         1

we obtain
                                                                                (1 ")(     1)
                                                      n( ) = n                        "          :




                                                                           8
Hence, there is more entry the higher the tari¤. Moreover, with the number of ...rms n ,

                                                                   ( )=         ;
                                                                   ( )= :

The optimal choice of a ( ),

                                                                                        f
                                     w fa ( )        a [a (         )]g =                           ;
                                                                                    m ( ) G [a ( )]

implies
                                                              m ( ) = m:

In summary, we have

Lemma 3 Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold and " < 1. Then for small tari¤ s new ...rms enter and:
               (    1)                          (1 ")(        1)
(i) P ( ) =        "     P ; (ii) n ( ) =             "            n; (iii) a ( ) = a; (iv)               ( )=     ; (v)   ( ) = ; (vi)
 m ( ) = m.

In this equilibrium, entrants and the original producers share the same marginal cost,                                        , and they
charge the same price p for their ...nal goods, as conjectured above.
   In the elastic case, " > 1, equations (15), (16) and (17) imply

                                            ^ =                      +1
                                                                                                 ^                                     (58)
                                                     +1                              ("    1)
and
                                                                      ("    1)
                                          b
                                          a =                                                    ^;                                    (59)
                                                     +1                              ("    1)
where
                                                                    (1    )a
                                                       =                        :
                                                                   a + (1    )a
                                                                                                0(                                 "    (1    )
The objective function of a potential entrant is (57). Therefore                                      ) > 0 if and only if P ( )
is rising in . However, this time we use (58) and                           >        (     1) to obtain

               (            ^
                         ") P         (     1) ^          (         ") ^        (         1) ^
                                                   =
                                 ^                                          ^
                                                               ( +1       )(   ")
                                                   =                                 (    1)
                                                              +1             (" 1)
                                                               [ (    1) + 1    ](    ")
                                                   <                                         (    1)
                                                              (    1) + 1          (" 1)
                                                                (1    ) (" 1) [ (   1) + 1]
                                                   =                                         < 0:
                                                                 (   1) + 1          (" 1)

It follows that potential entrants face negative pro...ts for all small tari¤ levels. Therefore, we have


                                                                      9
Lemma 4 Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold and " > 1. Then for small tari¤ s there is no entry of
new ...nal-good producers and prospective pro...ts of potential entrants decline with the tari¤ rate.


   Next consider the welfare e¤ects of small tari¤s. We showed in the main text that, apart from
a constant, welfare can be expressed as

                                                                                         1           1
                    V ( ) = U (X )        n    m            n `            n f                           .
                                                                                       G (ac )     G (a)

In the elastic case, i.e., " > 1, ac = a and there are no additional search costs. Moreover, there is
no entry, so that n = n. Therefore

                                     V ( ) = U (X )                     n m            n`

and
                            dV    dX                   d`                  dm                    d
                               =P                  n                n                   nm         :
                            d      d                   d                    d                    d
The CES aggregator implies that
                                          X =n              1   z (` ; m )

and therefore

                                 dX                            d`      dm
                             P      =n         1   P        z`    + zm
                                  d                            d        d
                                                             P    d`      dm
                                         =n    1                      +
                                                            1p    d         d
                                                            d`      dm
                                         =n                     +         :
                                                   1        d        d

The second line is obtained from the ...rst by noting that the marginal revenue generated by an
increase in an input equals the input's marginal cost, which is one for labor and                            for intermediate
                                                                1
inputs. The third line is obtained from P = pn                      1   . Using this result, we obtain

                      dV         1    d`                                           dm                  d
                         =n              +n                                                      nm      ;              (60)
                      d              1d                      1                      d                  d

which is equation (22) in the main text.
   Next, the assumption of a Cobb-Douglas technology implies

                                                       1
                                              ` =                         m

and therefore
                                     1    d`            1        1            d(       m )
                                             =                                               :
                                         1d                 1                      d



                                                            10
However, spending on intermediate inputs is a fraction                                      of spending on all inputs,

                                                                                  1
                                                      n       m =                     P X ;                                                        (61)

and therefore

                                     1      d`            1       1         d(        m )           1         d (P X )
                            n                  =n                                               =                                                  (62)
                                           1d                 1                   d                               d
                                                      1                               d
                                                 =                    ("    1)                           P X :
                                                                                      d
                             1
Using P = (         ) n          1    =(         1), the last equality is obtained from

                            d (P X )   d (P )1                    "
                                                                                                 d                1
                                     =                                =      ("       1)                              P X :
                                d          d                                                     d

Therefore, using (58),

                            1     d`              1                                         +1
                        n            =                    ("           1)                                                  P X :
                                 1d                                              +1                          ("       1)

This gives us the ...rst term in (60). Since " > 1, the tari¤ reduces employment and this has a
negative (partial) e¤ect on welfare.
        To obtain the second term in (60), we again use (61) and (58), which gives


          dm            1 d (P X )                    d
    n        =                                   nm
           d                  d                        d
                    1                                  +1                                                1                         +1
                =           ("        1)                                              P X                    nm
                                             +1                             (" 1)                                          +1                ("        1)
                    1       1                                               +1
                =                    [("    1)    + 1]                                                   P X :
                                                              +1                           ("       1)

Now, (13) and (16) imply
                                                      = w                   [ a + (1                )a ]                                           (63)
                                                                      +1
and
                                                      = w                   a + (1              ) wa .                                             (64)
                                                                      +1
Therefore,

                         dm                                            1          1                                             +1
n                           =                                                             [("       1)       + 1]                                      P X
            1             d                           1                                                               +1                ("        1)
                                            +                               1         1                                            +1
                                     =                                      2
                                                                                            [("         1)    + 1]                                          P X :
                                                                  1                                                        +1            ("        1)

While the tari¤ reduces demand for the composite intermediate good, the welfare e¤ect is ambiguous


                                                                            11
for the reasons discussed in the main text. This component of the welfare e¤ect is positive if and
only if
                                                          +
                                                                    >                     :
                                                                                  1
This is the second term in (60).
   To obtain the third term in the welfare formula, we use (64) and (59) to obtain

                               d                                        da
                          nm               = wnm (1                 )
                               d                                        d
                                               1                                      ("            1) wa
                                           =       nm (1            )                                                     :
                                                                             +1                          ("          1)

Next, (61) and (63) imply

                                                        1                                            1
                              nm =                                                                         P X :
                                               w +1 [ a + (1                  )a ]

Therefore,
                          d         1          +1               1                             ("     1)
                   nm          =       2
                                                                                                                      P X :
                          d                                             +1                                 ("    1)
So, in this case, d =d > 0; i.e., the terms of trade deteriorate.
   Combining the three terms in the expression for the change in welfare, we have

                               +1                              ("       1)        dV  2
                                                                                     =                                        (65)
                                               +1                             P X d
                                       (1          ) ("        1)
                                           +
                               +                                   (              1) [("             1)     + 1]
                                                                1
                                       +1                       (" 1)
                                               (      1)                          :
                                                                +1

A marginal tari¤ raises welfare if and only if the right-hand side of this equation is positive. Since
at free trade   (1) = 1        , it follows that, starting with free trade, a very small tari¤ reduces
welfare if and only if
                                               "( + )
                                                                             >(                    1) (1        ):
                                   +           (" 1) (1                  )
Next, note that, holding           constant, the right-hand side of (65) is declining in . Hence, any
positive tari¤ must reduce welfare if

                             "( + 1                        )
                                                                    >(                1)             for all          1:
                          +1       ("                     1)

   In the inelastic case, i.e., " < 1, Lemma 3 describes the equilibrium outcomes. The di¤erence
in welfare between this tari¤-ridden equilibrium and an equilibrium without the tari¤ results only
from the di¤erences in consumer surplus and tari¤ revenue, because pro...ts of new entrants are zero


                                                                    12
and operating pro...ts of incumbents do not change. We therefore have

                                         "       h          " 1           " 1
                                                                                i
          V( )       V (1) =                         X( )    "        X    "            [P ( ) X ( )            P X] + (                  1) n ( ) m ( ) :
                                     "       1

However, in view of Lemma 3, (61) implies

                                                                                              1
                                                         n( )m( ) =                               P ( )X ( );

and therefore

                                 "       h            " 1           " 1
                                                                          i                                                           1        1
   V( )           V (1) =                    X( )      "        X    "          [P ( ) X ( )               P X] +                                  P ( )X ( ):
                             "       1

Since, in this case,

                                                                                +1
                                                                       =                          wa;
                                                                                 +1
                                                                       =                 wa;
                                                                                +1
                                                                                +1
                                                                       =                          ;

                                             "
we can use X ( ) = P ( )                         and Lemma 3(i) to obtain

V ( ) V (1)                      "               (    1)(1 ")                       (    1)(1 ")                         1 +1                          1       (   1)(1 ")
            =                                           "         1                        "              1 +                                                        "
    P1 "                     1       "
                             1                        1 +1                          1          1            (       1)(1 ")
                     =               +                                                                                "       :
                         1       "                                                         1          "

This implies


              (   1)(1 ")
                          +1
                    "                                1 +1                 1         "                 1    +1                                      1
                               V0( ) =                                +                   1                                       (       1)               :        (66)
          (        1) P 1 "                                                         "                                                          1       "

Since         > " + (1       ") (                1), the right-hand side of (66) is declining in . Welfare declines in
for all       > 1 if it declines at                  = 1. Note that

                                                                                         +1                     1
                                                 sign V 0 (1) = sign
                                                                                                                     "
                                                                      = sign [(1                  )(       ")         "] :

Therefore,
                                         V 0 (1) < 0 if and only if                        > (1            )             1 :
                                                                                                                "
This is more likely to be satis...ed the larger is the bargaining power of the buyers, the lower is the


                                                                                    13
elasticity of substitution, and the larger is the elasticity of demand for di¤erentiated products as a
whole.

Section 4 Large, Unanticipated Tari¤s
   In this section, the outside option for buyers is to search for new suppliers in country B . The
outside option is the same when a buyer bargains with a supplier in country A as when it bargains
with one in country B . Since there are no tari¤s on inputs purchased in country B , the bargaining
game with a supplier in country B yields
                                                                    "                                                        #
                                                             1                                     f
      B   (b; ) = arg max [qm ( )            wB bm ( )]                 wB       b   b( ) m( ) +                        qm ( )       .
                         q                                                                       G b( )

The ...rst-order condition for this problem is

                                 1
                                                =                                        f
                                                                                                                    ;
                             B (b; )     wB b       wB       b   b( ) +                                 B   (b; )
                                                                                     m( )G[b( )]


and therefore

                                                                                                         f
                   B   (b; ) = wB b + (1             ) wB        b      b ( ) + (1            )                 :                        (67)
                                                                                                     m( )G b( )

Taking the conditional mean of both sides of this equation for b                                     b ( ), yields

                                                                             1              f
                                 B     b ( ) = wB        b   b( ) +                                .                                     (68)
                                                                                        m( )G b( )

Now use the ...rst-order condition for b ( ) that minimizes costs,

                                                                                         f
                                     wB b ( )        b       b( )        =                      ;                                        (69)
                                                                                     m( )G b( )

to obtain
                                         B   (b; ) = wB b + (1                        ) wB b ( ) :                                       (70)

Note that this cost of inputs depends on the tari¤ only through b ( ) and it is the same for the
original producers and new entrants.
   Bargaining with suppliers in country A yields
                                                                  "                                                              #
                                                             1                                     f
     A (a;   ) = arg max [qm ( )          wA am ( )]                  wB     b       b( ) m( ) +                        qm ( )           .
                        q                                                                        G b( )




                                                                  14
The ...rst-order condition for this problem is

                                 1
                                                  =                               f
                             A (a; )      wA a         wB    b   b( ) +                                A (a;   )
                                                                              m( )G[b( )]


and therefore

                                                                                                          f
                     A (a;    )=        wA a + (1           ) wB    b   b ( ) + (1            )                  :         (71)
                                                                                                      m( )G b( )

Substituting (68) and (69) into this equation we obtain

                                                                                          b( )
                                          A (a;       ) = wA a + (1                ) wB           :                        (72)

This negotiated price depends on                 through the ratio b ( ) = . In these circumstances, it is cheaper
to source an input a from country A if

                                                                                  f
                                         A (a;    )         B    b( ) +                  :
                                                                              m( )G b( )

Using (68) and (69), the right-hand side of this inequality equals wB b ( ). Therefore this inequality
can be expressed as
                                                        wA a        wB b ( ) :

From this result we have

Lemma 5 For given b ( ), the cost minimizing cuto¤ aB is

                                                                   wB b ( )
                                                  aB = min                  ;a :                                           (73)
                                                                     wA

     Now consider the perceived marginal cost of the composite intermediate good for one of the
original producers. From (67), we see that the average marginal cost of sourcing from country B is
wB   b   b ( ) , while from (71) we see that the average marginal cost of sourcing from country A is
  wA     a (aB ) + (1        ) wB   b   b ( ) . Since an incumbent ...rm sources a fraction G (aB ) =G (a) of its
inputs from country A and the remaining fraction 1                            G (aB ) =G (a) from country B , its marginal
cost of the intermediate input is

                   G (aB )                                                                            G (aB )
                 =           wA a (aB ) + (1                       ) wB   b    b      + 1                     wB   b   b
                   G (a)                                                                              G (a)
                    G (aB )                                      G (aB )
                 =          wA a (aB ) + 1                               wB          b    b   ;
                     G (a)                                       G (a)

where we have replace the function b ( ) with the value of b at the tari¤ level , b . Using (73) and




                                                                   15
properties of the Pareto distribution yields the equation for the M M curve,
                              (
                         =                        +1 wB b                                       for b < wA a=wB
                                                                                                                                     :                  (74)
                                   +1        wA a + (1                       ) wB b             for b > wA a=wB

New entrants (if any exist) search for suppliers only in country B . Equation (68) implies that an
entrant'
       s marginal cost is
                                            new   = wB           b       b        =                 wB b :                                              (75)
                                                                                        +1
For the tari¤ level     = wB =wA , the equilibrium values are b = a and                                                    new   =          =   =   +1 wB a.
   We next derive the equation for the N N curve, ...rst for the case of " > 1 and then for " < 1. In
either case, we have (69). As we explained in the previous section, when all the ...rms are identical,
m , the volume of imported intermediate goods, is given by (see (51))
                                                                             "
                                                    "
                                   m = (p )             (n )                 1   c0 (   )                                                               (76)
                                                                             "
                                                                                                "
                                        =               c(       )               (n )           1   c0 (       )
                                                    1
                                                                     "
                                                                                        "
                                                                                                         (1 ") 1
                                        =                                (n )           1   (        )                 ;
                                                         1

where n = n in the elastic case. Since higher tari¤s do not raise pro...ts when " > 1, there is no
entry of new ...rms. Substituting the expression for m into (69) yields

                                                                                            "
                               ( + 1) f                        "
                                                                                                                (1 ") 1
                                            +1
                                                 =n            1                                    (      )                ,                           (77)
                              wB    b                                               1

which is the N N curve in the elastic case. It follows that the elasticity of the N N curve in this case
is ( + 1) = [1     (1    ")], which is larger than one under Assumption 3 for all " < . From (74),
the slope of the M M curve is smaller than one and therefore N N is steeper at the intersection
point of the two curves, as drawn in Figure 5.
   In the inelastic case (" < 1) we derive the N N curve as follows. A new entrant who searches
for suppliers in country B , has zero pro...ts, so
                                                             1
                                        "   (       1)                                   1                      f
                  0 = max (P )                                   c [wB             b (b)]                                  fo        fe ,
                          b                                                                                    G (b)

where

                                            c [wB       b (b)]       =           wB             b          ;
                                                                                        +1
                                                        G (b) = b :

Let bnew be the optimal search strategy for an entrant. The ...rst-order condition for an interior


                                                                         16
solution for bnew is

                                                                                   (     1) 1
                       "   (           1)                                                                                                f
             (P )                                   wB                bnew                              wB                 +                    +1
                                                                                                                                                     = 0;   (78)
                                                          +1                                                  +1                    bnew

and the zero pro...t condition becomes

                                                     1                                      (       1)
                               "   (           1)                                                                 f
                (P )                                          wB                 bnew                                          = fo + fe :                  (79)
                                                                       +1                                        bnew

The last two equations provide a solution to the cuto¤ bnew and the price index P . These are the
same conditions that lead to (43):

                                                                               f                    (     1)
                                                     bnew             =                                      .                                              (80)
                                                                            fo + fe             (        1)

Note that this solution does not depend on the wage rate or the tari¤ rate. It follows that new
entrants choose the same cuto¤ that the original entrants chose in country A when they entered
the industry. That is,
                                                                            bnew = a:

And the solution to the price index is,

                                                                                                                                (   1)
                                       "                                                   f
                       (P )                =                      1       fo + fe +                      wB                a                ;
                                               (         1)                                a                     +1

which is independent of the size of the tari¤ for                                       > wB =wA . The price index under free trade is

                                                                                                                                (   1)
                                       "                                                   f
                       (P )                =                      1     fo + fe +                        wA                a             ;
                                               (         1)                                a                     +1

so we have
                                                                                            (       1)
                                                              "              "     wB                              "
                                               (P )               =P                                     >P            :                                    (81)
                                                                                   wA
Moreover, P for        slightly above wB =wA is the same as the price index in the small-tari¤ setting
when    approaches wB =wA from below.
   Although P does not depend on the tari¤ rate, changes in the tari¤ rate might nonetheless a¤ect
the scale of entry by new ...rms if the tari¤ impacts the prices charged by the original producers,
because (2) implies
                                                          "                                                                             #
                                                                                                                               (1   )
                       (P )1               =                  n(        )    (1    )
                                                                                       + nnew wB                       a                    ;               (82)
                                                      1                                                       +1

where n is the number of original entrants,                                        is their marginal cost and nnew is the number of



                                                                                  17
new entrants. If higher tari¤s were to lead to higher marginal costs                                        , they would also lead to
fewer entrants. However, we will soon see that                       does not change with the tari¤ level as long as
      wB =wA so that, in fact, nnew is independent of the tari¤ rate for all                                        > wB =wA .
   To derive the equilibrium marginal cost of the incumbents,                               , we ...rst note that the M M curve
de...ned by (74) applies to this case too. Next use the ...rst-order condition for b that minimizes
costs of m (for an original producer),

                                                                            f
                                       wB b         b   b            =                      ;
                                                                          m G b

to obtain
                                                        +1            f ( + 1)
                                             wB b            =                 :
                                                                          m
However,

                                                                 "
                             m = x c0 (        ) = (P )                        c(       )           c0 (    )
                                                                           1
                                                "                                           1
                                 =    (P )                   (        )        (    )           :
                                                        1

Substituting this expression for m into the previous equation yields the upward sloping N N curve
when demand is inelastic, namely

                                      +1                             f ( + 1)
                             wB b          =                                  (             )1+      (     1)
                                                                                                                :                   (83)
                                                    1                  (P ) "

In this equation P is a constant, given by (81). The elasticity of the N N curve now is

                                                   +1
                                                         > 1:
                                                1+ (  1)

Equations (74) and (83) yield the solution b = a and                       =        +1 wB a         for         = wB =wA , as depicted in
Figure 6. For higher tari¤ rates,          > wB =wA , the price index P remains the same and therefore
only the M M curve shifts, as explained in the main text. As a result, in the inelastic case, b = a
and      =   +1 wB a   for all      wB =wA .
   Under these circumstances (82) implies that the number of new entrants also is constant and
equal to nnew = n (wB =wA )          n. Moreover, m is constant and mnew = m , and all ...rms face
the same marginal cost, be they incumbents or new entrants. It follows that all employ the same
amount of labor. As a result, the di¤erence between revenue and production costs do not change
and pro...ts net of entry costs are zero for all entrants. It follows that changes in welfare result from
changes in tari¤ revenue, which is generated from the remaining imports from country A by the
original producers and by changes in the search costs in country B by these ...rms. We summarize
these ...ndings in:



                                                            18
Lemma 6 Suppose Assumptions 1-3 hold and " < 1. Then for all                                              wB =wA , b = bnew = a and
   =     new   =       +1 wB a   and nnew = n (wB =wA )                     n.

    Now consider the response of                    and b to tari¤ changes, beginning with the elastic case. First
suppose that            is such that b < wA a=wB . In this case, there is sourcing from both countries
and (74) and (77) imply that neither                         nor b change as long as tari¤s remain in the region with
b < wA a=wB . In contrast, consider an increase in the tari¤ when b > wA a=wB . Then (74) and
(77) imply

                                                             ^ =            b + (1
                                                                        Bb                     B)   ^;
                                               ( + 1) b
                                                      b = [1 +                       ("    1)] ^ ;

where
                                                                (1     ) wB b
                                                    B   =                          :
                                                               wA a + (1    ) wB b
Therefore,
                                              ^ =             ( + 1) (1                   B)
                                                                                                     ^;                                 (84)
                                                            +1   B                   B    ("    1)

                                              b   [1                   (1        ")] (1        B)
                                              b =                                                    ^:                                 (85)
                                                   +1                   B            B    ("    1)
The numerators and the denominators of both equations are positive, implying that higher tari¤s
raise the cuto¤ and the marginal costs of intermediate inputs. Moreover, note from (85) that

                                         b                    (1            B) [           (" 1)]
                                         b        ^=                                               ^:
                                                               +1                B        B ("  1)

The denominator on the right-hand side of this equation is positive. The numerator is negative
under Assumption 3, because                   > ". We conclude that the ratio b = is declining with the tari¤
level.
    As shown in the text, for                2 (wB =wA ; c ) we have b > wA a=wB , where                            c   is the tari¤ level
at which       c wA a   = wB b ( c ). For tari¤s in this range, a higher tari¤ raises both                              and b according
to (84) and (85). In contrast,                and b are invariant to the tari¤ rate for all                        >     c.   In this range,
aB = wB b ( c ) = wA and b = b ( c ), so we can express the weighted average of the foreign cost of
the inputs using (70) and (72) as

               G (aB )                                             b                   G (aB )
         =                  wA     a (aB )   + (1           ) wB            + 1                    wB     b   b   + (1         ) wB b
               G (a)                                                                    G (a)
                   c       +1        wB b                          c                 +1
         =                                    +         1                                   wB b :
                            +1                                                        +1

The second line reveals the o¤setting e¤ects on the terms of trade:                                       declines as a result of the
decline in prices paid to suppliers in country A; but it rises with reallocation of supply from country
A to country B , because net-of-tari¤ costs are higher in country B . The combined impact can be

                                                                            19
seen by rewriting the equation for              as

                                                          1       c                +1
                                       =   1                                              wB b :
                                                                                    +1

From this, we obtain

Lemma 7 Suppose " > 1. Then for                      >     c,   higher tari¤ s generate better terms of trade if and
only if
                                                                      +1
                                                              <            :

   We now examine the welfare e¤ects of tari¤s for                         > wB =wA , beginning with the case of elastic
demand, i.e., " > 1. First, consider tari¤s in the range                           2 (wB =wA ; c ). In this range, there are no
new searches by any of the incumbent producers and country A continues to supply all intermediate
inputs. As a result, tari¤s are imposed on all imports, generating a revenue of (                                1)   m . Tari¤
revenue plus variable pro...ts plus consumer surplus sum to

                V ( )=T ( )+           ( )+          ( )
                         =(       1)   m + [P X                        nm            n` ] + [U (X )      P X ]
                         = U (X )          nm            n` :

Di¤erentiating this equation gives

                    1 dV  1  dX                   d`    dm     d
                         = P                                 m
                    nd    n   d                   d      d     d
                                                   d`                                      dm            d
                              =                 1     +                                             m      :
                                       1           d       1                                d            d

We have shown that, in this range, b is larger for larger tari¤s whereas b = is smaller for larger
tari¤s. The optimal choice of b for a given m , equation (69), therefore implies that m declines
with the tari¤, while (72) implies that              declines. For these reasons, the change in the sourcing of
intermediate inputs raises welfare if and only if

                                           +1        wA a + (1                 ) wB b
                           =                                                              =                   < 1:
                     1                 1    +1       wA a + (1                 ) wB b              1 +    B


Meanwhile, better terms of trade always contribute to higher welfare. Finally, since

                                                                               1
                                           n` = (1                )                P X

and       rises with the tari¤ level, it follows that P X declines with the size of the tari¤ in the
elastic case. As a result, ` declines, which reduces welfare, all else the same. Clearly, in this case,
a marginal increase in the tari¤ rate may increase or reduce welfare.


                                                                  20
   We next consider             >   c   for the elastic case. In this range, d` =d = dm =d = dX =d =
dP =d = 0, because neither                nor b vary with the size of the tari¤. As a result,

                                                   dV                 d          d
                                                      =     nm                     ,
                                                   d                  d          d

where    ( ) is the cost of the new searches that take place by incumbent producers. Using (69)
            wB b( c )
and aB =      wA ,      the cost of new searches amounts to

                                                        G (aB )  f
                                             =n 1
                                                        G (a) G b ( c )
                                                                 c
                                             = nmt 1                                wB b ( c ) :
                                                                               +1

Therefore, the variation in the search cost that results from a slightly higher tari¤ is

                                         d
                                              = nm         +1
                                                                 ( c)            wB b ( c ) :
                                         d                                  +1

The terms of trade now are a weighted average of the cost of sourcing from country A and the cost
of sourcing from country B ,

            G (aB )                                         b                    G (aB )
        =                  wA   a (aB )   + (1       ) wB            + 1                 wB           b   b   + (1     )b   .
            G (a)                                                                G (a)

The ...rst term on the right-hand side represents the fraction of goods sourced from country A,
G (aB ) =G (a), times the average cost of goods sourced from that country, while the second term
represents the fraction of goods sourced from country B times the average cost of those inputs.
              wB b( c )
Using aB =      wA        and properties of the Pareto distribution, this equation becomes

                                c       +1          wB b ( c )                   c          +1
                          =                                      + 1                                  wB b ( c )
                                         +1                                                  +1
                                +1                                    1
                          =               wB b ( c ) 1               +1
                                                                          ( c)      ,
                                 +1

                                    d          (      1)    1                  +1
                                          =           +2
                                                                 ( c)                    wB b ( c )
                                    d                                           +1
Since the right-hand side of the last equation is negative if and only if

                                                                      +1
                                                            <              ;

it follows that the terms of trade improve if                         < ( + 1) = and deteriorate if                  > ( + 1) = .




                                                                 21
Combining terms, we now have

                                  1 dV             d             1 d
                                       =
                                 nm d              d           n m d
                                                                +1
                                           = wB b ( c )                 +2
                                                                                 ( c) .

Therefore, welfare rises with the tari¤ for            >   c   if and only if

                                                           +1
                                                    <                   :

   In the main text, we displayed in Figure 8 the relationship between V and                                  for      = 5;   =
4; " = 1,    =   = 0; 5, fe = fo = 10, f = 5, wA = 0:5 and wB = 0:6. The following ...gures shows
the relationship when wB = 0:55, which implies a smaller gap between wages in country A and
country B and thus a relocation of a greater portion of the supply chain for any                              > 1:1.




Evidently, the overall welfare e¤ects of a tari¤ of any given size are quite similar in these alternative
scenarios.
   When the label B denotes the home country, the social cost of inputs is

                       G (aB )                                      b            G (aB )
                   =              wA    a (aB )    + (1         )       + 1              wB       b   b   ,
                       G (a)                                                     G (a)

where the second term now represents the cost of producing inputs at home. Using properties of
                                       wB b( c )
the Pareto distribution and aB =         wA ,      we have

                             c     +1         wB b ( c )                     c
                       =                                       + 1                        wB b ( c ) ,
                                    +1                                             +1




                                                           22
                 d              +1                +1
                          =        +2
                                        ( c)                       wB b ( c ) +           +1
                                                                                                  ( c)              wB b ( c )
                 d                                 +1                                                      +1
                                  1                            2
                          =               +2
                                                ( c)                 ( + 1) ( + 1                     ) wB b ( c ) :
                              ( + 1)

In this case, the resource cost of inputs declines with the tari¤ if and only if

                                                         ( + 1) ( + 1                     )
                                                     <                    2
                                                                                              :

The e¤ect of a higher tari¤ on social welfare can now be expressed as

                  1 dV              d             1 d
                       =
                n m d               d           n m d
                                        1                                 2
                               =                      +2
                                                           ( c)                  ( + 1) ( + 1                   ) wB b ( c )
                                    ( + 1)

                                    +1
                                          ( c)            wB b ( c )
                                                       +1
                                                       2 + ( + 1) ( + 1                           )
                               = wB b ( c )                                                                 ( c) .
                                                             ( + 1) +2

Therefore, welfare rises with the tari¤ if and only if

                                                         ( + 1) ( + 1                     )
                                                     <                                        :
                                                              ( + )

   Next, we derive an equation for              c.    From (38) we have

                                                         1                      f
                                                            wA a =                 ;
                                                         +1                     ma

where m is the volume of intermediates in the free-trade equilibrium, before any tari¤ is imposed.
From (69) we have
                                               1                                     f
                                                  wB b ( c ) =
                                               +1                             m ( c) b ( c)
when the tari¤ is    c.   Therefore,
                                                  wB b ( c ) +1    m
                                                                =        :
                                                   wA a +1        m ( c)
However, from (76),
                                                           "                                          (1 ") 1
                                                                      "
                               m=                              n      1                  wA a                   ;
                                                  1                             +1
                                                                     "
                                                                                 "
                                                                                                  (1 ") 1
                                m ( c) =                                  n      1       ( c)               :
                                                               1
However, (74) implies that,

                                        ( c) =                 wB b ( c ) =                       c wA a
                                                         +1                          +1

                                                                    23
and therefore,
                           wB b ( c ) +1         wA              +1         m             1
                                         =                ( c)        =           =                             :
                            wA a +1              wB                        m ( c)   ( c) (1              ") 1


It follows that,
                                                           wB             (" 1)
                                                  c   =                            :
                                                           wA
Since   c wA a    = wB b ( c ), this implies
                                                                          (" 1)
                                                               wB           (" 1)
                                               b ( c) =                                a:
                                                               wA

   It remains to consider welfare in the inelastic case, i.e., " < 1. But, as is evident from the
analysis in the main text, in this case welfare changes are the same as in the elastic case with                                     >   c,
although the welfare levels di¤er between these two scenarios. The reason for the level di¤erence is
                                                                                                           (1 ")(      1)
                                                                                                    wB           "
that, in the inelastic case, the number of ...rms is larger, i.e., n ( ) =                          wA                      n > n, and the
                                                                    (" 1)
                                                          wB          (" 1)
search cuto¤ is smaller, i.e., a < b ( c ) =              wA                  a. But the conditions for welfare changes
are similar in both cases; i.e., in both cases the variations in tari¤ revenue and the search costs,
which are the only sources of welfare changes, are produced by the n original producers.
   Finally, note that in the inelastic case and with                         wB =wA ,          the average ex-factory cost of a
                                                                           wB a
bundle of inputs for an incumbent ...rm is (using aB =                      wA )


                  G (aB ) h                                    ai              G (aB )
              =             wA    a (aB ) + (1        ) wB          + 1                  wB [             b (a)     + (1      ) a]
                  G (a)                                                        G (a)
                                                                    "                  #
                    wB                                     a                   wB
              =             wB            + (1        )        + 1                       wB                         + (1       ) a
                    wA               +1                                        wA                          +1

while for a new entrant this cost is

                                          new    = wB      b (a)     =              wB a:
                                                                              +1

The average ex-factory cost of a bundle of m units of the composite intermediate good is

                                         n                     n (wB =wA ) n
                                                          +                                 new :
                                     n (wB =wA )                 n (wB =wA )

Since   new   does not depend on the tari¤ level, the home country's terms of trade are an increasing
function of the size of the tari¤ if and only if                 is declining in . Note, however, that

                                             @                  d              1
                                      sign         = sign                                      :
                                             @                 d




                                                               24
It follows that the terms of trade are increasing in the size of the tari¤ if and only if

                                                     +1
                                                <         :




                                                    25
