                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HETEROGENEOUS EFFECTS OF HEALTH INSURANCE ON BIRTH RELATED OUTCOMES:
            UNPACKING COMPOSITIONAL VS. DIRECT CHANGES

                                            Jie Ma
                                         Kosali I. Simon

                                       Working Paper 27728
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27728


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2020




 We thank Jeanette Samyn, and two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. The views
 expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Jie Ma and Kosali I. Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
 two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
 notice, is given to the source.
Heterogeneous Effects Of Health Insurance On Birth Related Outcomes: Unpacking Compositional
Vs. Direct Changes
Jie Ma and Kosali I. Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 27728
August 2020
JEL No. I1

                                         ABSTRACT

When women of childbearing age gain health insurance, we expect their birth outcomes to
improve, but comparing births that occur before and after policy changes may confound two
separate impacts of coverage. For one, health insurance could affect who gives birth, through
reduced costs of contraception. Health insurance could also directly improve maternal and child
health among those who give birth, through additional prenatal resources. We address this
question using the Affordable Care Act young adult provision, comparing birth related outcomes
for those aged 24-25 years after the law, to outcomes among older young adults. We show that
since the law subsidized contraceptives mainly among higher socioeconomic groups, the
composition of mothers shifted towards less advantaged groups. Accounting for this shift, we find
evidence of direct improvements in prenatal care and pregnancy-related health (reduced
gestational diabetes and hypertension).


Jie Ma
Xi'an Jiaotong University
28 West Xianning Street
Xi'an, Shaa 710000
China
jie_ma@xjtu.edu.cn

Kosali I. Simon
O'Neill School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
1315 East Tenth Street
Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
and NBER
simonkos@indiana.edu
                                      I. INTRODUCTION


Whether access to health insurance can improve birth related outcomes has been a key question

in the economics and demography literature. Medicaid expansions for pregnant women in the

1980s and 90s were mainly motivated by infant health concerns and have been shown effective

in improving birth outcomes (Currie and Gruber 1996). However, recent research has reached

mixed conclusions on whether Medicaid expansion for pregnant women also leads to changes in

fertility outcomes (Bitler and Zavodny 2010; DeLeire, Lopoo, and Simon 2011). At the same

time, the literature on access to contraceptives (Ananat and Hungerman 2012; Kearney and

Levine 2009; Bailey 2012; Goldin and Katz 2000) finds unambiguous falls in fertility that

changed the composition of those becoming new mothers.


If new health insurance affects fertility decisions, those who give birth post-policy may have

different birth outcomes partly because of underlying factors that vary among socioeconomic

groups. The largest recent expansion in insurance coverage for women of childbearing age

occurred through the Affordable Care Act (ACA) young adult provision. In our work, we exploit

this policy change to examine changes in composition of new mothers and resulting implications

for pregnancy and birth outcomes.


The ACA expansion in private health insurance for young adult dependents targeted ages 19-26,

which are among the most biologically fertile years for women (ACOG 2014). Studies already

show that this provision leads to lower rates of child-bearing (Abramowitz 2018; Heim, Lurie,

and Simon 2018) which is not surprising as this provision increases access to contraception

without substantially changing insurance status for childbirth itself due to existing Medicaid

policy (Y. A. Antwi et al. 2016) nor does the provision cover the newborn. We find that the

                                                 2
provision caused the U.S. young-adult birth composition to shift, decreasing the share of children

born to married, non-minority mothers and mothers not receiving WIC benefits. We show that

understanding the compositional effect is also of practical importance for studying subsequent

outcomes: evidence of improved prenatal health is much stronger when we control for

compositional changes in mothers. The "total effect" estimate comparing the average mother

before and after the policy would have resulted in smaller effect size compared to the direct

effect the policy has on mothers from similar background. But we find that even with controls

for maternal characteristics, there is inadequate statistical precision to assess direct effects of

improved private insurance access on birth outcomes. Our work complements medical literature

that examines these outcomes (Daw and Sommers 2018) which also finds no significant changes

in birth weight but some evidence on early and adequate prenatal care.


Examining the compositional effects of the ACA young adult provision on maternal and infant

health is an important addition to the literature for understanding the full scope of the provision's

impact. The composition changes occurring among mothers in the fertility setting is similar to

the mortality selection concept in the early-life health literature where children of weaker

underlying health would die due to an adverse health shock, leaving those reaching adulthood to

look more healthy at first glance (Bozzoli, Deaton, and Quintana-Domeque 2009).


The importance of understanding the heterogeneity of fertility response when studying birth

outcomes has been demonstrated in the prior economics literature on contraceptive access. The

pill literature finds that following the availability of reliable birth control, women from more

advantaged socio-economic backgrounds disproportionally withdraw from motherhood, leading

to an immediate worsening of birth outcomes in population-level studies (Ananat and



                                                   3
Hungerman 2012). One paper studying the effects of family planning programs in the 1970s

finds that children born after the program had higher family incomes and one third of the

increase is due to the programs' targeting lower income families so their reduction of fertility is

strong (Bailey, Malkova, and Mclaren 2017). PopEleches (2006) finds that children born after

the abortion ban in Romania attained more education and better labor market outcomes because

of changes in mother's composition. After controlling for parents' socio-economic background,

children born after the ban experienced worse outcomes. These papers highlight the importance

of mother's composition changes in the context of studying contraceptive access and child

outcomes. Aside from these examples, we are unaware of papers in a contemporary US context

studying how heterogeneity of responses affects composition of the population giving birth and

how that selection effect may cancel out the actual direct effect of the policy. On the other hand,

access to contraceptives reduces unplanned births (Kearney and Levine 2009) and could thus

potentially improve birth outcomes (Joyce and Grossman 1990). The compositional effect on

birth outcomes is essentially ambiguous. Ignoring such dynamics of fertility responses could

introduce noise and bias in assessing how health insurance affects birth related outcomes, an

important relationship given the U.S. ranks almost at the bottom of all OECD nations in infant

health (as measured by mortality, OECD) and because the U.S. experienced substantial gains in

health insurance through the ACA.


The ACA young adult provision extending dependent coverage for young adults up to age 26 has

been shown to improve access to private health insurance (Antwi, Moriya, and Simon 2013;

Sommers and Kronick 2012; Cantor et al. 2012). A number of studies have examined the

provision's effect on various outcomes, such as labor market decisions (Heim, Lurie, and Simon

2014), out-of-pocket health care spending (Busch, Golberstein, and Meara 2014), access to

                                                 4
inpatient and outpatient health care (Akosa Antwi, Moriya, and Simon 2015; Sommers et al.

2013), mortality (Mcclellan 2017), preventive care and health behavior outcomes (Barbaresco,

Courtemanche, and Qi 2015), and time use (Colman and Dave 2018), among others.


Health insurance access also has substantial implications on childbearing behaviors and birth

outcomes. More than a third (37.9%) of mothers who gave birth in 2009 were between the ages

of 19 and 26. Young adults in this age group tend to be rather low users of other health care

services: for example, labor and delivery is the most common cause of hospitalization among

females between the ages of 20 and 21, comprising 62.3 percent of their hospital discharges in

2011 (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2011). Trudeau and Conway (2018) study

the state young adult provisions and the state contraceptive mandates prior to the ACA. State

young adult provisions are rather weak counterparts to the federal ACA young adult provision,

as the state version applied only to about one half of employers whereas the federal young adult

provision applied to all employers and all individual market plans (USDOL 2019). Not

surprisingly, Trudeau and Conway (2018) find that the state young adult provision did not affect

coverage or birth rates, thus they do not study effects on birth outcomes or discuss selection

effects. Heim, Lurie, and Simon (2018) and Abramowitz (2018) document that the federal young

adult provision led to modest reductions in fertility using tax data and the American Community

Survey respectively. However, no paper thus far considers how differential fertility responses

may affect the composition of mothers from a lower socio-economic background in the context

of the ACA young adult provision. In this paper, we thus start by examining how composition

may affect birth outcome estimates if one were only to look for standard difference-in-difference

trend breaks among all treatment-age women compared to all control-age women. Using 2009 to

2015 birth certificate data and a difference-in-differences framework comparing young adults

                                                 5
between the ages of 24 and 25 to slightly older adults (ages 27-28) before and after the provision

is the typical way we would approach this research question. From there, we undertake steps to

shed light on composition of births, as has been done in prior papers on contraceptive access.


First, we examine heterogeneity in fertility response to the availability of dependent coverage,

along maternal characteristics not available or not used in prior studies conducted with

household survey or tax data, such as pre-pregnancy health (including smoking, diabetes, and

hypertension) and welfare program participation. We find that the young adult provision has

increased the share of children born to unmarried mothers, mothers belonging to minority racial

and ethnic groups, mothers who reported smoking in the pre-pregnancy period, and mothers

receiving welfare benefits. The results suggest that women from higher socioeconomic

backgrounds disproportionately choose to delay or avoid childbirth, which is a useful insight for

our analyses on maternal and infant health. This exercise also reaffirms the overall fertility

reduction result in prior literature, now using a new data source (birth certificates).


We next build on our evidence of differential fertility responses to examine the impact of the

young adult provision on prenatal and birth outcomes. We show results with and without

controls for maternal characteristics, demonstrating that composition matters in expected ways

when studying prenatal care, but we find that statistical precision is low when we examine birth

outcomes.


We find that the young adult provision directly improved prenatal care: a higher proportion of

mothers initiated prenatal care in the first trimester, amounting to about a 2% increase. We also

find improvement in maternal health. Mothers in our study were between 6 to 12% less likely to

have gestational diabetes and hypertension.

                                                  6
We did not find significant improvements in birth outcomes. The improved maternal health

would in theory imply an improvement in infant health as well. However, birth weight and

gestational age showed little change when controlling for composition. In fact, when we estimate

this relationship without controls, there was even a small but significant reduction in birth

weight. It might be simply that infant health was not sensitive enough to improved prenatal care,

or it could mean that the shift in unmeasured maternal composition negatively affected infant

health, masking the effect of improved prenatal care on birth outcomes in our study.


Shifts in maternal composition to those with less advantaged socio-economic backgrounds would

have a negative implication for prenatal care and birth outcomes because prior research (e.g.

Geronimus 1996) has established that some groups of racial minority mothers tend to bear

children with lower birth weight and a higher proportion of pre-term births compared to white

mothers. However, having access to private health insurance could also have a direct positive

effect on prenatal care and birth outcomes. Antwi et al. (2016) find that the young adult

provision has caused pregnant women to substitute from Medicaid to private insurance, which

may improve prenatal care and birth outcomes (Currie and Gruber 1996). In addition, being

insured prior to pregnancy may improve early initiation of prenatal care (Rosenberg et al. 2007).


Our paper is first paper in the fertility, birth outcomes, health insurance space to consider and

estimate selection vs direct (causal) effects. The key issue here is that since insurance affects

both access to contraception as well as prenatal and preconception health care, birth outcomes

are possibly affected in multiple ways (i.e. birth outcomes could improve directly because of

better timing and better mothers' health care) but if we were to fit regressions for birth outcomes

without accounting for the separate effects on fertility, and if the effects on fertility are targeted



                                                   7
towards certain types of women, then the estimates could reflect both the direct effects on birth

outcomes as well as the fact that the fertility effects changed the composition of who gives birth.

A separate literature on contraceptive policy (contraceptive mandate, pill access) exists but those

policies have different mechanisms at play: those papers primarily study fertility effects and to

the extent there are any birth outcomes effects, they do not occur through prenatal health care.

Past papers on fertility, birth outcomes and health insurance (or contraceptive policy in general)

have not investigated the selection vs causation issue. As mentioned, there are several papers on

fertility effects of the young adult provision, and there is one paper on birth outcome effects of

the young adult provision (Daw and Sommers 2018), but neither consider the selection vs.

causation themes of our paper.


Dills and Grecu (2017) study the effect of state contraceptive mandates and discuss the concept

of direct vs. selection effects, but they do not explore selection empirically; they do not estimate

whether selection changes the results on birth outcomes. Dills and Grecu (2017) find a decrease

in fertility only among Hispanic women, a group not expected to be the target of the policy, and

they do not find evidence of an improvement in birth outcomes. One might expect that

contraceptive mandates could directly improve birth outcomes because the laws may allow

couples to conceive a child at a time of their choosing, when they are more able to invest in

prenatal inputs. If contraceptive mandate policy only affects some women (higher SES) who now

also reduce their fertility, then more of the women giving birth after the policy will be of lower

SES, and that may prevent uncovering of direct evidence of improved birth outcomes. However,

Dills and Grecu (2017) actually find that fertility declines are not concentrated among higher

SES women. They find fertility declines among young Hispanic women, who are not the most

likely group covered by private employer coverage, thus this result is puzzling. They also find

                                                  8
some selection evidence: more mothers are smokers post policy and more of the mothers do not

provide paternal information; they do not test whether incorporating selection changes the results

on birth outcomes.


Daw and Sommers (2018) examined the ACA young adult provision's effect on birth outcomes.

Their paper did not touch on fertility changes thus does not discuss possible selection. They

include estimates for birth outcomes with and without adjusting for some maternal

characteristics, but only to note that they are similar. Our work extends the findings on birth

outcomes to illustrate that there is much to be learned on heterogeneity of impact by

incorporating fertility results into this analysis and by comparing estimates with and without

controls for maternal characteristics. In fact, when we re-examine Daw and Sommers (2018)

results, we find evidence consistent with our point: their estimated effects of improved birth

outcomes and maternal behaviors of the federal young adult provision are actually clearer after

adjusting for maternal characteristics.


Our work also adds to the understanding of the effect of health insurance access on childbearing-

related health care use as it demonstrates that having access to health care prior to pregnancy and

having private insurance over Medicaid during pregnancy leads to an improvement in prenatal

care: early initiation.


              II. THEORETICAL ARGUMENTS AND EMPIRICAL METHOD

Theoretical Arguments

The compositional relationship between health insurance and infant health could act in two

directions. Previous studies and our own analyses consistently suggest that the ACA young adult


                                                 9
provision has led to a decrease in fertility, especially among women of higher socioeconomic

status. This compositional change would lead to worsened birth outcomes, as the remaining

mothers have lower infant health outcomes. However, the ACA young adult provision has also

likely reduced the proportion of unwanted pregnancies even conditional on socioeconomic

status, and in this sense, we may observe improved birth outcomes due to selection.


In contrast to the compositional effects through fertility consequences, the direct effect of the

ACA young adult provision on birth outcomes would occur through improved health insurance

access prior to pregnancy and shifting pregnant women from Medicaid to private insurance. Pre-

pregnancy insurance coverage leads to improved prenatal care (Rosenberg et al. 2007). Medicaid

reimburses providers at lower rates than do private insurance (Alexander and Schnell 2019;

Currie and Gruber 1997). On the other hand, private insurance has higher cost sharing than

Medicaid, which is first dollar coverage for this population. Although the RAND experiment and

more recent studies (Swartz 2010) show that higher cost-sharing may lead to a delay of care and

worsen health for sicker populations, the evidence suggests that higher cost-sharing has a less

adverse effect on healthy populations. Since the population covered by the young adult

provision is from more advantaged socio-economic backgrounds than the average Medicaid

beneficiary, , moving from Medicaid to employer-sponsored private plans (which have copays

but are better accepted by providers) may improve office-based health care access without the

downsides associated with higher cost sharing. A positive direct effect combined with an

ambiguous compositional effect suggests that the relationship between the insurance offered

through the ACA young adult provision and birth outcomes is ultimately an empirical question.


Empirical Method



                                                 10
We use a difference-in-differences (DD) framework comparing the treatment group (24-25 year

olds) who are most comparable in age with a control group (27-28 year olds), before and after

the ACA young adult provision, to identify the effect of the ACA young adult provision on

maternal composition, prenatal care, and birth outcomes. The specification is shown below:


                   = 0 + 1      +  +  +    + 
                  


where g denotes the age group and t is the month-year one gave birth.  is the outcome for


mothers, or infants born to mothers, in age group g who gave birth in month-year t.  is a

dummy variable that takes the value one if the mother is between the ages of 24 and 25.  is

also a dummy variable that is one for the observations from October 2011 and later.  are the

age fixed effects and  are the month-year fixed effects. We also control for the labor market

trends ( ) at the group by month-year level.


Our sample includes mothers between the ages of 24 and 28 years, excluding 26 year olds

because of the ambiguity of their treatment status under the policy. Thus, our treatment group

amounts to 24-25 year-olds. This narrower treatment group is used instead of all 19-25 yr olds as

the sample size in the Natality data is large, and focusing on 24-25 yr olds vs 27-28 yr olds

provides closer matches on characteristics of the two populations Using the 24- to 25-year-old

mothers as the treatment group mitigates variation from prior young adult provisions in different

states, which rarely extended coverage to those older than 24.


To further account for the potential differential effects of labor market trends, we also include an

interaction between the unemployment rate and treatment status, in addition to controlling for




                                                 11
unemployment rates. We lag unemployment rates by 9 months to analyze fertility and maternal

composition.


The young adult provision was announced in March 2010 and went into effect in September

2010. However, most private insurance plans renew at the start of the year, so the full effect was

expected to take place in January 2011. Infants conceived after the full effect date would

generally be born after October 2011 so we count this as our post period. For the fertility

outcome, we exclude the transitional period from November 2010 to September 2011 in our

analyses because of the ambiguity of the policy strength. Births before November 2010 would be

less affected because these babies were conceived before the announcement of the provision. For

prenatal care and birth outcomes, the excluded transitional period is March 2010 to September

2011 because the effect on prenatal care and birth outcomes may have started as early as March

2010 due to increased access to private insurance during pregnancy.


Our analysis uses data collapsed to the year-month-age level, and fertility is calculated using the

total count of births for mothers of the same age in each month. Maternal composition outcomes

are defined as the share (percentage), among all mothers of the same age in a given month, who

had a specific characteristic. For example, the proportion of mothers who were unmarried among

all 24-year-old mothers in January 2011 would be the value of the outcome variable for one

observation.


We control for age fixed effects, which capture time invariant fertility differences by age, and

year-month fixed effects, which allow us to control for unobserved measures common to all

mothers within a given month, such as seasonal fluctuations. We control for the log of the female

population for studying fertility and for baby's gender when we examine prenatal care and birth

                                                12
outcomes. As our data is collapsed at a highly aggregate level, we use robust standard errors in

our main analyses. This is equivalent to the clustered standard errors at the age-month-year level

as in Daw and Sommers (2018). We also report the p-value of the wild bootstrap t standard error

clustered at the age level with Webb weights for our main results 1.


Since we are using cell-level data in the analyses, we must account for the frequency of the cells

through weighting with the appropriate universe (DeLeire, Lopoo, and Simon 2011). For

fertility, each cell has the frequency of the corresponding age-specific female population. For

birth outcomes, the frequency used for weights is the number of births in each cell, since these

outcomes such as birth weight are only relevant for that population.


To partly control for the impact of maternal composition change on prenatal care, we include

ethnic/racial composition in the model (the proportion of white mothers, African American

mothers, and Hispanic mothers) and the proportion of married mothers; from there, we estimate

the results for pre-pregnancy health outcomes and prenatal care, maternal health, and infant

health.


By including these population proportions, we control for the changes caused by the shifting

composition only in ways observable in our data; we caveat that there may be other non-

measurable ways through which selection operates. Though our approach cannot eliminate

composition changes within the same race or marital status level, by comparing our results with

demographic controls to our results without them, we gain new insights on the effect of

composition shifts due to insurance changes.



1
  Webb weights are a 6-point bootstrap weight distribution and has been shown to improve the reliability of
inference in cases with few clusters (Webb, 2014).

                                                        13
                                                     III. DATA

This study uses the 2009 to 2015 Natality Public Files which contain birth certificate data

collected through the National Vital Statistics System by the Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention. This provides information on parental demographic information, mother's prenatal

care and infant birth outcomes for all births in the United States. We create a denominator using

data on the female population by age from the National Population Estimates file from the U.S.

Census Bureau-Population Division. Unemployment data by race for age groups 18-19, 20-24,

and 25-29 are obtained from the Labor Force Statistics of the Current Population Survey.


The sample period 2009 to 2015 is ideal for this study for several reasons. Birth certificates

underwent a systematic update during this period: states began adopting the 2003 revision of the

U.S. Standard Certificate of Live Birth in 2003, but implementation was phased in over more

than a decade; data from the 2003 certificate started to be available in 2009. The number of states

and territories that had adopted the new certificate rose from 28 in 2009 to 49 (including D.C.) in

2015 (see Table 2A for the implementation schedule). Among variables used in this study, only

marital status, race, birth weight, and birth counts are comparable across the 1989 and 2003 birth

certificates. 2 Other outcome variables are only available through the 2003 certificate. To ensure

data consistency, we only include observations from the updated 2003 certificate for the main

analyses. The results are similar if we limit the sample to only the 28 states that adopted the

certificate in 2009.




2
 Maternal smoking and prenatal care, though included in both 1989 and 2003 versions of birth certificates, were not
comparable because of changes in how questions were specified and the sources from which information was
obtained. For example, for the first year revised certificates are implemented, the percentage of women reported to
begin care in the first trimester typically falls in a state by at least 10 percentage points (National Center for Health
Statistics 2009).

                                                           14
Table 1 reports summary statistics of maternal characteristics and birth outcomes for the

treatment and control groups. Unsurprisingly, the control group of mothers between the ages of

27-28 had a higher overall fertility rate. Compared to the treatment group, the older mothers

were unsurprisingly from more advantaged social-economic backgrounds: they were more likely

to be married and white, and less likely to receive the WIC benefits. They were also less likely to

be smokers. In terms of pre-pregnancy health, the treatment group appeared to have lower rates

of pre-pregnancy diabetes and hypertension, possibly due to their younger age.


We examine three sets of outcomes: prenatal care utilization, maternal behaviors and health, and

infant health. We measure prenatal care from two aspects: the total number of prenatal visits and

when prenatal care is initiated. The number of prenatal visits measures the quantity of prenatal

care and early prenatal care initiation measures the quality of the prenatal care. For maternal

health, we focus on maternal smoking which has been show in prior literature to have a strong

effect on infant health. We use birth weight and gestational age to measure infant health. We also

report neonatal ICU use for extreme adverse outcomes. The control group displays an earlier

initiation of prenatal care and more prenatal visits. Mothers in the treatment group had lower

rates of gestational diabetes and hypertension. However, both groups were very similar in terms

of infant birth weight, gestational age, and neonatal ICU utilization.


                                          IV. RESULTS

Fertility and Maternal Composition


We first examine changes in fertility due to the young adult provision using Natality data, to

compare with estimates in the literature produced with other data sources. Figure 1 shows the

regression-adjusted difference in fertility trends between the treatment group of 24-25-year-old

                                                 15
mothers and the control group of 27-28-year-old mothers. Prior to October 2010, the difference

remained relatively stable: the level difference was negative, indicating that the control group

had a higher fertility rate. After October 2011, when the effect of the young adult provision was

likely to be fully realized, there was an increase in the difference in fertility between the control

and treatment groups. This graph clearly suggests a reduction in fertility among the treatment

group following the young adult provision, confirming previous studies.


Table 2 reports regression results for the fertility models. Using log birth counts as our measure,

we show that as compared to the control group, the fertility of the treatment group dropped by

2.57%. The mean birthrate for the treatment group in the sample is 84 per 1,000 women,

suggesting that the young adult provision led to about 2 fewer births for every 1,000 women. The

estimated insurance gain for the 23-25 age group is about 0.0414 (Y. Antwi, Moriya, and Simon

2013), so the implied elasticity of fertility to health insurance is about 0.62. Using fertility rate

or log fertility rate as measures, the estimates are also negative and significant, with a slightly

larger magnitude.


Our estimate of a -2.57 percent fertility change is larger than those presented in two other studies

of the effect of the young adult provision on fertility. Abramowitz (2018) estimates a fertility

reduction of -1.17 percent using a sample of 20-to-30-year-old mothers; Heim, Lurie, and Simon

(2018) estimate a reduction of -0.5 percent using a sample of 24-to-29-year olds whose parents

have employer-based retirement plans. Considering the large variation in sample inclusion

criteria, the variation in these estimates is not surprising. More importantly, however, both

studies find that the young adult provision has had a negative effect on fertility and builds

consensus on this question.



                                                  16
To examine whether changes in fertility translated into changes in the type of parents to whom

children are born during our period of study, we apply the DD framework to the composition of

mothers. Panel A of Table 3 reports results on the fraction of children born to unmarried mothers

and mothers of different racial groups. The coefficient of Column 1 suggests that there was a

reduction in the fraction of children born to married mothers. The fraction of children born to

white mothers decreased as well, while the fraction of children with African American mothers

increased.


Panel B of Table 3 reports changes in pre-pregnancy smoking, diabetes, and hypertension. Pre-

pregnancy smoking is higher among mothers in the treatment group following the provision. The

increase in pre-pregnancy smoking likely reflects changing maternal composition as those

mothers who gained access to private insurance and avoided childbearing were from higher

socioeconomic backgrounds. This reduction in fertility among women of higher socioeconomic

backgrounds in turn reduced the average socioeconomic status of those who gave birth. Mothers

from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, meanwhile, were more likely to smoke. 3 We find a

significant reduction in the proportion of mothers with pre-pregnancy diabetes, and the

coefficient for hypertension is also negative. The pattern for diabetes and hypertension was less

consistent across socioeconomic conditions so changes in mother's composition might have

resulted in improvement in diabetes and hypertension.


Turning now to data on infants, those born to disadvantaged women tend to have lower health

measures than those born to advantaged mothers, thus these results above on maternal

composition have implications for the study of birth outcomes. For example, infant birth weight


3
 We calculate using Natality data that the pre-pregnancy smoking rates were 9.55% for married mothers and
22.25% for unmarried mothers in 2009.

                                                      17
is higher for white mothers relative to African American mothers. 4 The shift in maternal

composition to be more African American, less educated, for example, also implies infant health

measures may appear lower on average, holding other factors constant.


The results controlling for maternal composition changes are reported in Panel C of Table 3.

These regressions include the proportion of white mothers, African American mothers, and

Hispanic mothers and the proportion of married mothers in the model. When we compare the

estimates in Panel B with those in Panel C, we see that all changes in pre-pregnancy health can

be explained by shifting maternal composition: after controlling for composition, the coefficients

for pre-pregnancy smoking, diabetes, and hypertension become very close to zero and are no

longer significant. This suggests that controlling for the proportions effectively accounts for

composition changes and that composition shifts resulting from improved family planning might

not have been significant enough to cause changes in pre-pregnancy health outcomes.


Prenatal Care and Birth Outcomes


In this section, we discuss the effect of the young adult provision on prenatal care utilization and

birth outcomes. The provision affected health insurance during pregnancy by increasing the

share of pregnant women with private insurance, which was more generous than Medicaid and

was thus expected to improve access to prenatal care. Prenatal care and birth outcomes were also

expected to be affected by shifting maternal composition: a higher proportion of babies born to

more disadvantaged mothers would result in decreases in prenatal and infant health without




4
 Our calculation suggests that the average birth weights were 3324.986 g for white mothers and 3085.926 g for
African American mothers in 2009.

                                                       18
changes in pregnancy wantedness or prenatal care. We report results from the basic model in

Table 4 and estimates controlling for composition changes in Table 5.


Panel A of Table 4 suggests that before controlling for race and marital status, there appears

significant improvement in prenatal care in the form of earlier prenatal care initiation. The

proportion of mothers who started prenatal care in the first trimester increased by 1.16

percentage points. The increase was accompanied by a reduction in those starting prenatal care in

the second (0.753 percentage points) and third trimesters (0.337 percentage points), rather than

an increase in the overall proportion of mothers getting any prenatal care. In 2009, before the

provision, 67.77% of mothers in the treatment group started prenatal care in the first trimester, so

the increase was about 2 percent of the prior average.


Earlier initiation of prenatal care has been shown to improve maternal health as well as infant

birth outcomes, and in potentially cost-effective ways, since it could be accomplished while

keeping the total number of prenatal visits the same. Earlier initiation, rather than an increase in

the total number of prenatal visits, is considered beneficial to pregnancies without incurring

additional costs. Healthy People 2020 sets the goal for the proportion of pregnant women who

receive prenatal care beginning in the first trimester at 77.9%. The young adult provision moved

the treatment group marginally closer to that goal.


In addition to private insurance being more generous than Medicaid and thus providing better

access to prenatal care (insofar as it makes it easier to find a provider and results in less waiting

time), having any insurance before pregnancy rather than obtaining Medicaid after becoming

pregnant seems also to encourage earlier initiation of prenatal care. Rosenberg et al. (2007) find

that pre-pregnancy Medicaid coverage appears to be associated with earlier initiation of prenatal

                                                  19
care. Our results also suggest that providing health insurance before pregnancy may be an

effective way to improve prenatal care initiation.


Panel B of Table 4 reports the effects on maternal behaviors and health. Without controls for

race and marital status, we observe a reduction in gestational diabetes and hypertension. The

effects are rather large: a 7.5 percent reduction (over a base of the prior mean of 2.8 percentage

points) in gestational diabetes and a 4.2 percent reduction in gestational hypertension (prior mean

of 3.9 percentage points). For maternal smoking, the coefficient suggests that there were no

significant changes. Recall that in Table 3 Panel B, pre-pregnancy smoking appeared to have

increased as a result of the provision, but only before race and marital status were added. We

attempt now to directly examine smoking cessation behaviors by constructing two smoking

cessation measures in panel B of table 4: smoking cessation before pregnancy (the proportion of

mothers not smoking at all during pregnancy among those who were smoking within 3 months of

pregnancy) and cessation during pregnancy (the proportion of mothers not smoking in the third

trimester among those who were smoking during the first trimester). These regressions without

race and marital status controls indicate a significant increase in smoking cession during

pregnancy of about 2 percentage points, which was about 10 percent of the prior average.


Infant health, on the other hand, displayed an extremely small (less than one tenth of a percent)

though statistically significant decrease in two cases of the four displayed in Panel C of Table 4.

The lack of response in birth outcomes to the provision may result from the opposing effect of

improved prenatal care and maternal health, and from changes in the fraction of children born to

mothers of lower socioeconomic backgrounds.




                                                 20
To separate the composition effect from the effect of improved private insurance access, we use

a regression model that adjusts for demographic characteristics, just as we do in lower Panel B of

Table 3. We report the results in Table 5. Comparing the results in Table 5 to those in Table 4,

we find that the improvement in prenatal care initiation is still significant after accounting for

compositional changes and if anything, are slightly stronger results, suggesting that this change

was due to improved access to private insurance rather than changes in observed maternal

composition. It also appears that the improvements in gestational diabetes and hypertension were

not entirely due to compositional changes but benefited from insurance improvements. The

effect on smoking cessation behaviors, however, changes once we control for composition,

becoming statistically insignificant. Last but not least, the measures in Table 5 Panel C suggest

that there were no significant changes in infant health. After accounting for the potential negative

effect of compositional changes, it appears that infant health is not sensitive to the improvement

in the prenatal care and maternal health brought by the provision. We also report the estimates by

race and marital status for selected outcomes in Table 3A in the appendix. The subgroup results

are consistent with the direct effects in Table 5.


The results in Table 5 suggest that the private insurance access afforded by the young adult

provision had positive effects on prenatal care and maternal health, but no detectable effect on

infant health. Thus, the overall take-away regarding the impact of the provision on birth and

prenatal care is consistent with Daw and Sommers (2018), who also find improvements in

prenatal health but no strong evidence on childbirth outcomes.


                                   V. ROBUSTNESS CHECK




                                                     21
The key assumption underlying the DD framework is that in the absence of the policy change,

the treatment and control groups would have experienced parallel trends. In our context, if there

were changes in the size and composition of our cohorts, the DD estimates would capture these

changes but not cohort decisions in response to the young adult provision. We control for the

size of the female population, where the most disaggregated level of data we can obtain is the

yearly-race level. If there were changes in the proportion of cohorts in other dimensions, the

estimation may be biased. It is thus important to check the validity of the common trend

assumption. Figure 1 provides visual evidence that the difference between the treatment and

control groups stayed constant prior to the provision.


One challenge, as pointed out in Slusky (2015), is that potentially different trends in the

treatment and control groups caused by a shifting labor market after the 2007 recession pose a

threat to the identification strategy used in the young adult provision literature. The narrow

treatment group and the unemployment interaction term in our model help control for these

differences. Our conservative model uses aggregate data and flexible time trends, which adds to

the confidence of our main findings.


To formally test the pre-trend difference between the treatment and control groups, we regress

outcome variables on a linear time trend and its interaction with the treatment status, using data

prior to November 2010 for fertility and mother's composition and prior to March 2010 for

prenatal care and birth outcomes. The coefficient of the interaction term is expected to catch the

pre-trend difference in a linear fashion. For consistency with the main model, we control for age

fixed effects, month-year fixed effects, and the unemployment rate and its interaction with the




                                                 22
treatment status. We weigh the fertility and mother's composition regressions by the female

population and the prenatal care and birth outcome models by the number of births in each cell.


Table 6 reports pre-trends for fertility, maternal composition, and pre-pregnancy health. All

coefficients are small and not significant at conventional levels. Table 7 reports the pre-trend

tests for prenatal care, maternal health, and infant health. Most coefficients are small compared

to the estimates in the analyses and far from statistical significance except for "quit smoking

during pregnancy" and "neonatal ICU". Overall, these results indicate that differing pre-policy

trends do not appear to substantially detract from assumptions underlying the DD framework.


To further address the possibility of differential time trends for the treatment and control groups,

we perform placebo tests with pseudo implementation dates using data prior to March 2010. In

these tests, the implementation dates are set as 12 pseudo dates from February 2009 to January

2010. 5 We report the results of these pseudo experiments for prenatal care initiation and maternal

health in Table 8. Each pair represents a separate regression of the outcome using the specified

date as the pseudo policy date. Overall, the coefficients are small and not statistically significant,

indicating that our results are not driven by differential underlying trends. Results for other

outcomes are available upon request.


Using State Level Data


In Table 9, we use 2009 to 2013 state-level data to explore the heterogeneity among states

interacting with previous policies such as Medicaid standalone contraceptive coverage. For the

state-level analyses, we collapse the data at the state-month-age level and control for race,


5
 The prenatal care and maternal health variables shown in Table 8 are not available prior to 2009 so we cannot
conduct a longer-term pre-trend test.

                                                        23
marital and education composition, as well as the unemployment rate and women's population

size. We also include state, year, and month fixed effects and the interaction between the

unemployment rate and treatment status.


We explore the heterogeneity in interaction with the state Medicaid family planning waivers. A

Medicaid family planning waiver allows states to provide contraceptive coverage to women with

an income level too high to qualify for Medicaid with federal reimbursement for 90% of the cost

of these services and supplies. In 2011, 22 states had expanded eligibility for family planning

services (Sonfield, Frost, and Gold 2011). Theoretically, the young adult provision should have a

stronger effect in states without family planning waivers. Column 2 and 3 in Table 9 report the

fertility results by waiver status. It suggests that the effects are very similar, which might be due

to the fact that the young adult provision targeted women whose parents have health insurance

and can be part of a different population than the Medicaid waiver.


The last two columns of Table 9 show the effects by prior state level young adult provision

status. 30 states have expanded dependent coverage to some extent to young adults beyond age

18 before 2010 and we hypothesize that the effect of the federal provision would be more

substantial in states without prior provision. However, the magnitudes of the effect are similar

with or without prior provision. Depew (2015) examines the effect of state young adult provision

on fertility using CPS data and found the effect to be not significant. Trudeau and Conway

(2018) also find no changes in birth rates due to the state young adult mandate. Given these

findings, it is likely that the federal provision has similar effects regardless of prior state

provisions.


                                         VI. CONCLUSION

                                                   24
This paper examines the role of maternal selection in how the ACA young adult provision, which

allows young adults to stay on their parents' health insurance plan until the age of 26, affects

fertility, prenatal care utilization, and pregnancy and birth outcomes. The evidence suggests that

the short-term effects of the provision are a reduction in fertility and an increase in the relative

proportion of infants who are born to less advantaged mothers. It also suggests that the provision

improves prenatal care and maternal health even after we account for maternal composition

changes, though there is no detectable evidence that this translates into improvements in birth

outcomes.


Our result suggests that the young adult provision causes women from advantaged

socioeconomic backgrounds to disproportionally withdraw from motherhood (because they

gained coverage through the provision that raises their use of contraception) and raises an

inequality concern. This represents an additional reason for society wishing to prioritize public

policy that provides insurance coverage for women from disadvantaged backgrounds.


We also find very small improvements in earlier initiation of prenatal care, which relates to

Healthy People 2020's goal of "increasing the proportion of pregnant women who receive

prenatal care beginning in the first trimester to 77.9 percent". Currently, the rate is around 70%

for 24-25 yr old mothers, and the ACA increased this by about 1.3 percentage points (Table 5).

Although the benefit of more prenatal visits has been contested (McDuffie et al. 1996), early

prenatal care is largely considered cost effective and beneficial to infant and maternal health in

policy discussions (Healthy People 2020). In our context, it appears however that birth outcomes

such as gestation and birth weight are not sensitive to the small magnitude of improvement in




                                                  25
prenatal care caused by the provision, thus further studies are needed to identify policy actions

that improve birth outcomes in statistically detectable ways.


The study has several limitations. The most important challenge is that composition shifts might

not be fully captured by the variables available to us, such as pre-pregnancy health status and

health behaviors, race/ethnicity, and marital status. Thus, while our study is the first to highlight

heterogeneous fertility responses as a potentially important consideration when examining birth

outcomes, there is room in future studies to improve ways to capture compositional changes.


Another limitation is that we cannot directly identify the "provision-affected" population whose

parents had employer-sponsored health insurance because birth certificates do not collect

information on mothers' parents. Our analysis thus cannot directly identify the elasticity of births

in response to health insurance access or coverage. However, we do offer an imprecise back-of-

envelope calculation for targeted groups using estimates of the young adult provision's effect on

insurance coverage.


Reduced fertility naturally raises questions of how young adults spend the time they would

otherwise have spent on child rearing. Although education, work, and leisure would be natural

guesses, the evidence only seems to support an increase in time spent on leisure activities

(Colman and Dave 2018); it does not support substantial changes in education or labor force

participation (Heim, Lurie, and Simon 2014).


Amidst discussions regarding the future of healthcare reform and several attempts to repeal the

ACA, the young adult provision is among the more popular pieces of the law and is likely to

remain regardless of any other changes in U.S. health policy in the near future. Indeed, the



                                                  26
American Health Care Act and several other recent ACA replacement proposals proposed to

keep the young adult provision unaltered. This increases the need to understand the policy's

effects beyond those on coverage and on young adult health status. Our findings suggest that the

provision has improved maternal health and helped young adults determine their optimal

fertility, although more research is needed to uncover the direct effects of health insurance on

improved birth outcomes.




                                                27
Reference

Abramowitz, Joelle. 2018. "Planning Parenthood: The Affordable Care Act Young Adult

    Provision and Pathways to Fertility." Journal of Population Economics 31 (4): 1097­1123.

ACOG. 2014. "Female Age-Related Fertility Decline." Fertility and Sterility. American Society

    for Reproductive Medicine.

Akosa Antwi, Yaa, Asako S Moriya, and Kosali I Simon. 2015. "Access to Health Insurance and

    the Use of Inpatient Medical Care: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act Young Adult

    Mandate." Journal of Health Economics 39: 171­87.

Alexander D, Schnell M. 2019. "The Impacts of Physician Payments on Patient Access, Use, and

    Health." NBER Working Paper No. 26095.

Ananat, Elizabeth Oltmans, and Daniel M. Hungerman. 2012. "The Power of the Pill for the

    Next Generation: Oral Contraception's Effects on Fertility, Abortion, and Maternal and

    Child Characteristics." Review of Economics and Statistics 94 (1): 37­51.

Antwi, Yaa Akosa, Jie Ma, Kosali Simon, and Aaron Carroll. 2016. "Dependent Coverage under

    the ACA and Medicaid Coverage for Childbirth." New England Journal of Medicine 374

    (2): 194­96.

Antwi, Yaa, Asako Moriya, and Kosali Simon. 2013. "Effects of Federal Policy to Insure Young

    Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act Dependent Coverage Mandate."

    American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (4): 1­28.

Bailey, Martha J. 2012. "Reexamining the Impact of Family Planning Programs on US Fertility:

    Evidence from the War on Poverty and the Early Years of Title X." American Economic

    Journal: Applied Economics 4 (2): 62­97.

                                               28
Bailey, Martha J, Olga Malkova, and Zoë M Mclaren. 2017. "Does Parents' Access to Family

    Planning Increase Children's Opportunities? Evidence from the War on Poverty and the

    Early Years of Title X." NBER Working Paper.

Barbaresco, Silvia, Charles Courtemanche, and Yangling Qi. 2015. "Impacts of the Affordable

    Care Act Dependent Coverage Provision on Health Related Outcomes of Young Adults."

    Journal of Health Economics 40: 54­68.

Bitler, Marianne P., and Madeline Zavodny. 2010. "The Effect of Medicaid Eligibility

    Expansions on Fertility." Social Science and Medicine 71 (5): 918­24.

Bozzoli, Carlos, Angus Deaton, and Climent Quintana-Domeque. 2009. "Adult Height and

    Childhood Disease." Demography 46 (4): 647­69.

Busch, S. H., E. Golberstein, and E. Meara. 2014. "ACA Dependent Coverage Provision

    Reduced High Out-Of-Pocket Health Care Spending For Young Adults." Health Affairs 33

    (8): 1361­66.

Cantor, Joel C., Alan C. Monheit, Derek Delia, and Kristen Lloyd. 2012. "Early Impact of the

    Affordable Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage of Young Adults." Health Services

    Research 47 (5): 1773­90.

Colman, Gregory, and Dhaval Dave. 2018. "It's About Time: Effects of the Affordable Care Act

    Dependent Coverage Mandate on Time Use." Contemporary Economic Policy 36 (1): 44­

    58.

Corman, Hope, Dhaval M. Dave, and Nancy Reichman. 2018. "Effects of Prenatal Care on Birth

    Outcomes: Reconciling a Messy Literature." NBER Working Paper Series.




                                              29
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. "Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent

    Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women." Journal of Political Economy

    104 (61): 1263.

------. 1997. "The Technology of Birth: Health Insurance, Medical Interventions, and Infant

    Health." NBER Working Paper No. 5985.

Daw, Jamie R., and Benjamin D. Sommers. 2018. "Association of the Affordable Care Act

    Dependent Coverage Provision With Prenatal Care Use and Birth Outcomes." JAMA: The

    Journal of the American Medical Association 319 (6): 579.

DeLeire, Thomas, Leonard M. Lopoo, and Kosali I. Simon. 2011. "Medicaid Expansions and

    Fertility in the United States." Demography 48: 725­47.

Depew, B. 2015. "The effect of state dependent mandate laws on the labor supply decisions of

    young adults." Journal of Health Economics, 39, 123­134.

Dills, Angela K., and Anca M. Grecu. 2017. "Effects of State Contraceptive Insurance

    Mandates." Economics and Human Biology 24: 30­42.

Geronimus, Arline T. 1996. "Black/White Differences in the Relationship of Maternal Age to

    Birthweight: A Population-Based Test of the Weathering Hypothesis." Social Science and

    Medicine 42 (4): 589­97.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2000. "Career and Marriage in the Age of the Pill."

    American Economic Review 90 (2): 461­65.

Heim, B, I Lurie, and K Simon. 2014. "The Impact of the Affordable Care Act Young Adult

    Provision on Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from Tax Data." Tax Policy and the

    Economy, Volume 29, 1­34.


                                              30
Heim, Bradley, Ithai Lurie, and Kosali Simon. 2018. "The Impact of the Affordable Care Act

     Young Adult Provision on Childbearing, Marriage, and Tax Filing Behavior: Evidence from

     Tax Data." Demography.

Kearney, Melissa S, and Phillip B Levine. 2009. "Subsidized Contraception, Fertility, and Sexual

     Behavior." Review of Economics and Statistics 91: 137­51.

Mcclellan, Chandler. 2017. "The Affordable Care Act's Dependent Care Coverage and

     Mortality." Medical Care 55 (5): 514­19.

McDuffie, R S, A Beck, K Bischoff, J Cross, and M Orleans. 1996. "Effect of Frequency of

     Prenatal Care Visits on Perinatal Outcome among Low-Risk Women. A Randomized

     Controlled Trial." JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association 275 (11): 847­

     51.

National Center for Health Statistics. 2009. "User Guide to the 2009 Natality Public Use File."

PopEleches, Cristian. 2006. "The Impact of an Abortion Ban on Socioeconomic Outcomes of

     Children: Evidence from Romania." Journal of Political Economy 114 (October): 744­73.

Rosenberg, Deborah, Arden Handler, Kristin M. Rankin, Meagan Zimbeck, and E. Kathleen

     Adams. 2007. "Prenatal Care Initiation among Very Low-Income Women in the Aftermath

     of Welfare Reform: Does Pre-Pregnancy Medicaid Coverage Make a Difference?"

     Maternal and Child Health Journal 11 (1): 11­17.

Slusky, David J G. 2017. "Significant Placebo Results in Difference-in-Differences Analysis:

     The Case of the ACA's Parental Mandate." Eastern Econ Journal, Unpublished

     Manuscript, 43 (4): 580­603.




                                                31
Sommers, Benjamin D., Thomas Buchmueller, Sandra L. Decker, Colleen Carey, and Richard

    Kronick. 2013. "The Affordable Care Act Has Led to Significant Gains in Health Insurance

    and Access to Care for Young Adults." Health Affairs 32 (1): 165­74.

Sommers, Benjamin D., and Richard Kronick. 2012. "The Affordable Care Act and Insurance

    Coverage for Young Adults." JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association 307

    (9): 913­14.

Sonfield A, Frost JJ and Gold RB. 2011 "Estimating the Impact of Expanding Medicaid

    Eligibility for Family Planning Services: 2011 Update." New York: Guttmacher Institute.

Swartz K. 2010. "Cost-sharing: effects on spending and outcomes." The Synthesis project

    Research synthesis report. 2010(20).

Trudeau, Jennifer, and Karen Smith Conway. 2018. "The Effects of Young Adult-Dependent

    Coverage and Contraception Mandates on Young Women." Contemporary Economic

    Policy 36 (1): 73­92.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2011. "Child Health USA 2011."

U.S. Department of Labor, "Young Adults and the Affordable Care Act: Protecting Young

    Adults and Eliminating Burdens on Businesses and Families FAQs." Accessed Feb 14,

    2019. https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-

    center/faqs/young-adult-and-aca

Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention

    and Health Promotion. n.d. "Healthy People 2020." https://www.healthypeople.gov/.




                                              32
                                                    FIGURE 1

                    Difference in Fertility Trends between Treatment and Control Groups




Note: Using cell level data (age/year/month/race/marital/education), we plot regression-adjusted estimates of the
difference between control and treatment group fertility trends, controlling for population size. We run two separate
regressions: one for the treatment group and one for the control group. Explanatory variables include year-month
fixed effects, age fixed effects, and cell fixed effects at the race-marital-education level. Using the `margin'
command in Stata, we generate predicted regression-adjusted fertility by year-month and plot the difference. The
number represents the difference between the control and treatment groups. Lines are drawn at 9 months after March
2010 (the month of the ACA announcement) and 9 months after January 2011 (the month of the law's full
implementation).




                                                         33
                                                      TABLE 1

       Descriptive Statistics by Age Group: Maternal Composition and Birth Outcomes, Pre-period

                                              Age 24-25                        Age 27-28                  T-test
 Outcome Variables                            Mean             St.dev           Mean     St.dev         Significance
 Demographic Characteristics
 Fertility                          72.032                     1.293            76.795       0.578 #
 Married                             0.541                     0.032             0.688       0.021 ***
 WIC                                 0.552                     0.028             0.412       0.025 ***
 Race
 White                               0.524                     0.011             0.562       0.015 ***
 Black                               0.141                     0.008             0.115       0.006 ***
 Hispanic                            0.287                     0.012             0.255       0.013 ***
 Health Pre-pregnancy
 Smoking before Pregnancy            0.155                     0.009             0.117       0.007 ***
 Diabetes before Pregnancy           0.005                     0.001             0.006       0.001 ***
 Hypertension before
 Pregnancy                           0.009                     0.001             0.011       0.001 ***
 Health Behaviors and Birth Outcomes
 Infant Health
 Birth Weight                     3263.112                     9.606         3293.025        8.329 ***
 Gestational Age                    38.668                     0.040           38.659        0.037
 Neonatal ICU                        0.067                     0.003            0.067        0.003
 Maternal Health
 Maternal Smoking                    0.121                     0.007             0.089       0.005 ***
 Gestational Diabetes                0.031                     0.002             0.041       0.003 ***
 Gestational Hypertension            0.040                     0.002             0.039       0.003
 Medical Utilization
 Prenatal Visits                    10.885                     0.079            11.212       0.074 ***
 Month Prenatal Care Started         1.391                     0.021             1.314       0.014 ***
 Cesarean Delivery                   0.301                     0.006             0.321       0.006 ***
Notes: 1. Summary statistics are calculated using the Natality Public Use Files from January 2009 to September
2010. The fertility estimates are based on 2009 data.
2. Fertility: yearly # of births per 1,000 women. # t-tests are not applicable to fertility rates.
3. The upper panel (demographic characteristics) is analyzed at the age/month level. The numbers reported are
calculated using cell averages weighted by the female population.
4. The lower panel (health behaviors and outcomes) is calculated using cell averages weighted by birth counts.
5. T test is to test for significant differences between treatment and control groups. *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01 denote
significance levels.




                                                          34
                                                     TABLE 2

                                                  Fertility Results

                                   Log Birth                                      Log Birth Count
                                                       Fertility Rate2
                                    Count1                                      Using Data up to 2013
              Coefficient         -0.0257***             -8.539***                    -0.0249***
                                   (0.00404)              (0.548)                      (0.00390)
           Wild bootstrap t
               p-value              0.0591                 0.0541                        0.0490
            Observations              292                    292                          196
             R-squared               0.991                  0.970                        0.989

Note: 1. The sample consists of individuals between the ages of 24 and 28 (26 excluded) and is drawn from the 2009
to 2015 Natality Public Use Files. The data is aggregated at the age-month-year level. Log birth count specification
controls for the log of the female population. The model includes fixed effects for a given month-year and age fixed
effects. It also includes lagged unemployment rates and an interaction between treatment status and lagged
unemployment rates.
2. The fertility rate is calculated as the number of newborns per 1,000 women. The last three columns provide the
estimate using a sample from 2009 to the year in the column name.
3. The coefficients reported here are the coefficients of the interaction terms between treatment status and post time
period.
4. Robust standard errors are reported. We also report the p-value for the standard error clustered at the age level
using wild bootstrap t with Webb (2014) weights.
5. *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01 denote significance levels.




                                                         35
                                                      TABLE 3

                                               Maternal Composition

                                           Panel A: Marital Status and Race
                   Married                  White               African American        WIC Receipt
 Coefficient       -0.0223***               -0.0147***          0.0138***               0.00253**
                   (0.00122)                (0.00135)           (0.000898)              (0.00121)
 Wild
 bootstrap t p-
 value             0.0591                   0.0581              0.0601                  0.0691
 Pre-mean          0.540                    0.524               0.141                   0.582
 Observations      292                      292                 292                     292
 R-squared         0.997                    0.969               0.976                   0.997
                                            Panel B: Pre-pregnancy Health
                   Smoking before           Pre-pregnancy           Pre-pregnancy
                   Pregnancy                Diabetes                Hypertension
 Coefficient       0.00186**                -0.00547***             -0.000351
                   (0.000855)               (0.000617)              (0.000229)
 Wild
 bootstrap t p-
 value             0.2543                   0.0651                  0.2843
 Pre-mean          0.166                    0.00503                 0.00887
 Observations      292                      292                     292
 R-squared         0.981                    0.985                   0.784
 Controlling for Race and Marital Status
 Coefficient       0.0000515                -0.00130                -0.0000993
                   (0.00134)                (0.000889)              (0.000370)
 Wild
 bootstrap t p-
 value              0.9249                  0.4595                   0.1782
  Observations      292                     292                      292
  R-squared         0.983                   0.988                    0.781
Note: 1. The sample consists of individuals between the ages of 24 and 28 (26 excluded) and is drawn from the 2009
to 2015 Natality Public Files. The data are aggregated at the age-month-year level. The model includes fixed effects
for a given month-year and age fixed effects, as well as lagged unemployment rates and an interaction between
treatment status and lagged unemployment rates. The estimates are weighted by the inverse of the female
population.
2. In Panel A, the dependent variables are the proportions of mothers who are married, white, black, or Hispanic.
The dependent variables in Panel B are the health conditions of mothers before their pregnancies. Panel C reports
the same outcomes as Panel B, which are estimated with additional controls for the proportion of race and marital
status composition (the outcome variables in Panel A).3. The coefficients reported here are the coefficients of the
interaction terms between treatment status and the post time period.
4. Robust standard errors are reported. We also report the p-value for the standard error clustered at the age level
using wild bootstrap t with Webb (2014) weights.
5. *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01 denote significance levels.




                                                         36
                                                     TABLE 4

Prenatal Care and Maternal and Infant Health Outcomes without Controlling for Race and Marital Status

                                                Panel A: Prenatal Care
                                                   Prenatal Care Start
                  Prenatal        1st Trimester    2nd Trimester     3rd Trimester        Caesarean
                  Visits
 Coefficient      0.00757         0.0116***        -0.00753***       -0.00337***          0.000372
                  (0.00850)       (0.00139)        (0.00118)         (0.000512)           (0.00115)
 Wild bootstrap t p-value
                  0.0951          0.0641           0.0561            0.0641               0.8488
 Pre-mean         11.066          0.692            0.225             0.054                0.303
 Observations     4248305         4248305          4248305           4248305              4248305
 R-square         0.982           0.988            0.985             0.921                0.930
                                               Panel B: Maternal Health
                  Maternal        Gestational      Gestational       Quit Smoking         Quit Smoking during
                  Smoking         Diabetes         Hypertension      before Pregnancy     Pregnancy
 Coefficient      -0.000376       -0.00219***      -0.00163***       0.0121***            0.00976***
                  (0.000837)      (0.000400)       (0.000523)        (0.00251)            (0.00297)
 Wild bootstrap t p-value
                  0.7628          0.0631           0.0531            0.0591               0.1922
 Pre-mean         0.117           0.028            0.039             0.314                0.242
 Observations     4248305         4248305          4248305           4248305              4248305
 R-square         0.985           0.962            0.909             0.652                0.424
                                                Panel C: Infant Health
                  Birth Weight    Low Birth        Gestation         Preterm:             Neonatal ICU
                                  Weight:                            Gestation<37
                                  <2,500g                            weeks
 Coefficient      -5.498***       0.000749         -0.0212***        -0.000386            0.000164
                  (1.226)         (0.000559)       (0.00676)         (0.000901)           (0.000678)
 Wild bootstrap t p-value
                  0.0651          0.0561           0.0741            0.6026               0.6667
 Pre-mean         3265.755        0.075            38.664            0.114                0.067
 Observations     4248305         4248305          4248305           4248305              4248305
 R-square         0.967           0.735            0.853             0.807                0.852

Note: 1. The sample consists of individuals between the ages of 24 and 28 (26 excluded) and is drawn from the 2009
to 2015 Natality Public Files. The data are aggregated at the age-month-year level. The model includes fixed effects
for a given month-year, age fixed effects, unemployment rates, and an interaction between treatment status and
unemployment rates. The regression is weighted by total birth counts for that cell.
2. The dependent variables in Panel A are the average prenatal care use of mothers for each cell; Panel B reports the
average measures of maternal health in each cell; Panel C reports the average measures of birth outcomes for each
cell. The data is aggregated at the age-month-year level.
3. The coefficients reported here are the coefficients of the interaction terms between treatment status and post time
period.
4. Robust standard errors are reported. We also report the p-value for the standard error clustered at the age level
using wild bootstrap t with Webb (2014) weights.
5. *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01 denote significance levels.

                                                           37
                                                     TABLE 5

       Prenatal Care and Maternal and Infant Health Outcomes, Controlling for Race and Marital Status

                                               Panel A: Prenatal Care
                                                         Prenatal Care Start
                 Prenatal Visits    1st Trimester        2nd Trimester       3rd Trimester          Caesarean
 Coefficient   0.0210*              0.0126***            -0.00829***           -0.00291***          -0.00210
               (0.0124)             (0.00191)            (0.00178)             (0.000779)           (0.00170)
 Wild bootstrap t p-value
               0.0681               0.0490               0.0470                0.0511               0.6436
 Pre-mean      11.066               0.692                0.225                 0.054                0.303
 Obs           4248305              4248305              4248305               4248305              4248305
 R-square      0.983                0.988                0.986                 0.922                0.932
                                              Panel B: Maternal Health
                                                                                                    Quit Smoking
                 Maternal           Gestational          Gestational           Quit Smoking
                                                                                                    during
                 Smoking            Diabetes             Hypertension          before Pregnancy
                                                                                                    Pregnancy
 Coefficient   -0.00134             -0.00347***          -0.00269***           0.00122              0.00518
               (0.00107)            (0.000618)           (0.000825)            (0.00397)            (0.00475)
 Wild bootstrap t p-value
               0.3213               0.0661               0.0541                 0.7477              0.4735
 Pre-mean      0.117                0.028                0.039                 0.314                0.242
 Obs           4248305              4248305              4248305               4248305              4248305
 R-square      0.987                0.963                0.912                 0.670                0.431
                                               Panel C: Infant Health
                                                                               Preterm:
                                    Low Birth
                 Birth Weight                            Gestation             Gestation<37         Neonatal ICU
                                    Weight: <2,500g
                                                                               Weeks
 Coefficient   0.410                0.0000962            0.00445               -0.00131             -0.000891
               (2.008)              (0.000957)           (0.00939)             (0.00136)            (0.00109)
 Wild bootstrap t p-value
               0.8869               0.9389               0.5666                0.4885               0.2963
 Pre-mean      3265.755             0.075                38.664                0.114                0.067
 Obs           4248305              4248305              4248305               4248305              4248305
 R-square      0.972                0.754                0.864                 0.809                0.857
Note: 1. The sample consists of individuals between the ages of 24 and 28 (26 excluded) and is drawn from the 2009
to 2015 Natality Public Files. The data are aggregated at the age-month-year level. The model includes fixed effects
for a given month-year, age fixed effects, unemployment rates, an interaction between treatment status and
unemployment rates, and additional controls for the proportion of race and marital status composition. The
regression is weighted by total birth counts for that cell.
2. The dependent variable in Panel A is the average prenatal care use of mothers for each cell; Panel B reports the
average measures of maternal health for each cell; Panel C reports the average birth outcome measures for each cell.
3. The coefficients reported here are the coefficients of the interaction terms between treatment status and post time
period.
4. Robust standard errors are reported. We also report the p-value for the standard error clustered at the age level
using wild bootstrap t with Webb (2014) weights.
5. *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01 denote significance levels.

                                                         38
                                                    TABLE 6
                          Pre-Policy Trends for Fertility and Maternal Composition

                                    Panel A: Fertility
                  Log Count         Fertility Rate
 Pre-trend        0.000141          -0.0204
                  (0.00101)         (0.0728)
 N                88                88
 adj. R-sq        0.977             0.972
                                 Panel B: Marital Status and Race
                  Married           White              Black                         WIC Receipt
 Pre-trend        0.0000693         0.000533           0.000125                      -0.000241
                  (0.000306)        (0.000387)         (0.000226)                    (0.000421)
 Observations     88                88                 88                            88
 R-square         0.997             0.961              0.956                         0.995
                                  Panel C: Pre-pregnancy Health
                                    Diabetes
                  Smoking before                       Hypertension
                                    before
                  Pregnancy                            before Pregnancy
                                    Pregnancy
 Pre-trend        0.0000770         -0.0000471         -0.0000555
                  (0.000221)        (0.0000370)        (0.0000661)
 Observations     88                88                 88
 R-square         0.972             0.591              0.626


Note: 1. The sample consists of individuals between the ages of 24 and 28 (26 excluded). The upper panel is
estimated using the January 2009 to November 2010 Natality Public Files, and the lower panel is estimated using
data from January 2005 to November 2010 Natality Public Files. The coefficient reported is for the interaction
between a linear time trend and treatment status. The model includes fixed effects for a given month-year and age
fixed effects. It also includes unemployment rates and an interaction between treatment status and unemployment
rates.
2. Robust standard errors are reported.
3. *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01 denote significance levels.




                                                        39
                                                     TABLE 7

                           Pre-Policy trends for Prenatal Care and Maternal Health

                                            Panel A: Prenatal Care
                                                  Prenatal Care Start
            Prenatal Visits      1st Trimester    2nd Trimester 3rd Trimester                   Caesarean
 Coeffic
 ient       0.00689              0.000430        0.000294         -0.000114                     0.000161
            (0.00474)            (0.000729)      (0.000629)       (0.000212)                    (0.000575)
 N          729991               729991          729991           729991                        729991
 R^2        0.978                0.984           0.980            0.961                         0.901
                                          Panel B: Maternal Health
            Maternal             Gestational     Gestational      Quit Smoking                  Quit Smoking
            Smoking              Diabetes        Hypertension before Pregnancy                  during Pregnancy
 Coeffic
 ient       -0.000184            -0.000195          -0.0000530          0.000589                -0.00341**
            (0.000379)           (0.000182)         (0.000259)          (0.00137)               (0.00161)
 N          729991               729991             729991              729991                  729991
 R^2        0.982                0.958              0.544               0.673                   0.333
                                              Panel C: Infant Health
                                                                        Preterm:
           Birth        Low Birth
                                             Gestation                  Gestation<37            Neonatal ICU
           Weight       Weight: <2,500g
                                                                        Weeks
 Coeffi
 cient     0.269        -0.000418            0.000238                   -0.0000314              -0.000734**
           (0.563)      (0.000271)           (0.00282)                  (0.000383)              (0.000349)
 N         729991       729991               729991                     729991                  729991
 R^2       0.959        0.730                0.719                      0.722                   0.543

Note: 1. The sample consists of individuals between the ages of 24 and 28 (26 excluded) and is drawn from January
2009 to March 2010 Natality Public Files. The coefficient reported is for the interaction between a linear time trend
and treatment status. The model includes fixed effects for a given month-year, as well as age fixed effects and cell-
level fixed effects. It also includes unemployment rates and an interaction between treatment status and
unemployment rates.
2. Robust standard errors are reported.




                                                         40
                                                     TABLE 8

                               Placebo Tests with Pseudo Implementation Dates


                      Prenatal Care     Prenatal Care      Prenatal Care
                                                                              Gestational         Gestational
                      Start in 1st      Start in 2nd       Start in 3rd
                                                                              Diabetes            Hypertension
                      Trimester         Trimester          Trimester

           Estimate   0.0116***         -0.00753***        -0.00337***        -0.00219***         -0.00163***
                      (0.00139)         (0.00118)          (0.000512)         (0.0004)            (0.000523)
    February 2009     0.00253           -0.00271           -0.000280          -0.000627           0.00105
                      (0.00593)         (0.00561)          (0.000763)         (0.000637)          (0.00112)
       March 2009     0.00366           -0.00333           -0.000195          -0.000406           -0.000468
                      (0.00431)         (0.00402)          (0.00102)          (0.000901)          (0.00179)
        April 2009    -0.00163          -0.000576          0.00193**          0.000953            -0.00350*
                      (0.00394)         (0.00364)          (0.000873)         (0.000983)          (0.00180)
         May 2009     -0.000434         -0.00286           0.00106            -0.000525           -0.000345
                      (0.00396)         (0.00371)          (0.00119)          (0.00129)           (0.00176)
         June 2009    -0.000270         -0.00118           0.00132            -0.00108            0.000347
                      (0.00323)         (0.00308)          (0.000946)         (0.00120)           (0.00126)
         July 2009    0.00253           -0.00253           0.000237           -0.00127            0.0000200
                      (0.00253)         (0.00226)          (0.000909)         (0.000866)          (0.00117)
      August 2009     0.00272           -0.00164           -0.000844          -0.00119*           -0.000390
                      (0.00207)         (0.00197)          (0.000915)         (0.000705)          (0.000959)
  September 2009      0.00498**         -0.00399**         -0.00105           -0.000682           -0.000607
                      (0.00207)         (0.00193)          (0.000759)         (0.000657)          (0.000861)
     October 2009     0.00282           -0.00292           -0.000525          0.0000335           -0.000219
                      (0.00226)         (0.00195)          (0.000743)         (0.000666)          (0.000809)
  November 2009       0.00254           -0.00264           -0.0000337         -0.000623           -0.0000221
                      (0.00251)         (0.00215)          (0.000754)         (0.000740)          (0.000850)
   December 2009      -0.00217          0.000485           0.000475           -0.000768           0.000124
                      (0.00196)         (0.00202)          (0.000822)         (0.000922)          (0.000925)
     January 2009     -0.00171          0.000599           -0.000114          0.000656            -0.000439
                      (0.00182)         (0.00209)          (0.00111)          (0.000913)          (0.000951)

Note: 1. The sample consists of individuals between the ages of 24 and 28 (26 excluded) and is drawn from January
2009 to March 2010 Natality Public Files. The coefficient reported is for the interaction between a pseudo
implementation date as indicated and the treatment status. The model includes fixed effects for a given month-year,
age fixed effects, and cell-level fixed effects. It also includes unemployment rates and an interaction between
treatment status and unemployment rates.
2. Robust standard errors are reported.
3. *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01 denote significance levels.




                                                        41
                                                      TABLE 9

                                     Fertility Effects using State Level Data

                           28 States
                           with new                                        No Prior       With Prior
                           certificate     No Waiver       Waiver          Provision      Provision
                Effect     -0.0619***      -0.0556***      -0.0889***      -0.0435*       -0.0510**
                           (0.0124)        (0.0140)        (0.0144)        (0.0188)       (0.0174)
                N          9114            8820            5880            6174           8820
                adj. R-
                sq         0.971           0.958           0.967           0.973          0.967
Note: 1. The sample consists of individuals between the ages of 24 and 28 (26 excluded) and is drawn from the 2009
to 2013 Natality Public Use Files with state identifiers. The data is aggregated at the age-month-year-state level. The
dependent variable is the log birth count in each cell. The model includes fixed effects for month and year fixed
effects, state fixed effects, and age fixed effects. It also includes lagged unemployment rates and an interaction
between treatment status and lagged unemployment rates.
2. The coefficients reported here are the coefficients of the interaction terms between treatment status and post time
period.
4. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
5. *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01 denote significance levels.




                                                          42
Appendix
                                             TABLE 1A

                           Percentage Missing of All Outcome Variables


                 Outcome Variables
                                                Missing       Total   Percent Missing
           Birthweight                            14,140   13,346,815          0.11%
           Gestational Age                        15,341   13,346,815          0.11%
           Maternal Smoking                    1,069,064   13,346,815          8.01%
           Gestational Diabetes                  133,561   13,346,815          1.00%
           Gestational Hypertension              133,561   13,346,815          1.00%
           Prenatal Visits                       568,740   13,346,815          4.26%
           Month Prenatal Care Started           619,627   13,346,815          4.64%
           Cesarean Delivery                      12,467   13,346,815          0.09%
           Married                                     0   13,346,815          0.00%
           WIC                                   390,071   13,346,815          2.92%
           White                                 175,273   13,346,815          1.31%
           Black                                 175,273   13,346,815          1.31%
           Hispanic                              175,273   13,346,815          1.31%
           <High School                          231,392   13,346,815          1.73%
           High School                           231,392   13,346,815          1.73%
           Some College                          231,392   13,346,815          1.73%
           College                               231,392   13,346,815          1.73%
           Graduate Degree                       231,392   13,346,815          1.73%
           Smoking before Pregnancy            1,068,058   13,346,815          8.00%
           Diabetes before Pregnancy              42,332   13,346,815          0.32%
           Hypertension before Pregnancy          42,332   13,346,815          0.32%
           Note: from Natality Public Files 2009-2015




                                                  43
                                           TABLE 2A

                Implementation of the 2003 U.S. Standard Certificate of Live Birth

Year                 2015       2014        2013        2012       2011       2010      2009
                48 States 47 States   41 States   38 States   36 States 33 States
                and the   and the     and the     and the     and the   and the     28
Total           D.C       D.C         D.C         D.C         D.C       D.C         States
Alabama                 1           1
Alaska                  1           1           1
Arizona                 1           1
Arkansas                1           1
California              1           1           1           1         1           1        1
Colorado                1           1           1           1         1           1        1
Connecticut
Delaware               1            1            1            1           1          1    1
District of
Columbia               1            1            1            1           1          1    1*
Florida                1            1            1            1           1          1     1
Georgia                1            1            1            1           1          1     1
Hawaii                 1            1
Idaho                  1            1            1            1           1           1   1
Illinois               1            1            1            1           1           1
Indiana                1            1            1            1           1           1   1
Iowa                   1            1            1            1           1           1   1
Kansas                 1            1            1            1           1           1   1
Kentucky               1            1            1            1           1           1   1
Louisiana              1            1            1            1           1          1*
Maine                  1            1           1*
Maryland               1            1            1            1           1          1
Massachusetts          1            1            1            1          1*
Michigan               1            1            1            1           1          1    1
Minnesota              1            1            1            1
Mississippi            1            1            1
Missouri               1            1            1            1           1          1
Montana                1            1            1            1           1          1     1
Nebraska               1            1            1            1           1          1     1
Nevada                 1            1            1            1           1          1    1*
New
Hampshire              1            1            1            1           1          1    1
New Jersey             1           1*
New Mexico             1            1            1            1           1          1    1
New York
(excluding
NYC)                   1            1            1            1           1          1    1


                                               44
 New York
 City                       1              1              1             1             1             1            1
 Year                    2015           2014           2013          2012          2011          2010         2009
 North
 Carolina                    1              1              1             1             1            1*
 North Dakota                1              1              1             1             1             1               1
 Ohio                        1              1              1             1             1             1               1
 Oklahoma                    1              1              1             1             1             1              1*
 Oregon                      1              1              1             1             1             1               1
 Pennsylvania                1              1              1             1             1             1               1
 Rhode Island                1             1*
 South
 Carolina                    1              1              1             1             1              1             1
 South Dakota                1              1              1             1             1              1             1
 Tennessee                   1              1              1             1             1              1             1
 Texas                       1              1              1             1             1              1             1
 Utah                        1              1              1             1             1              1             1
 Vermont                     1              1              1             1             1              1             1
 Virginia                    1              1              1            1*
 Washington                  1              1              1             1             1              1             1
 West Virginia               1              1
 Wisconsin                   1              1              1             1             1
 Wyoming                     1              1              1             1             1              1             1
Note: Information obtained from the 2015 Natality Public File. Includes each state and territory, New York City,
and the District of Columbia; * states revised certificates after January 1; new birth certificate information is
included from the following year. Data excludes reporting areas that revised after January 1.




                                                         45
                                             Table 3A
                               Subgroup Analyses of the Birth Outcomes
                 (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)                  (5)
                       Prenatal Care Start
                                                 Gestational       Gestational
                 1st Trimester 2nd Trimester
                                                 Diabetes          Hypertension         Gestation Age
 Full sample     0.0116***       -0.00753***     -0.00219***       -0.00163***          -0.0212***
                 (0.00139)       (0.00118)       (0.0004)          (0.000523)           (0.00676)
 White-
                 0.00622         -0.00580
 Unmarried                                         -0.00364*         -0.0000410         0.0287
                 (0.00508)       (0.00560)         (0.00176)         (0.00196)          (0.0170)
 White-
                 0.00212         -0.00299*
 Married                                           -0.00234**        -0.00189**         -0.00787
                 (0.00237)       (0.00163)         (0.000954)        (0.000899)         (0.0132)
 Black-
                 0.00944**       -0.00746**
 Unmarried                                         -0.00166          -0.00286**         -0.00776
                 (0.00447)       (0.00316)         (0.00192)         (0.00122)          (0.0282)
 Black-
                 0.0165          -0.00815
 Married                                           0.00348           0.000904           -0.0201
                 (0.0106)        (0.00756)         (0.00383)         (0.00227)          (0.0275)
 Hispanic-
                 0.00999***      -0.00570*
 Unmarried                                         -0.00373***       0.000556           0.0358*
                 (0.00334)       (0.00286)         (0.00101)         (0.00197)          (0.0207)
 Hispanic-
                 0.00269         -0.000298
 Married                                              -0.0000975        -0.00160          0.00504
                  (0.00606)         (0.00361)         (0.00152)         (0.00144)         (0.0306)
Note: 1. The sample consists of individuals between the ages of 24 and 28 (26 excluded) and is drawn from
the 2009 to 2015 Natality Public Use Files. The dependent variables are the average measures of birth
outcomes in each cell. The data is aggregated to the age-marital status-race-education-month-year level.
The model includes month and year fixed effects, age fixed effects, and education fixed effects. It also
includes unemployment rates and an interaction between treatment status and unemployment rates.
2. Standard errors are clustered at the age-marital status-race-education level.
3. *0.10, **0.05, ***0.01 denote significance levels.




                                                   46
