                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     INTERBANK NETWORKS IN THE SHADOWS OF
                            THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT

                                       Haelim Anderson
                                          Selman Erol
                                       Guillermo Ordoñez

                                      Working Paper 27721
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27721


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We thank participants at the 2019 Barcelona Summer GSE Forum, the 2019 NBER SI Monetary
Economics Workshop, the 2019 Yale Financial Stability conference, the 2020 Philadelphia
Federal Reserve's conference on "The Impact of Post-Crisis Regulation on Financial Markets",
and the 2020 Western Finance Association annual meeting. We also thank seminar participants at
the IMF and FDIC. We thank Mark Carlson, Gary Gorton, Jeffrey Miron, Gary Richardson,
Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, and Kathy Yuan for comments and suggestions and Dillon McNeill,
Andrew Orr, David Eijbergen, and Andrew Vizzi for excellent research assistance. Views and
opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent official positions or
policy of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Ordonez received financial support by NSF
Grant 1919351 and Erol by NSF Grant 1919029 and the CMU Berkman Faculty Development
Fund. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Haelim Anderson, Selman Erol, and Guillermo Ordoñez. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Interbank Networks in the Shadows of the Federal Reserve Act
Haelim Anderson, Selman Erol, and Guillermo Ordoñez
NBER Working Paper No. 27721
August 2020
JEL No. D53,D85,E02,E44,G11,G21,G23,N21

                                         ABSTRACT

Central banks provide public liquidity to traditional (regulated) banks with the intention of
stabilizing the financial system. Shadow banks are not regulated, yet they indirectly access such
liquidity through the interbank system. We build a model that shows how public liquidity
provision may change the linkages between traditional and shadow banks, increasing systemic
risk through three channels: reducing aggregate liquidity, expanding fragile short-term
borrowing, and crowding out of private cross-bank insurance. We show that the creation of the
Federal Reserve System and the provision of public liquidity changed the structure and nature of
the U.S. interbank network in ways that are consistent with the model and its implications. We
provide empirical evidence by constructing unique data on balance sheets and detailed
disaggregated information on payments and funding connections in Virginia.



Haelim Anderson                                 Guillermo Ordoñez
Center for Financial Research                   University of Pennsylvania
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation           Department of Economics
550 17th St NW                                  PCPSE - Room 505
Washington, DC 20429                            133 South 36th Street
handerson@fdic.gov                              Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                                and NBER
Selman Erol                                     ordonez@econ.upenn.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Tepper School of Business
5000 Forbes Ave
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
erol@cmu.edu
1       Introduction

The recent large infusions of public liquidity by the Federal Reserve System (and several
other central banks around the world) during the financial crises of 2007-2009 and the 2020
COVID-19 pandemic revitalized the discussion about the role that such infusions play in
financial markets. If public liquidity needs were exogenous and its provision costless, its
social desirability would be clear. Neither of those conditions, however, is likely to be met.
This is the reason central banks grant access to public liquidity only to traditional banks
that abide by several regulations. Yet the provision of public liquidity affects not only the
behavior of individual banks but also the manner in which banks - regulated (traditional
banks) and nonregulated (shadow banks) - interact with each other. The critical question,
therefore, is: how does public liquidity affect financial fragility when some banks can avoid
regulations and still obtain such liquidity indirectly from regulated banks?
This question is quite relevant, but also challenging, in modern times. In itself, though,
the question is not new. It was also prominent during the early years of the Federal Reserve
System, created by the 1913 Federal Reserve Act to offer liquidity to member banks through a
discount window, with the precondition that members would accept stricter regulation. The
Act made membership compulsory for national banks but voluntary for state banks, under
the presumption that most state banks would choose to join. Most of them did not. Indeed,
and perhaps inadvertently, the Federal Reserve Act may have created what we call a shadow
banking system : a system of banks, commercial or other, that are not under federal regulation
and do not have direct access to liquidity facilities or bailout promises. In the 1920s, this
shadow banking system consisted of nonmember banks that operated under more-relaxed
state regulations (relative to the ones imposed on member banks), yet had indirect access
to public liquidity through correspondent banks that were members of the Federal Reserve
System (CQ Researcher (1923)).1
In this paper, we first build a model to understand how introducing public liquidity affects
the extent and intensity of banks' interactions, in particular between regulated members and
unregulated nonmembers. We start by considering a financial system without public liquidity,
which is motivated by the banking structure during the National Banking Era, the period
preceding the introduction of the Federal Reserve System. We consider a peripheral country
bank with access to liquidity and investment opportunities but also facing the possibility of
sudden withdrawals. In response to the possibility of those shocks, the bank may choose to
diversify its portfolio by placing deposits in a reserve-city bank - a core bank - that also has
    1
     Banks placing deposits in other banks were called respondents and banks receiving deposits were called
correspondents. Correspondent banks were generally located in financial centers.

                                                    2
investment opportunities and that serves as a hub to insure across regions (receiving deposits
from several country banks, as New York banks did during the National Banking Era).
In the model we then introduce access to public liquidity by the core bank (now a member
bank), motivated by the Federal Reserve Act. We show that as a response, the periphery
bank (now a shadow nonmember bank) relies less on cash and deposits to insure against
liquidity shocks and more on borrowing short-term funds from the member bank. In this
way, the endogenous reaction of shadow banks to the public liquidity to which they lack
direct access is not only to reduce cash holdings but also to accumulate more risks in their
own portfolios. In short, the role of financial - center banks was transformed, as they went
from being a provider of productive diversification to being a nonproductive pass - through
conduit for shadow banks accessing cheaper liquidity without facing costlier regulations.
Beyond the fragility implied by the accumulation of risk in a single unregulated bank, the
increase in interbank short-term borrowing between member and nonmember banks makes
the overall network more complex and thereby strengthens the possibility of contagion. The
system's vulnerability to shocks increases (without public liquidity ex-post, there would be
more inefficient project liquidations ), even though fragility (actual liquidations) declines by
the umbrella provided by public liquidity. Naturally if public liquidity is not for free (an
aspect we do not discuss in this paper), the reduction in fragility comes at the cost of an
increase in vulnerability and effective use of public liquidity.
Finally, our simple model also shows that the provision of public liquidity can change the
structure of the interbank system by decentralizing it geographically and thereby crowding
out private insurance. Although during the National Banking Era the concentration of re-
serves in New York City had been deemed a source of financial instability, it had also allowed
banks to smooth local liquidity shocks: since New York City banks pooled the reserves of a
large number of banks across different regions, the interbank network was able to diversify
regional shocks that were not correlated (Gilbert (1983)). With the introduction of public
liquidity, however, country banks were induced to rely more on their local correspondents
at lower costs (the costs were lower because distances were shorter, information was better,
relations were stronger, and so forth), but the emergence of decentralized interbank relation-
ships made the overall banking system more vulnerable to regional liquidity shocks. In short,
the role of financial-center banks was transformed, as they went from being a provider of
private liquidity insurance to being a conduit for public liquidity insurance.
The advantage to grounding the model on a counterfactual without central banks is the
possibility of testing its implications against historical data. The challenge, however, is
overcoming a lack of detailed balance sheet information on financial networks and banking

                                               3
connections at about the time the Federal Reserve Act was passed. Existing bank balance
sheet data for the period in question report only the total amounts of interbank balance sheet
items, without disaggregating them by individual debtor or creditor correspondent bank. In
addition, commercial bank directories, such as Rand McNally and Polk, provide information
on self-reported correspondent linkages but not on the types of interbank transactions or the
amounts associated with these transactions. In other words, these directories provide names
of counterparties but not information on the strength and nature of the relationships.
To overcome these limitations, we construct various datasets. First, we obtain yearly bank
balance sheets for state banks (most of the banks we document are nonmembers) and for
national banks (by construction, all national banks are members), aggregated at the state
level from 1910 to 1929. This information gives us an aggregated view of (1) how the Federal
Reserve Act's liquidity provision changed the aggregate amount of private liquidity in the
system, and (2) what the differences in various balance sheets items were between members
and nonmembers. This differentiation between members and nonmembers is important be-
cause the public liquidity provision would almost automatically reduce private liquidity for
member banks, but its effect on nonmembers is less obvious. Our model strongly suggests
that liquidity is reduced for nonmember banks as well, given their ability to access public
liquidity through member banks. We show that this was indeed the case, even in states where
state regulations become more stringent.
Although aggregate balance sheet data provide useful information, they still do not show
how the creation of the Federal Reserve System changed the overall interbank structure.
To solve this problem, we collect state bank examination reports for Virginia state banks
for the years 1911 and 1922 (that is, before and after passage of the Federal Reserve Act).
The examination reports provide assets and liabilities in detail for banks as well as detailed
information on their correspondents. On the asset side, we obtain the the amounts of deposits
between respondent and correspondent banks. Similarly, on the liability side, we obtain the
amounts of short-term loans between respondent and correspondent banks. With this detailed
information we document the nature and intensity of payment and funding relationships and
investigate how the creation of the Federal Reserve changed the structure and nature of
interbank relationships.
Consistent with the aggregate balance sheet findings - and with the model's implications
- we find that the creation of the Federal Reserve System reduced the aggregate liquidity
(cash and deposits) held by shadow banks in Virginia and strengthened their short-term
borrowing. The ability of nonmember banks to borrow indirectly from the Federal Reserve
through member banks increased nonmember banks' reliance on short-term funding, which


                                              4
in turn decreased their need to hold liquid assets. Furthermore, we find that the interbank
system became more dispersed after the Federal Reserve Act. On the one hand, the interbank
deposit network became more local, with banks reducing their number of correspondents in
New York and increasing the number in local financial centers, such as Richmond and Norfolk.
On the other hand, the interbank borrowing network also became more local, with banks
borrowing from members in nearby towns instead of from larger banks in financial cities. In
other words, the creation of the Federal Reserve System produced a decentralized interbank
network, consistent with the endogenous network response predicted by our model.
Our study has important implications for policy today. The common view is that providing
public liquidity to traditional banks insulates them from potential risks arising from unreg-
ulated shadow banks. That view, however, relies heavily on the assumption that the two
types of banks do not interact, or that they cannot change their relationships in response to
changes in public liquidity provision. Here we argue that unregulated banks can access public
liquidity indirectly by changing their interbank operations, modifying the role of traditional
banking and potentially creating a new source of systemic risk. Although the system is more
stable when faced with small, "business as normal" shocks, it also creates room for a larger
shock endogenously generated.
Related Literature: Our paper contributes to a rich literature that studies the conse-
quences of the Federal Reserve Act. Previous work has found that the creation of the Federal
Reserve reduced financial volatility by smoothing seasonal liquidity pressures on the bank-
ing system (See Miron (1986), Mankiw et al. (1987), Bernstein et al. (2010), Carlson and
Wheelock (2018b)). We show that, even though the creation of the Federal Reserve may
have stabilized the functioning of the system in "normal times," in the background it was
building a shadow system that relied too much on public funds and guarantees, held too little
liquidity, and connected too much on fragile borrowing. Creation of the Federal Reserve may
have also increased systemic risk, planting the seed for larger collapses.
Indeed, recent empirical studies (Mitchener and Richardson (2019) and Calomiris et al.
(2019)) have documented the importance of contagion and systemic risk in accounting for the
Great Depression. Other studies have complemented this view, showing that the inability of
nonmember banks for an immediate and direct access to central bank liquidity magnified the
severity of banking crises during the Great Depression, leading to the creation of new and
more extensive lending facilities, such as the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (Wicker
(2000) and Anbil and Vossmeyer (2017)). Our paper argues that those preconditions may
have been unanticipated consequences of the creation of the Federal Reserve System.
More recent work, which includes Mitchener and Richardson (2019) and Carlson and Whee-

                                              5
lock (2018b), has documented changes in the structure of interbank deposit networks that
resulted from creation of the Federal Reserve System. Jaremski and Wheelock (2019), for
instance, using information about correspondent linkages from the Rand McNally Directory,
document how banks established connections to correspondents that joined the Federal Re-
serve in cities with Federal Reserve offices, reducing concentration in the overall network.
Our empirical work is consistent with these findings, but motivated by the theoretical im-
plications of our model. In addition to considering changes at the extensive margin (tracing
which banks were part of a connection) as these papers do, we constructed a new dataset
with information at the intensive margin (the dollar amounts of the deposits and loans that
were involved in a connection). Furthermore, we extended this analysis to funding relations
(short-term loans) in addition to payment relations (deposits). These additions are critical
for understanding the effect of the Federal Reserve System on systemic risk.
Our paper also contributes to the recent literature on the rise of shadow banking- both by
regulatory arbitrage (Ordonez (2018)) and by restricted public liquidity provision (Bengui
et al. (2019)). In this paper, we also argue these two factors have been critical to the
structure and growth of perhaps the first shadow banking system in the U.S. We show this
by using the fact that some banks chose to operate outside the Federal Reserve System (be
a nonmenmber bank) and exploited indirect access to public liquidity through interbank
connections. The modern application of our insights contribute to the recent literature on
the transmission of monetary policy on the shadow banking sector (Adrian and Shin (2009),
Freixas et al. (2011), Chen et al. (2018) and Bianchi and Bigio (2020)). According to our
results, the monetary policy that introduces liquidity in the system has nontrivial effects
on the relationship between traditional banks and shadow banks, the composition of their
portfolios, and the stability of the financial system.2
In the area of theory, we apply a network structure to understand how interlinkages (both
intensive, focusing on the degree of payment and funding, and extensive, focusing on the
existence and anatomy of links) react to government interventions. There are recent studies
that endogenize the effects of public interventions to the functioning of banking networks.
Erol and Ordoñez (2017), for example, study the reaction of an interbank network to banking
regulations. They show that liquidity and capital requirements that are intended to provide
stability may also make the system more prone to collapse by discouraging the functioning of a
network structure that insures against financial shocks. In this paper we study how facilities
that lend to certain banks may also unintentionally harm both network functionality and
total stability, and we provide evidence of those forces.
   2
     Gorton and Ordonez (2020) studies the role of monetary policy on systemic risk through the impact on
collateral information in the system, not through the impact on interbank relations.

                                                   6
In terms of financial network theory, the closest work to ours is Erol (2018), who argues that
uncapped ex-post liquidity provision induces a more centralized network by mitigating the
insolvency contagion through core banks. Instead we show that liquidity provision induces
a less centralized network by reducing the value of liquidity coinsurance by core banks. In
this sense, we also contribute to the literature of interbank networks and their effects on
systemic risk, as in Allen et al. (2012), Acemoglu et al. (2015) and Chang and Zhang (2019).
Empirically, Anderson et al. (2019) show how the concentration of interbank deposits affected
systemic risk during the National Banking Era. This paper bridges the theoretical work with
the empirical endeavor and focuses on how the provision of public liquidity changes interbank
relations and systemic risk.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides historical background
of the interbank system functioning before and after passage of the Federal Reserve Act.
Section 3 presents a model that not only introduces an external agent (central bank) that
provides liquidity in a banking setting but also how the provision affects the holding of
liquidity of a bank and the payment and funding relations across banks. Section 4 presents
empirical evidence of (1) a reduction in aggregate liquidity (for both Federal Reserve members
and nonmembers), (2) an increase in short-term borrowing and the possibilities of contagion,
and (3) changes in the geographical properties of the core-periphery network. We conclude
with some final remarks.



2       Historical Background

During the National Banking Era (1864-1912), the U.S. banking system exhibited seasonal
spikes in loan interest rates and frequent episodes of banking panics. Short-term interest
rates displayed strong seasonal fluctuations due to large increases in the supply of deposits
during agricultural harvest seasons and the demand for credit during agricultural planting
seasons. As a result, banks faced liquidity pressures in spring and fall, and panics occurred
at times of the year in which these pressures peaked.
The interbank system of the period, through the network of correspondent deposits and
short-term funding, played an important role in relaxing liquidity pressures. The interbank
deposit network was characterized by a three-tier pyramid structure.3 Country banks held
    3
     The interbank system developed to overcome branching restrictions and facilitate interregional payments
of goods and services. The National Banking Act institutionalized the interbank system by setting up a
location-based three-tier system of national banks: central reserve-city banks (those located in New York
City, Chicago, or St. Louis), reserve-city banks (banks in selected other large cities), and country banks
(banks in all other locations). Central reserve-city banks were required to hold cash reserves equal to 25% of

                                                      7
deposits in reserve-city banks, which in turn kept deposits in New York City banks. The
concentration of interbank deposits in New York City banks allowed these banks to reallocate
liquidity across regions. When country banks in agricultural regions faced seasonal demands,
they withdrew their interbank deposits from financial centers, with those funds coming from
other banks in areas where seasonal demands were less pressing. The geographical regional
differences in demand produced somewhat offsetting flows of interbank deposits in New York
City banks, which effectively provided private insurance across regions (see, for instance,
Kemmerer (1910)). The interbank system helped banks meet seasonal liquidity pressures
not only by allowing banks to cross-share deposits but also by allowing them to borrow
short-term funds from correspondents. Country banks borrowed the most, reserve-city banks
borrowed rarely, and central reserve-city banks borrowed hardly at all.
But although the interbank system helped soften the seasonal demands on banks, it did not
create additional liquidity. As a result, the cash demands of country banks drained cash bal-
ances from New York City banks and led to seasonal spikes in interest rates. Contemporaries
thought these seasonal swings contributed to bank panics and instability, and this belief
prompted calls for reform to create an elastic currency that would make the reallocation of
funds across regions less dependent on interbank relationships (Sprague (1910)).
In response to this financial landscape, the Federal Reserve System was created in 1913 (under
the Federal Reserve Act) with three primary objectives: to eliminate the concentration of
bank reserves in New York City banks by establishing 12 regional reserve banks; to create
an elastic currency and thereby reduce seasonal volatility; and to prevent panics (Calomiris
(1994)). To achieve these goals, the Federal Reserve offered a discount window to member
banks through the 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks, but required members to meet new
reserve requirements by placing deposits in those Federal Reserve Banks instead of reserve-
city and central reserve-city banks.4
The Federal Reserve Act retained for member banks the three-tier classification of central
reserve-city banks, reserve-city banks, and country banks, but changed their reserve require-
ments. Member banks were required to hold 13%, 10% and 7%, respectively, of demand
their deposits. Reserve-city banks were also required to hold reserves equal to 25% of their deposits, of which
one-half could be deposits with a correspondent bank in a central reserve city. Country banks were required
to hold reserves equal to 15% of their deposits, but they could keep three-fifths of the 15% as deposits with
a correspondent bank in reserve and/or central reserve cities. State bank regulators subsequently passed
similar laws.
    4
      Even though only member banks were given access to Federal Reserve services, including the discount
window, the Act made it possible for the central bank to extend the discount window to nonmember banks in
special circumstances with the approval of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Before 1923, for instance,
the Board allowed member banks to discount eligible paper acquired from nonmember banks (See Hackley
(1973), p. 119). But in general, the Board limited the extension of credit to nonmember banks in exceptional
circumstances (See Carlson and Wheelock (2013)).

                                                      8
deposits and 3% of time deposits within the Federal Reserve Banks. The Federal Reserve did
not pay interest on any of these deposits.5
Although the Federal Reserve Act succeeded in reducing the volume of interbank deposits,
it failed to eliminate interbank network linkages. Deposits with the Federal Reserve Banks
did not pay any interest, whereas deposits at city correspondents paid 2% interest. Hence,
member banks continued to hold some deposits with correspondents, both to earn interest
and to diversify their asset portfolios (CQ Researcher (1923), Carlson and Wheelock (2018b)).
Becoming a member, however, was partly voluntary. The Act made it compulsory for national
banks to join, but for state banks, joining was voluntary. The creators of the Federal Reserve
System hoped to bring state banks under a more unified system of regulation and supervision,
but only a small fraction of state banks became members: by June 1915, only 17 state banks
had chosen to join. This reluctance had two causes. First, even though the Act prohibited
member banks from using interbank deposits to meet reserve requirements, state regulators
allowed state banks to do so (CQ Researcher (1923)). Second, banks that did not become
members could continue earning interest on all of their interbank deposits. Indeed, more
banks joined after a 1917 revision that lowered capital and reserve requirements.
Figure 1 shows the proportions of national, state member, and state nonmember banks from
1914 to 1929. With only 5% of state banks choosing to become a member, more than 60% of
all banks remained outside the Federal Reserve System. Membership grew slowly, eventually
reaching a peak of 1,648 state banks (compared with 19,141 nonmember banks) in 1922
(Committee Branch Group (1935)).6

Figure 1: Percentages of Banks with respect to Federal Reserve Membership Status, 1914-
1929
                           Percent
                           80
                           70
                           60
                           50
                           40
                           30
                           20
                           10
                            0
                                1914

                                       1915

                                              1916

                                                     1917

                                                            1918

                                                                   1919

                                                                          1920

                                                                                 1921

                                                                                        1922

                                                                                               1923

                                                                                                      1924

                                                                                                             1925

                                                                                                                     1926

                                                                                                                            1927

                                                                                                                                   1928

                                                                                                                                          1929




                                       National Banks                     State Member Banks                        State Non-member


Source : Committee on Branch, Group, and Chain Banking, 1932.

   5
     These reserve requirements were first introduced in 1913, took effect in 1914 and were amended in 1917.
   6
     In terms of relative size, member banks tended to be larger than nonmembers but nonmembers still held
a sizable fraction of total deposits. In 1923, for instance, nonmember banks held more than a third of total
U.S. commercial bank deposits ($10.6 billion of a total of $37.7 in the whole system).

                                                                                  9
Figure 2 presents the rate of state bank membership by state in 1920, showing some hetero-
geneity across states, but still an overall low participation at the Federal Reserve Bank.

         Figure 2: Federal Reserve System Participation Rate of State Banks - 1920




       Participation Rate
             0.0 - 4.2
             4.2 - 11.1
             11.1 - 19.4
             19.4 - 29.8
Source : Annual Report of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.


The unforeseen large fraction of state banks remaining outside the Federal Reserve System
had major implications for the nature of the interbank system. In what follows we show that
this led to a large number of banks accessing the System's discount window indirectly-through
their correspondents. Before the Federal Reserve System was established, country banks
borrowed short-term funds from their correspondents. After the System was established,
country banks started relying more intensively on their correspondents in financial centers
to borrow for short periods, with the understanding that when city correspondents ran out
of funds, they would go to the Federal Reserve Bank and rediscount their own eligible paper
to replenish their liquidity positions.



3     Model

As we have just noted, although the Federal Reserve System was to provide liquidity to the
banking system, many state banks chose not to join the System. As we have also just noted,
even though nonmember banks were not allowed to access the Federal Reserve's discount
window directly, they did it indirectly through their relations with member banks in financial
centers. The goal of our model is to understand how nonmember banks' indirect access to
the central bank's liquidity affects (1) the aggregate liquidity of the banking system, (2)
the nature of interbank exposures, and (3) the structure of the interbank network. The


                                                  10
implications of the model provide us the compass to isolate the relevant variables to analyze
in the data and the lenses to interpret them.
Our model not only helps us to understand the role of the Federal Reserve Bank creation on
reshaping the interactions between member and nonmember banks, but its extrapolation is
also informative about the behavior of modern unregulated financial intermediaries that are
not considered banks in the traditional sense (the so-called shadow banks, such as money
market funds, investment banks, etc.) and their interaction with regulated banks. Our model
highlights the importance of understanding banking networks as a requisite to understand
the effects of shadow banking in financial markets.
We begin with an environment with just two banks, a member and a nonmember, and analyze
how the introduction of public liquidity affects aggregate liquidity and interbank relations.
We then add more banks to study the structure of the interbank network.


3.1     Environment

The economy is composed by two banks, x (nonmember bank) and y (member bank in a
reserve city). Bank x accepts D household deposits and has access to a project that pays
a net rate of return rx > 0. Bank y does not have deposits and has a project that pays
a net rate of return ry > 0. Projects can be liquidated at any time to recover the original
investment, but projects can only be liquidated in full (no partial liquidation).


Reserves and investments After investments, some depositors may need funds and with-
draw from x before projects reach maturity ­liquidity shocks. As projects can only be liqui-
dated in full, x wants to maintain reserves to cover withdrawals, and may do so by holding
cash or by depositing at bank y , earning net interest r, which we assume is low relative to
the projects' returns.7
Denoting x the reserves that x keeps as cash, and L the amount that x deposits at y , bank
x invests Ix = D - x - L. Assuming bank y is subject to reserve requirements in the form of
holding a fraction  of liabilities in cash, and denoting y the reserves that y keeps in cash,
y  L. This implies that y invests Iy = L - y . We call Ix and Iy investments, x and
y cash reserves, and L the interbank deposits. The transactions and obligations described
thus far, absent liquidity shocks, are shown in Figure 3.
   7
     During the National Banking Era, state regulators allowed state banks to keep reserves at reserve cities to
meet reserve requirements, and reserve city banks paid 2% (and no more than 2%) interest on those deposits,
which justify our assumption that r is exogenous (See James (1978)). We further discuss the rationale for
these assumptions in Online Appendix C

                                                      11
                          Figure 3: Transactions absent Liquidity Shocks
                                           Project              Project

                                                Ix Ix (1 + rx )          Iy Iy (1 + ry )

                     Household          D                      L
                                                   x                       y
                     depositors
                                        D                   L(1 + r)


Liquidity shocks Liquidity shocks caused by depositors withdrawing early can disrupt
the previous flow of funds. We assume that full liquidation of projects always covers original
investments, but projects can only be liquidated in full. This last assumption allows us to
focus on liquidity crises and not solvency crises, as depositors can always recover D regardless
of shocks, still maintaining the inefficiency of liquidations.
We denote early withdrawals by   [0, Z ], where Z is the upper bound on possible with-
drawals and  is drawn randomly from a distribution with CDF denoted by S . We call 
the liquidity shock. Depending on the size of the liquidity shock and the size of investments,
there are various scenarios that can materialize regarding liquidations. Next, we describe
these scenarios for the case in which, facing a withdrawal that forces liquidation, bank x
always withdraws its deposits from y before liquidating the own project. Formally, this hap-
pens when Ix + y > L and Ix rx > Lr, which are conditions on endogenous variables that
we prove later (in Lemma 1) that always occur on the path of play.8

   1. If   x + y , the combined cash reserves from x and y are sufficient to meet the
      liquidity shock.

        (a) If   x , withdrawals are met by x's cash in vault.
       (b) If x <   x + y , x's cash reserves are not enough and x borrows  - x
           short-term from y to cover the withdrawals.9

   2. If  > x + y , the combined cash reserves from x and y are not enough to cover the
      liquidity shocks, in which case x must either liquidate its own project or withdraw its
      deposits from y to an extent that y has to liquidate its project project. These are three
      possibilities:
   8
      For expositional simplicity we focus on on-path scenarios, and we deal with off-path scenarios in the
proof of Lemma 1.
    9
      Such lending is risk-free so we assume that y does not charge an interest. Given this, whether x borrows
 - x or y is inconsequential. In what follows, we assume that x borrows the smallest amount that suffices
for it to ride out the shock, which is robust to the existence of small borrowing costs.

                                                       12
         (a) If x + y <   x + L, the deposits of x at y are enough to cover the liquidity
             needs, together with x's cash. Then x withdraws L from y , who has to liquidate
             its project.10
         (b) If x + L <   x + y + Ix , x must liquidate its own project, as deposits at y
             are insufficient. In this case, x can keep its deposits at y . As the proceedings of
             liquidation may still be insufficient, x may need some of y 's cash.
               i. If x + L <   x + Ix , x does not borrow short-term from y .
              ii. x + Ix <   x + y + Ix , then x borrows  - x - Ix short-term from y .
         (c) If x +y + Ix <  , neither Ix from the liquidation of the project, nor deposits L at
             y suffice by themselves, hence x liquidates its project and withdraws its deposits
             from y to cover the large withdrawal.

Figure 4 shows schematically all these scenarios.

                    Figure 4: Size of the Liquidity Shock and Transactions
              borrowing    y liquidates                     borrowing    y liquidates
0                                                                                                D

          x          x + y              x + L               x + Ix      x + Ix + y         x + Ix + L

                                                                x liquidates


These possible states determine ex-post short-term borrowing by bank x from bank y ,
                           
                             - x              if x <   x + y
                           
                        b =  - x - Ix         if x + Ix <   x + Ix + y
                           
                                              otherwise
                           0


and bank x ex-post profits,
                            
                             Ix rx + Lr       if   x + y
                            
                                              if x + y <   x + L
                            I r
                              x x
                        x =
                             Lr               if x + L <   x + y + Ix
                            
                                              if x + y + Ix < 
                            0

    10
    Since bank y is forced to liquidate the whole project upon withdrawal, we assume x withdraws the full
amount L from y .

                                                   13
To obtain ex-ante short-term borrowing and ex-ante profits, we define

                                              S [x + L]

the probability that x's project is not liquidated and

                          S [x + y ] + (S [x + y + Ix ] - S [x + L])

the probability that y 's project is not liquidated. Bank x's expected profits are then

                                    x = E[x ] = Ix rx + Lr.                                          (1)

Following similar arguments, bank y 's expected profits are

                                        y =  (Iy ry - Lr) .                                          (2)


Timing Given the expected profits, bank x chooses investment Ix and deposits L, which
determines its cash reserves x . Then y chooses investment Iy , which determines its cash
reserves, which are subject to reserve requirements y  L.11 Then, liquidity shocks mate-
rialize. This timeline is summarized in Figure 5.

                                    Figure 5: Timeline of events
       D          L, Ix , x         Iy , y          

Borrowing         Bank x           Bank y 's      Liquidity Liquidations and          Project maturity
from outside      portfolio        portfolio      shocks    interbank deposit         and repayments
depositors        choice           choice         to bank x withdrawals

In this setting we can define upstream contagion as follows: Consider a realized shock  . If
  x + y , there is no spillover from x to y . If x + L <   x + Ix + y , x liquidates
its own project. In these two cases, there is no contagion from x to y in terms of forcing
y 's project liquidation. If x + y <   L + x , then x withdraws its deposits L from y .
If x + y + Ix <  , then both projects get liquidated. In both of these cases, y 's project
gets liquidated. We call this situation upstream contagion from x to y . The probability of
upstream contagion is then 1 - .



  11
     Bank y always accept the deposit since its outside option is 0. We will assume that (1 - )ry > r and
so y strictly prefers to accept the deposit.

                                                   14
3.2     Equilibrium Without Public Liquidity

To obtain clean implications from the model by closed-form solutions, we assume that with
probability   [0, 1],  is drawn from U [0, Z ] with Z  D. With probability 1 -  there is
no liquidity withdrawal and  = 0.12 The expected profits of x and y from equations (1) and
(2) can be rewritten as

                                          Ix              2L - 2y
                          x =      1-        Ix rx + 1 -          Lr
                                          Z                  Z
                                                                 


                                          2L - 2y
                          y =      1-                   (L (ry - r) - y ry ) .
                                             Z
While expected short-term borrowing is

                                                         2 y
                                          B = E[b] =         .
                                                         Z

We solve for subgame perfect Nash equilibrium, in which bank x chooses Ix and L to maximize
x subject to Ix , L  0 and Ix + L  D, given that bank y chooses Iy  [0, (1 - )L] to
maximize y .
In what follows we focus on a relatively low probability of early withdrawals, more specifically
   = Z+       Z
               D
                 , with  = max 0, 2-     2
                                           
                                             2(1 - ) - rry - 1 . When  is not too large,
equilibrium reserve requirements bind for y and y = L. Intuitively, banks are less prone
to hold cash buffers in order to prevent the liquidation of projects.

Lemma 1. For relatively low rate on deposits (this is, 2r < (1 - )rx and r < (1 - )ry , where
 < 0.5), reserve requirements bind on the path of play: y = L. Moreover, Ix + y > L
and Ix rx  Lr.

In order to save on otherwise cumbersome notation, we restrict attention to binding reserve
requirements as described in Lemma 1. The next proposition shows how the allocation of
funds changes in response to the probability of a liquidity shock  (taking into consideration
the expectation of the withdrawal size in case it happens).



  12
      That a bank faces more withdrawals than deposits implies additional legacy liabilities by an amount
Z - D  0. This extension avoids kinks in the solution once we introduce public liquidity, but Z > D is
irrelevant in this part of the paper, and one can simply assume Z = D for now. Please see Online Appendix
C for a detailed discussion of such Z  D.

                                                   15
Proposition 1. Equilibrium Portfolios Without Public Liquidity Provision.
If     2 , the equilibrium quantities are

               D + Z                       D + Z
        L=             ,            Ix =         ,           x = D - Ix - L,          y = L.
              4 (1 - )                       2

                                                   -1
              Z (1-)                       D 1-2
where Z           
                       and 2  1 +          Z 3-2
                                                        .
If 2 >  > 1 , the equilibrium quantities are instead

             D (rx + r) - Z (rx - r)
      L=                             ,             Ix = D - L,        x = 0,              y = L.
                2 (rx + 2(1 - )r)

                              -1
                    D rx +r
where 1  1 +        Z rx -r
                                   < 2 .
Finally, if 1 > , bank x does not deposit or hold cash, and Ix = D.

Figure 6 illustrates the Proposition 1 as a function of the probability of a liquidity shock
. As  increases (that is, liquidity shocks become more likely), all instruments for dealing
with these shocks increase (more cash reserve, more expected borrowing, and more interbank
deposits). An increase in liquid assets is offset by a decline in illiquid investments.

  Figure 6: Investments, Interbank Deposits, Short-Term Borrowing, and Cash Reserves



         D

                                                                         Investments Ix
                                                                         Interbank deposits L
                                                                         Expected borrowing B
                                                                         Cash Reserves x



                                                                 
                1                                  2         


There is also a clear pecking order on holding liquid assets. When the risk of withdrawals is
very low ( < 1 ), the return of an additional unit of investment for bank x is larger than
the risk of liquidating the whole project, and then x would rather invest fully in the project,
without holding any cash or depositing in y . Once the risk of withdrawals increase enough
(1 <  < 2 ), bank x reduces investment in the own project and places some deposits in


                                                        16
y . The reason is intuitive: by depositing in y bank x diversifies its portfolio such that, in
case of withdrawals that are not too large there is no need to liquidate a single large project
but instead a smaller one (either x's or y 's). In other words, as banks cannot liquidate a
fraction of projects, diversification works through investing in smaller ones. Finally, once the
probability of withdrawals is large enough (2 <  <        ¯ ), bank x also holds some cash and
resorts more heavily on borrowing from y .


3.3    Equilibrium with Public Liquidity

In this section, we show a public liquidity provision reduces aggregate private liquidity in
the banking system, including the private liquidity of banks that do not have direct access
to public liquidity. In addition, a public liquidity provision can make the banking system
more vulnerable to regional shocks because banks reduce their connectivity to core banks,
and such connectivity provides a private tool to smooth out cross-regional liquidity shocks.
Suppose there is a central bank that provides short-term liquidity only to y (a member
bank), for a maximum amount m, which we refer to as the public liquidity provision (m = 0
is the baseline case of no liquidity provision of the previous section). Although bank x is
not a member of the Federal Reserve System, it can indirectly access the Federal Reserve's
liquidity facilities though its interbank relationship with y . We are interested in how the
ability of x to indirectly access the central bank's liquidity affects x's reserve holdings, and
in turn affects contagion and systemic risk.
Regardless of the amount of public liquidity m, bank y does not want to keep reserves and
y = L. For bank x, using idle reserves x or borrowing at most m from the central bank
via y are substitutes. For bank x, therefore, any shock  below m can be met at no cost just
by borrowing short-term from the member bank. In contrast, a shock above m will require
banks to use their own reserves or to liquidate projects, as above.
Formally, from the viewpoint of bank x, future shocks become  = max{0,  - m}, with 
equal to 0 with probability 1 -  +  m Z
                                        , and drawn from U [0, Z - m] with probability  Z -
                                                                                          Z
                                                                                            m
                                                                                              .
We focus on the values of m < Z - D so that public liquidity does not eliminate liquidity
risk in the financial sector when liquidity shocks are large.
We can rewrite the ex-post profit of bank x as

                                  Ix - m              2L - 2y - m
                  x,m =     1-           Ix rx + 1 -              Lr
                                     Z                      Z
                                 m                           m




                                              17
and the following proposition extends Proposition 1 with public liquidity provision.

Proposition 2. Equilibrium Portfolios With Public Liquidity Provision.
If     2 , the equilibrium quantities are

        D + Z + m                         D + Z + m
   L=             ,                Ix =             ,              x = D - Ix - L,   y = L.
         4 (1 - )                              2

                                                          -1
            Z (1-)                        D 1-2       m
where Z         
                     and 2  1 +           Z 3-2
                                                  -   Z
                                                               .
If 2 >  > 1 , the equilibrium quantities are instead

        D (rx + r) - (Z + m) (rx - r)
   L=                                 ,                   Ix = D - L,      x = 0,    y = L.
              2 (rx + 2(1 - )r)

                                   -1
                 D rx +r       m
where 1  1 +     Z rx -r
                           -   Z
                                        < 2 .
Finally, if 1 > , bank x does not deposit or hold cash, and Ix = D.

Figure 7 shows how bank x's choices change with public liquidity m for a level of  that
justified x holding cash with m = 0 in Figure 6. For low levels of m (first parametric case in
the previous proposition), Ix and L increase with m because both are treated as investments.
This leads to a steep reduction in cash reserves. When m becomes large enough (second
parametric case), x will not keep any cash reserves and will keep only interbank deposits.
Then, as m goes up, x starts reducing interbank deposits L as it shifts its asset portfolio
from low paying investment L to high paying investment Ix . All in all, the combined reserves
of bank x, x + L, decrease in m. Intuitively, indirect access to public liquidity reduces the
need for holding reserves privately and diversifying its portfolio.
Next we describe how short-term borrowing reacts to m. The ex-post amount of x's short-
term borrowing from y is
              
                - x                  if x <   x + y + m
              
               - L -                 if x + max {L, y + m} <   x + L + m
              
                      x
           b=
               - Ix - x
              
                                     if x + max {Ix , L + m} <   x + Ix + y + m
              
                                     otherwise
              0

These cases lead to the following proposition.




                                                      18
   Figure 7: Investments, Interbank Deposits, Short-Term Borrowing, and Cash Reserves




          D
                                                                             Investments Ix
                                                                             Interbank deposits L
                                                                             Expected borrowing B
                                                                             Cash Reserves x



               D (1-2  )                         D (rx + r)          m
                3 -2                              r x -r
                                                              Z -D

Equilibrium allocation as a function of central bank liquidity m in line with Propositions 2 and 3.


Proposition 3. Equilibrium Short-Term Borrowing
Expected short term borrowing is

                
        B=        2(m + y )2 + m2 - max {0, m + y - L}2 - max {0, m + L - Ix }2
               2Z

which is strictly increasing in m in equilibrium.

Figure 7 also illustrates this proposition, with short-term borrowing increasing in m, simply
because bank x relies more on public liquidity provided through bank y . Bank x holds more
illiquid assets and a less diversified portfolio to meet withdrawals.
This simple analysis highlights the effect of public liquidity provision on the investments and
private reserves of shadow banks. Compared with the case of no public provision of liquidity
(m = 0), shadow banks always invest more in illiquid assets and hold less in cash reserves,
relying more on member banks, not to diversify projects but instead as a simple conduit to
access public liquidity, disintermediating the system.


3.4     Systemic Risk: Fragility and Vulnerability

We have shown how banks adjust their portfolios in response to public liquidity m. Even
though they reduce private liquidity as m increases, its potential negative effects is offset
by higher public liquidity. Hence, they will not need to liquidate projects when they face
liquidity shocks as often as they would in the absence of public liquidity. If public liquidity
is costless, central banks may provide an unlimited amount of public liquidity, which would

                                                       19
implement the first best in our setting, which is given by investing all in the most productive
project without the need to liquidate it.
To allow for the possibility of liquidations on path, we assume that, although banks expect
public provision of liquidity by the central banks, they do not know the exact amount of
such public liquidity. If they overestimate the availability of public liquidity, they will hold
too much in illiquid assets and may have to liquidate their investments. We model this
uncertainty with stochastic m. Suppose that m is random between 0 and Z - D. Then
regardless of the level of public liquidity, there is always a shock high enough to require
the liquidation of both projects. Therefore, all of our earlier analyses go through simply by
replacing m with E[m] in the equilibrium quantities.
There are different ways to categorize risks in the financial system. A first category involves
the identity of projects that need liquidation. Direct risk refers to the probability that the
project of x gets liquidated as a consequence of the (direct) liquidity shock to x. Contagion
risk refers to the probability that the project of y gets liquidated as a consequence of x
withdrawing its interbank deposits from y . Systemic risk refers to the probability that all
projects get liquidated.
A second category is based on banks' demand for public liquidity and their use of it. On
the one hand Fragility refers to the liquidation risk of portfolios, where these portfolios are
chosen based on expected liquidity shocks and expected public liquidity. Fragility takes into
account all sources of liquidity. A fragile economy, then, is an economy that is more likely
to have less than expected public liquidity (for political or macroeconomic shocks that imply
less than expected m) that forces project liquidation. On the other hand, Vulnerability refers
to the liquidation risk of portfolios if there were no public liquidity available ex-post, where
these portfolios are chosen based on expected liquidity shocks and expected public liquidity.
Vulnerability takes into account only private liquidity. A vulnerable economy, for instance,
would be one with very large projects and very few private reserves. A large provision of
public liquidity would make an economy highly vulnerable but not fragile.
To obtain closed-form results that clarify comparisons, suppose that m is 0 with probability
              m
 and U [0, 2 1-
                ] with probability 1 -  , where m < 1- 2
                                                         
                                                          (Z - D). This distribution implies
that m has mean m and mass  at no public liquidity. The next Proposition characterizes
the effect of expected public liquidity m on the different categories of risk defined above,
Proposition 4. Systemic Risk
Direct vulnerability is increasing in m . Systemic vulnerability and contagion vulnerability
                                       -2                                        1-2
are increasing in m under m < D 1     3-2
                                          - Z and decreasing in m under m > D 3   -2
                                                                                     - Z .
All notions of fragility are decreasing in m .

                                              20
When there is no expectation that central banks will provide liquidity support (this is m =
0), fragility and vulnerability are the same. In that situation, projects that are vulnerable
because they may be liquidated without public liquidity support will indeed be liquidated
when there is no expectation that central banks will provide liquidity support. The larger
the expected injection of public liquidity, the lower is the fragility given a level of system
vulnerability.
The effect of expected public liquidity on fragility then has two components. An injection
effect ­ more expected public liquidity always reduces the need for liquidation ­ and an
equilibrium effect ­ more expected public liquidity reduces private liquidity and increases the
need for liquidation. Notice that the equilibrium effect in the evaluation of fragility is, in
fact, what we referred to as vulnerability.

                          Fragility = Vulnerability - Injection Effect


Intuitively, this explains why all measures of fragility decline given a level of vulnerability in
Proposition 4 (all projects are less likely to be liquidated when there are large amounts of
public liquidity in the system). Vulnerability, however, measures the exposure of the system
to the need for liquidation. Direct vulnerability is increasing in m because bank x reduces
the buffer L + x that protects Ix when it expects large public liquidity support. As the
project of bank x becomes more reliant on public liquidity, its direct vulnerability increases.


3.5    Networks

In this section, we extend our framework to study how the structure of the interbank network
changes in response to the provision of public liquidity. We show that banks move their
interbank relations towards counterparts that are less costly to maintain. If it is less costly
to maintain relationships with correspondents close in geographic proximity, banks choose
to connect less to central reserve cities and more to regional reserve cities. Hence, public
insurance crowds out the private insurance that smooths out cross-regional liquidity shocks.
We extend our analysis to several banks. As a first step we focus on four banks in two pairs.
More specifically, banks x1 and y1 are linked as described in the baseline, and the same is
true for banks x2 and y2 . We assume that banks x1 and x2 have household deposits and
projects. In contrast, banks y1 and y2 have interbank deposits received from x1 and x2 , and
projects. We call {x1 , x2 } the periphery and {y1 , y2 } the core. As a next step we generalize
the functioning of banks in the core. We introduce these generalizations in Section 3.5.1.
We study how, in the absence of public liquidity, core banks coinsure each other through

                                               21
forming a sort of clearinghouse, as large New York banks historically did before the Federal
Reserve Act. Finally, in Section 3.5.2, we allow periphery banks located in different regions
to choose their correspondents from among two groups of banks: those that have greater
coinsurance possibilities but may be farther away (say, banks in New York) and those that
have fewer coinsurance possibilities but may be closer (say, banks located in regional reserve
cities). This allows us to study the effect of the central bank's liquidity provision m on the
network structure. We show that central bank liquidity induces a shift of links from the far
core (New York City) to the close core (regional reserve cities), thereby crowding out the
private insurance that the system is able to provide.


3.5.1   Liquidity coinsurance

We assume that each of the core banks y1 and y2 has access to central bank liquidity, capped at
(deterministic) m in total. We also assume that the shocks faced by x1 and x2 are negatively
correlated, so we rule out competition over central bank liquidity.
There is  =     2
                   0.5 probability that the shock 1 is drawn from U [0, Z ] and the shock
2 = 0. The parameter  is also the symmetric probability that the shock 2 is drawn from
U [0, Z ] and the shock 1 = 0. There is, then a probability 1 - 2 = 1 -  that there is no
shock, and 1 = 2 = 0. This specification implies that only one bank needs liquidity at a
time and that we do not need to model the priorities of the central bank over which bank
to provide liquidity to, and how much. In other words, we abstract from aggregate liquidity
shocks in the system such that the central bank has to rescue both pairs of banks.
We further allow core banks y1 and y2 to insure each other against liquidity shocks coming
from bank x by reallocating liquidity between the two. When xi faces a liquidity shock, it
can borrow from yi , which can borrow from yj as well as from the central bank.
Without the liquidity coinsurance possibility, the ex-ante profit of xi is

                                Ixi - m                   2(1 - )Li - m
                  x i =    1-             Ixi rx + 1 -                       Li r
                                    Z                           Z

whereas with the liquidity coinsurance, the ex-ante profit is given by

                          Ixi - m - Lj                    2(1 - )Li - m - Lj
          x i =    1-                     Ixi rx + 1 -                              Li r
                                Z                                  Z

Proposition 5. Equilibrium Portfolios and Liquidity Co-Insurance
Suppose that m < D r x +r
                   rx -r
                          - Z 1-
                               
                                 
                                  . The equilibrium level of interbank deposits with and without

                                              22
liquidity co-insurance is given by

                     D (rx + r) - (Z + m) (rx - r)          D (rx + r) - (Z + m) (rx - r)
     Lno
      i
           ins
                 =                                 > Lins
                                                      i   =
                           2 (rx + 2(1 - )r)                2 (rx + 2(1 - )r) + (rx - r)

whereas Ixi = D - Li , xi = 0, and yi = Li for both cases.
If m > D rx +r
         rx -r
               - Z 1-
                    
                      
                       , Ixi = D for both cases.

This proposition shows that in the presence of coinsurance possibilities, interbank lending
allows banks to hedge against liquidity shocks and allows them to increase its own invest-
ments. Hence, banking network at the core acts as an additional source of private liquidity
on top of a public liquidity provision.


3.5.2   Endogenous network

Here we extend the framework to show that the provision of public liquidity insurance crowds
out the provision of private liquidity insurance. This happens when the periphery banks'
choices of correspondents changes under the central bank liquidity provision and leads to the
formation of a new network structure.
Let xi represent a bank in region i which can place deposits in a local reserve-city bank yi    C

or a New York City bank yi   N
                               . Similarly, let xj represent a bank in region j , which can place
deposits in a local reserve-city bank yj  C
                                             or a New York City bank yj   N
                                                                            . For both banks xi
and xj , placing deposits in New York City banks incurs a higher cost than placing deposits
in regional reserve-city banks because of the geographical distance between respondents and
correspondents. As discussed above, two New York City banks yi       N
                                                                       and yjN
                                                                                insure each other
against liquidity shocks by reallocating liquidity in the system. In the absence of the central
bank xi and xj will choose yi   N
                                   and yj
                                        N
                                            in order to reduce their exposure to local liquidity
shocks. Since liquidity shocks are not perfectly correlated between regions i and j , xi and xj
can smooth local liquidity shocks by adjusting their interbank deposits in New York City.
Now, we introduce central bank liquidity, m. Since xi can mitigate local liquidity shocks by
borrowing from a regional correspondent yi  C
                                              directly, we study conditions under which it will
choose to connect to yi rather than yi , which is more expensive. Similarly, xj will choose to
                       C               N

connect to yjC
               rather than yjN
                               . There are two options for equilibria. Banks can either connect
to New York City banks for private insurance but pay higher costs, or they can connect to
regional reserve city banks.




                                                 23
From the analysis in Section 3.5.1, if both banks connect to their regional correspondents,

                            (D - LC ) - m                                2 (1 - ) LC - m
            C
            xi =      1-                        (D - LC ) rx + 1 -                              Lr
                                 D                                              D

where LC is given by Lno       ins
                                     in Proposition 5. If both banks connect to New York City banks,

                  D - LN - LN - m                                    2 (1 - ) LN - LN - m
N
xi =       1-                               (D - LN ) rx + 1 -                                        LN r - c
                         D                                                     D

where LN is given by Lins in Proposition 5.
The next Lemma shows that the relative gain to connect with core banks decline with the
volume of public liquidity offered by the Federal Reserve System.
                     rx +r
Lemma 2. If 0  m < D rx -r
                           - Z 1-
                                
                                  



                       d C     N
                         x i - x i             r(rx - r)         D
                                   >                                > 0.
                          dm         2 (rx + 2(1 - )r) + (rx - r) Z

This characterization leads to the following proposition.

Proposition 6. Network Geographic Concentration
There exists mc such that, for m < mc , banks both regions deposit their reserves at New York
City banks, and for m > mc banks in both regions deposit their reserves in their corresponding
reserve cities.13

Under high enough public liquidity (more specifically, when m > mc ), there are no deposits
placed in New York City banks, as periphery banks do not rely explicitly on the cross-
regional insurance services they provide. With lower levels of public liquidity, however (more
specifically, m < mc ), the extensive margin of lending changes. Even after accounting for en-
dogenous deposit levels, the marginal benefit of connecting to New York City banks decreases
as the amount of central bank liquidity increases. Because public liquidity increases the abil-
ity of banks to absorb local liquidity shocks, xi and xj reduce their reliance on New York
City banks and rely on banks in regional reserve cities. A new network structure emerges as
the concentration of links decreases. These changes are illustrated in Figure 8.




  13
       We use stability as our equilibrium concept, which allows for x1 and x2 to deviate together.

                                                      24
                   Figure 8: Network Reactions to Public Liquidity Provision

    Region 1             NY             Region 2        Region 1           NY          Region 2

        C          N            N           C                 C       N          N         C
       y1         y1           y2          y2                y1      y1         y2        y2



       x1                                  x2                x1                           x2


         Low public liquidity: m < mc                         High public liquidity: m > mc
Change in the structure of the regional interbank network.


3.6     Summary

Our simple model generates three testable predictions of public liquidity provision, m, for
the allocation of funds and the shape of interbank linkages. These are:

    1. An increase in public liquidity provision (m) reduces aggregate private liquidity. Pri-
       vate liquidity holdings (cash and interbank deposits) decline for both member and
       nonmember banks.

    2. An increase in public liquidity provision (m) intensifies interbank relations. With more
       interconnections (in terms of short-term borrowing) there is an increase in the possibility
       of contagion, which increases the system's vulnerability to regional liquidity shocks.

    3. An increase in public liquidity provision (m) dissipates the overall interbank network.
       The network structure changes from a geographically concentrated core to a dissipated
       core, crowding out private insurance for cross-regional shocks.



4     Empirical Evidence

Here we provide empirical evidence for our theoretical predictions. We document how the
advent of the Federal Reserve's discount window changed aggregate liquidity in the banking
system as well as the nature of interbank relations and the structure of interbank networks.




                                                   25
4.1     Data Sources

We collect data from two sources. The first is aggregate, and allows us to test the implications
in terms of aggregate private liquidity and short-term borrowing in the nation as a whole.
The second is bank-specific, and allows us to test the interbank network implications.


4.1.1    Aggregate Balance Sheet Data

Using the Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency, we collect balance sheet in-
formation for national and state banks from 1910 to 1921 and construct balance sheet data
aggregated at the state level. During this period, banks were divided into three subcategories
based on size and location: central reserve city banks, reserve city banks, and country banks.
For national banks, the OCC report provides data for three groups of banks separately, but
for state banks it does not.14
With these aggregate balance sheet data, we examine the effect that the creation of the
Federal Reserve had on member versus nonmember banks at the aggregate level. Because
all national banks were members of the Federal Reserve System and few state banks became
members (Figures 1 and 2), we treat national banks generically as a proxy for member banks
and state banks as a proxy for nonmember banks.
As noted, we examine national and state banks from 1910 to 1929-but with a gap between
1918 and 1920 for three reasons. First, in 1917 the Federal Reserve provided a three-year
phase-in period allowing member banks to adjust to new reserve requirements. Second, in
1917 Congress amended the 1913 legislation and lowered reserve requirements in order to
attract more state banks. Third, after the nation's entrance into World War I (April 1917),
the Federal Reserve offered a preferential discount rate on loans secured by government debt
to support the war effort, but between 1920 and 1921 it removed this preferential rate, raising
its discount rate and tightening banks' access to the discount window.


4.1.2    Bank-Level Balance Sheet Data

To capture the testable implications in terms of the structure and role of interbank relations,
we collect state bank examination reports for all state-chartered banks in Virginia for the
  14
      For 3 central reserve cities (New York, Chicago, and St. Louis), the OCC constructs data at the city
level, and it does likewise for 17 reserve cities (Albany, NY; Baltimore, MD; Boston, MA; Cincinnati, OH;
Cleveland, OH; Detroit, MI; Kansas City, MO; Louisville, KY; Milwaukee, WI; Minneapolis, MN; New
Orleans, LA; Omaha, NE; Philadelphia, PA; Pittsburgh, PA; Saint Joseph, MO; Saint Paul, MN; and San
Francisco, CA). For the country banks it regulates, however, the OCC constructs data at the state-level.

                                                   26
years 1911 and 1922-thus, before and after passage of the Federal Reserve Act. Virginia
State bank examiners inspected all banks and trust companies with a state charter and filed
reports once or twice a year. We collected 222 of these examination reports for 1911 and
327 examination reports for 1922. In Virginia there were 248 and 334 state banks in 1911
and 1922, respectively. Hence, our dataset provides comprehensive information on Virginia
state banks-most especially, for our purposes, on their balance sheets and their counterparts-
before and after passage of the Federal Reserve Act. We focus on nonmember banks, however,
because in Virginia only 11 state banks joined the Federal Reserve System.15
The banks' balance sheet statements and detailed information on interbank relationships
(see Appendix Figure A1) allow us to examine the connections that exist between the role
of interbank relationships for payments and funding. For a given bank, the dataset reports
three types of interbank relationships: deposits due from other bank, deposits due to other
bank, and short-term borrowing from another bank.
The examiners recorded detailed information on interbank deposits to verify whether state
banks were holding enough interbank deposits to meet regulatory reserve requirements. As
mentioned in the section on historical background, above, state bank regulators allowed state
nonmember banks to hold interbank deposits to satisfy reserve requirements, which member
banks were not allowed to do. In Virginia, nonmember banks could hold up to 7/12 of required
reserves in the form of interbank deposits with approved reserve agents. Virginia state bank
regulators did not make differentiated reserve requirements for Richmond and country banks
so we can analyze them jointly.16
The examiner reported the amount that was due from each correspondent bank and the name
of each of those correspondent banks. "Due from" deposits are then assets. Deposits due
to other banks are deposits that other banks hold with a correspondent bank and are thus
liabilities of the bank. Although only balances with reserve agents could be used to satisfy
the legal reserve requirement, the examiner reported all the balances due from other banks.
Because due-to deposits constituted a small fraction of country banks' liabilities, we focus
throughout on due-from deposits, and this information provides us with a complete picture
of the payment networks of state banks in Virginia during the two years in question.
The examination reports also provide information on whether a bank borrowed on a col-
lateralized basis from its correspondents, the amounts of the loan, and the identity of the
lender. These short-term borrowings took the form of rediscounts and bills payable. "Bills
rediscounted" were loans sold with recourse. "Bills payable" consisted of either promissory

  15
       Although we collected information on 2 of these 11 banks, we drop them from our analysis.
  16
       Richmond was a reserve city, and in 1922 it became home to the district's Federal Reserve Bank.

                                                     27
notes of the borrowing bank or borrowing from Federal Reserve Banks. This information
provides us with a complete picture of the funding networks of Virginia state banks.
The data for 1911 (the first year Virginia's banking department released examination reports)
capture bank behavior before passage of the Act. The data for 1922 capture bank behavior
after passage of the Act. We work under the hypothesis that, by 1922 the structure of the
interbank network stabilized after the end of the war.


4.2     Balance Sheet Analysis

To determine how the advent of the Federal Reserve System affected the liquidity of the
banking system, we begin with an analysis of balance sheet ratios of national (member)
and state (nonmember) banks using state-level aggregate bank balance sheets. Then we drill
down to bank-level balance sheet data to compare macro- and micro-level patterns. We focus
on trends in our testable counterparts: cash, due from other banks (deposits in other banks),
and borrowed money (short-term borrowing).


4.2.1    Aggregate balance sheet analysis

In Table 1, we show the effect that creation of the Federal Reserve System had on member
versus nonmember banks at the aggregate level.
We begin by examining the volume of short-term borrowing by banks (B in our model).
Before the advent of the Federal Reserve, short-term borrowing was not large, with national
banks borrowing less than state banks (roughly 1% versus 2%).17 After the advent of the
Federal Reserve, both types of banks increased their borrowing significantly, but national
banks increased theirs more than state banks did: whereas state banks almost doubled their
relative borrowing, national banks more than tripled theirs. This is consistent with our model
in that after public liquidity was provided, banks relied more on short-term borrowing to face
short-term liquidity needs.
Now we turn attention to the most liquid asset on the balance sheet-cash (x in our model).
We look at the share of bank assets held in the form of vault cash for both national and
state banks from 1910 to 1929. Although all banks held less cash after the Federal Reserve
was created, the reduction was larger for national banks (from 6.1% to 1.8%) than for state
banks (from 4.3% to 2.4%). While the reduction for national banks resulted directly from

  17
      These patterns are driven by the fact that reserve-city and central reserve-city banks generally borrowed
less often than country banks (See Carlson and Wheelock (2018b)).

                                                      28
          Table 1: Balance Sheet Ratios, U.S. Aggregate, 1910-1917 and 1921-1929
                                     National Banks              State Banks
                                  1910-1917 1921-1929       1910-1917 1921-1929

          Cash to assets                  6.056          1.769           4.257         2.392
                                         (2.887)        (0.705)         (1.688)       (1.442)

          Duefroms to assets              14.36          7.615           14.26         7.914
                                         (6.167)        (3.487)         (4.915)       (5.524)


          Equity to liabilities           18.9           13.2            19.84         13.86
                                         (9.467)        (2.92)          (5.776)       (3.202)

          Deposits to liabilities         59.3          69.94            72.57         77.75
                                         (24.16)        (9.05)          (8.823)       (6.706)

          Duetos to liabilities           13.76          8.39            3.062         2.452
                                         (13.91)        (8.545)         (2.237)       (2.164)

          Borrowing to liabilities        1.142          3.422           2.165         3.553
                                         (2.359)        (3.544)         (2.989)       (3.395)


          Obs.                             567           630              384           432
Table 1 displays summary statistics for national and state banks during the period 1910-1929. Cash is
composed of specie and legal tender notes. Duefroms are interbank deposits due from other banks. Equity
is composed of paid in capital and surplus. Duetos are interbank deposits due to other banks. Borrowing is
short-term borrowing from other banks or the Federal Reserve Bank.
Source : Annual report of the Comptroller of the Currency .


access to public liquidity and lower reserve requirements, the reduction for state banks is
largely explained by indirect access to public liquidity, which is consistent with our model.
Even though state banks were not members, they held less liquidity because they were able
to access public liquidity through their member correspondents, even in states where reserve
requirements were increased, as we discuss in Appendix B.
Next, we examine the movement of interbank deposits (L in our model). On the asset side,
for both national and state banks the relative deposits in other banks declined roughly by
50% (in both cases, dropping from around 14% to around 8%). The liability side of the
balance sheets shows that deposits due to other banks decreased as well. In this case, the
large decline was mostly experienced by national banks that used to be correspondents and

                                                   29
received most of the interbank deposits in the system. For national banks, a reduction in the
volume of interbank deposits due from and due to other banks was likely a direct consequence
of the National Banking Act, which prohibited the use of interbank deposits to meet reserve
requirements. For state banks, in contrast, a decline in the volume of due-from deposits
was less mechanical, for those banks were still able to meet reserve requirements by holding
interbank deposits.
Because interbank deposits were an important source of financial contagion, we decompose
the holding of interbank deposits by national banks. In Figure 9, we plot interbank deposits
for national banks by geographical classification and examine separately the relationships
with national and with state banks.18 Panel (a) of Figure 9 shows national banks' deposits
due from other national banks and due from state banks. Until 1914, national banks held
most of their deposits in other national banks and very little in state banks. After creation
of the Federal Reserve, for all three groups of national banks the share of bank assets held in
the form of deposits due from other national banks declined significantly. This suggests that
among national banks, private insurance was reduced after creation of the central bank.
In Panel (b) of Figure 9, we look at national banks' deposits due to other national banks
and due to state banks. After creation of the Federal Reserve, national banks in both reserve
and central reserve cities saw a large reduction in the volume of their deposits due to other
national banks. However, they did not see a significant decline in the volume of their deposits
due to state banks. In other words, despite the reduction of private cross-insurance, national
banks in financial centers were still vulnerable to runs by state banks.


4.2.2    Bank-Level balance sheet analysis

In this section, we use individual balance sheets of Virginia state banks to examine the
consistency of the results between state-level balance sheet data and aggregated bank-level
balance sheet data, and we focus on the behavior of nonmember banks.
In Table 2, we show balance sheet ratios for the years 1911 and 1922. First, we examine
the share of short-term borrowing by banks. In 1911, before creation of the Federal Reserve,
country banks' short-term borrowing accounted for 4% of country bank liabilities. In 1922,
after creation of the central bank, country banks' short-term borrowing increased to 6%.
Virginia state banks also reduced liquid asset holdings. The share held in the form of vault

  18
     Note that the gap is larger in these two figures when compared with the rest because the OCC did not
separate "deposits due from other banks" into "deposits due from other national banks" and "deposits due
from other state banks" between 1915 and 1917. Similarly, it did not report "deposits due to other national
banks" and "deposits due to other state banks" separately.

                                                    30
             Table 2: Balance Sheet Ratios, Virginia State Banks, 1911 and 1922
                                                   1911       1922

                           Cash to assets                4.607        3.159
                                                        (2.913)      (2.782)

                           Duefroms to assets            12.38        8.880
                                                        (7.597)      (7.018)


                           Equity to liabilities         25.65        22.22
                                                        (10.63)      (11.85)

                           Deposits to liabilities       68.38        70.19
                                                        (14.80)      (16.61)

                           Duetos to liabilities         1.608        1.224
                                                        (6.972)      (6.015)

                           Borrowing to liabilities      3.805        5.764
                                                        (6.309)      (7.675)


                           Obs.                           220          320
Cash is composed of specie and legal tender notes. Duefroms are interbank deposits due from other banks.
Equity is composed of paid in capital and surplus. Duetos are interbank deposits due to other banks.
Borrowing is short-term borrowing from other banks.
Source : Virginia State Bank Examination Reports .




                                                   31
  Figure 9: Interbank Deposits, National Banks in Tier Groups, 1910-1914 and 1921-1928
                          (a): Deposits due from other Banks
          Due from National Banks                       Due from State Banks
   Ratio                                                                                                   Ratio
  0.18                                                                                                     0.18

  0.15                                                                                                     0.15

  0.12                                                                                                     0.12

  0.09                                                                                                     0.09

  0.06                                                                                                     0.06

  0.03                                                                                                     0.03

                                                                                                             0
  0.00




                                                                                                                    1910

                                                                                                                           1911

                                                                                                                                  1912

                                                                                                                                         1913

                                                                                                                                                1914




                                                                                                                                                       1921

                                                                                                                                                              1922

                                                                                                                                                                     1923

                                                                                                                                                                            1924

                                                                                                                                                                                   1925

                                                                                                                                                                                          1926

                                                                                                                                                                                                 1927

                                                                                                                                                                                                        1928
           1910

                  1911

                         1912

                                1913

                                       1914




                                              1921

                                                     1922

                                                            1923

                                                                   1924

                                                                          1925

                                                                                 1926

                                                                                        1927

                                                                                               1928
            Central Reserve City Banks           Reserve City Banks               Country Banks                     Central Reserve City Banks          Reserve City Banks                Country Banks




                                          (b): Deposits due to other Banks
                         Due to National Banks                         Due to State Banks
   Ratio                                                                                                    Ratio
  0.18                                                                                                     0.24

  0.15                                                                                                     0.20

  0.12                                                                                                     0.16

  0.09                                                                                                     0.12

  0.06                                                                                                     0.08

  0.03                                                                                                     0.04

  0.00                                                                                                     0.00
           1910

                  1911

                         1912

                                1913

                                       1914




                                              1921

                                                     1922

                                                            1923

                                                                   1924

                                                                          1925

                                                                                 1926

                                                                                        1927

                                                                                               1928




                                                                                                                    1910

                                                                                                                           1911

                                                                                                                                  1912

                                                                                                                                         1913

                                                                                                                                                1914



                                                                                                                                                       1921

                                                                                                                                                              1922

                                                                                                                                                                     1923

                                                                                                                                                                            1924

                                                                                                                                                                                   1925

                                                                                                                                                                                          1926

                                                                                                                                                                                                 1927

                                                                                                                                                                                                        1928
            Central Reserve City Banks           Reserve City Banks               Country Banks                     Central Reserve City Banks           Reserve City Banks               Country Banks



Figure 9 plots the ratio of deposits to other banks against total liabilities for national banks in each tier
group. The table examines national banks' deposits due to other national banks and their deposits due to
other state banks separately. Data for country banks are aggregated across all U.S. states; data for reserve
city banks are aggregated across 17 reserve cities; and data for central reserve cities are aggregated across
the three central reserve cities.
Source : Annual report of the Comptroller of the Currency .


cash (specie and legal tender notes) declined from 4.7% in 1911 to 3.1% in 1922. In addition,
the share of correspondent deposits in other banks declined roughly by 30% (from around
12% to around 8%). These patterns are consistent with findings from the aggregated data
and also with the prediction of the model.
To summarize, both aggregate balance sheet data and more-detailed balance sheet data
from Virginia state banks indicate that the advent of the Federal Reserve reduced liquidity
(in the form of cash and interbank deposits) and intensified the funding role of interbank
relationships (in the form of short-term borrowing) between member and nonmember banks.




                                                                                                      32
4.3        Network Analysis

The effect we have seen on the allocation of funds at the bank level does not, however,
provide insights into the concentration of interbank relations at the geographical level. In
this section, we study how the creation of the Federal Reserve System affected the nature
and structure of the interbank system in Virginia, a state where we have detailed extensive
and intensive margins of banking relations.
Figure 10 maps all respondent banks (Virginia state banks) and correspondent banks for
the years 1911 and 1922. The respondent (corresponding) banks that only placed (received)
deposits are in blue, while banks that both placed (received) deposits and borrowed (lent)
short-term funds are in red. There were 1,033 and 1,056 unique due-from relationships in
1911 and 1922, respectively. In addition, there were 150 and 309 unique short-term borrowing
relationships in 1911 and 1922. These maps provide the first clues that the funding roles of
the network became more prevalent after passage of the Federal Reserve Act.
Table 3 shows the number of correspondent relationships in 1911 and 1922. Three patterns
can be discerned. First, state banks held multiple correspondent accounts in multiple banks,
whereas they borrowed from one or two banks each. Second, the average number of corre-
spondents in which a bank had deposits decreased from 4.8 to 3.3. Third, the average number
of correspondents from which a bank borrowed short term remained at around 1.8.

                  Table 3: Number of Correspondent Relationships, 1911 and 1922
                                  1911                                1922
                      Number of Banks Mean SD           Number of Banks Mean                   SD

      Due-from                 218            4.71    4.13              323            3.27    2.41
      Borrowing                 89            1.71    1.05              172            1.80    1.06

Table 3    displays the average number of correspondent relationships per bank. "Due-from" indicates the
average    number of other banks from which a bank had amounts due. Similarly, "Borrowing" indicates the
average    number of correspondent banks that lent short-term funds to a respondent bank.
Source :   Virginia State Bank Examination Reports .


Before providing detailed information on the overall network before and after passage of the
Federal Reserve Act, we present a specific example to illustrate the change in a bank's relation
after the advent of the Federal Reserve Bank. The banking relations of the Bank of Warm
Springs in Warm Springs, Virginia, are depicted in Figure 11. The correspondent banks
that received only deposits from the Bank of Warm Springs are in blue and the ones that
both received deposits and lent short-term to the Bank of Warm Springs are in red. In the


                                                     33
               Figure 10: Respondent and Correspondent Banks, 1911 and 1922
                                     Respondent banks
                         1911                                1922

                                                                                                       q                 q                                                                                                                                           q                 q
                                                                                                         q q                                                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                       q q                        q                                                                                                                                      q q                    q
                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                        q q                                                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                  q                      q                                                                                                                                      q                      q
                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                q                            q                                       q q                                                                                      q                            q                                       q q
                                                                                                                                          q q                                                                                                                                                           q q
                                                                                                   q        q                                                                                                                                                    q        q
                                                                                                q q              q                                                   q                                                                                        q q              q                                                   q
                                                                                              q                                       q           q       qq                                                                                                q                                       q           q       qq
                                                                                              q                                       q       q                     q                                                                                       q                                       q       q                     q
                                                                                                 q                                                         q        q                                                                                          q                                                         q        q
                                                                            q                                                                                      q                                                                        q                                                                                    q
                                                                                              q qq                   q                                q            q                                                                                        q qq                   q                                q            q
                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                               q                q                                                                                                                                            q                q
                                                                          q                                       qq                                  q        q
                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                          q                                     qq                                  q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                             q                                        q                         q                                                                                          q                                        q                         q
                                                                                                                q                                   q                                                                                                                         q                                   q
                                                                                      qq                           q                      q       q       q                                                                                           qq                         q                      q       q       q
                                                                                               q                                                          qq                                                                                                 q                                                          qq
                                                                      q                                                      q            q        q         q                                                                        q                                                    q            q        q         q
                                                                              q                                                                       q                                                                                       q                                                                     q
                                                                                  q                    q         q                                        qq     q                                                                                q                  q         q                                        qq     q
                                                                                                                       qq                          q                                                                                                                                 qq                          q
                                                                              q                             q                      q                  q                                                                                       q                           q                      q                  q
                                                                      q                  q                                 q      q       qq                                                                                          q                q                                 q      q       qq
                                                                                                   q              q                                                                                                                                              q              q
                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                        q                              q        q
                                                                                                                         qq                    q qq     q                                                                               q                            q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq                    q qq     q
                                                          q                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                          q    qq                                                                         q                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q    qq
                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                  qq
                                                                  q                            q             q    q          qq                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                          q             q    q          qq
                                              qq                q q
                                                               qq                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq                q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq                                        qq
                                                      q       q                               q            q     q                                                                                                    q       q                             q            q     q
                                              q                     q                                         q                                                                                               q                     q                                       q
                                          q          q                          qq             q                                                                                                          q          q                        qq             q
                                      q            qq q   q               q          q                                                                                                                q            qq q   q               q        q
                                  q     q q            q                                                                                                                                          q     q q            q
                          q                             q                                                                                                                                 q                             q
                        qq            qqq   q        q                                                                                                                                  qq            qqq   q        q
                        q                                                                                                                                                               q
                                      q q                                                                                                                                                             q q
                    q    q                                                                                                                                                          q    q
                 q q                                                                                                                                                             q q




                                                                                                                                                               Correspondent banks
                                                                  1911                                                                                                                                                            1922


                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                             q




                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                             q


                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                             q
                              q                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q

                                                                                                   q       q                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                  qqqq
                                                                                                     qq q                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                        q          q                                                                                                                                             q         q
                                                                                                 qq q q  q                                                                                                                                                qq     q
                                                                                                 qq q                                                                                                                                                    q qq
                                                                                     q          qqq q             q                                                                                                                                      q q qq
                                                                                            q q qq   q q           q                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                 q q q q q q      q                                                                                                                                     q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q    q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                              q q q
                                                          q                                    qq q q         q  qq                                                                                                       q                             qq q     qq q q
                                                                                      q   q   q qq q      q q qq q
                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                 q   qq        q       q
                                                                                          q  qq      q         q
                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                    q q                qq
                                                                                         q          qq q      qqq
                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                 qq q            q q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                           qq                                                                                                                                                        q        qqq qq q q
                                                  q                                       q     q q   qq qq  q                                                                                                    q                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q  q q q q
                                                                                q
                                                                                qqq q   qq     q qq     qq q                                                                                                                                q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq    q           q            q
                                                                                  q    q  q       q qq                                                                                                                                  q q    qq       q q q
                                                                                   qq q q q                                                                                                                                              qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q
                                                                            q q qq   q                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                            q   q qq                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q  q
                                                                          q q qq
                                                                          q                         q                                                                                                                                q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                           q q        q                                                                                                                            qq               q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                       q

                                                                                                       q

                                                                  q


                                                                                                           q




Figure 10 maps all respondent banks (Virginia state banks) and correspondent banks for the years 1911 and
1922. The respondent (corresponding) banks that only placed (received) deposits are in blue, while banks
that both placed (received) deposits and borrowed (lent) short-term funds are in red.
Source : Virginia State Bank Examination Reports .




                                                                                                                                                                           34
tabular component of the map, we provide detailed information about these correspondent
relationships. Columns (1) and (2) provide the names and locations of the correspondent
banks of the Bank of Warm Springs. Columns (3) and (4) show the amount of interbank
deposits due from these banks and the amount of short-term funds borrowed from them.
Figure 11 shows how the structure and nature of the bank network for that specific bank
changed after passage of the Federal Reserve Act. First, correspondent relationships became
more local. In 1911, Bank of Warm Springs maintained correspondent banking relationships
in New York and Baltimore, but by 1922 it had dissolved these relationships and opened new
ones with banks in Richmond and Staunton, which were in close proximity. In addition, after
the Act was passed the bank placed large correspondent deposits in local banks, whereas
previously it had held a majority of its interbank deposits in Baltimore. Similarly, after
passage of the Act the bank relied on Virginia banks for short-term borrowing, whereas
previously it had borrowed from a New York City correspondent.

                             Figure 11: Bank Network for Bank of Warm Springs
                                                         Bank of Warm Springs in Warm Springs


                                   1911                                                                           1922




                                          q



                               q


                                                                                                       q
                      q                                                                            q
                     q                                                                            q
                                                                                                            q




 Correspondents            Town               State   Duefrom    Borrowed    Correspondents                Town          State   Duefrom    Borrowed
                                                                 Money                                                                      Money

 Chase National Bank       New York           NY        809.28     10000     Covington National Bank   Covington         VA       2562.25     21500
 National Exchange Bank    Baltimore          MD       2459.28      5000     Bath County National Bank Hot Springs       VA       1376.53
 Covington National Bank   Covington          VA        509.07      5000     Merchants National Bank   Richmond          VA       2129.64     25000
 Bath County National Bank Hot Springs        VA        237.61               National Valley Bank      Staunton          VA       1091.03     15000



Notes : Figure 11 provides information for the Bank of Warm Springs in Warm Springs. Columns (1) and
(2) provide information about the names and locations of correspondent banks. Columns (3) and (4)
provide information about the amount of interbank deposits due from these banks and the amount of
short-term funds borrowed from them.
Source : Virginia State Bank Examination Reports .

The changes made by Bank of Warm Springs are representative of the general patterns that
characterize interbank networks before and after creation of the Federal Reserve System.
In Tables 4 through 6 we present more systematically the interbank relationships for all

                                                                            35
Virginia state banks. Tables 4 and 5 show the structure of the interbank system at extensive
and intensive margins, and Table 6 shows the distance in miles between respondent and
correspondent banks.
Table 4 shows the distribution of state banks' due-from deposits (payment network). We
find that the creation of the central bank encouraged banks to rely more heavily on local
correspondents. Before the advent of the Federal Reserve, banks relied more on correspondent
relationships with banks outside Virginia; for example, many banks had city correspondents
in New York City and Baltimore. After the Federal Reserve's creation, however, the due-
from deposit network became more dispersed. Banks also shifted their relationships away
from New York and Baltimore and into other country banks in Virginia. These results are
consistent at both extensive and intensive margins.

          Table 4: "Due from" Relationships, Virginia State Banks, 1911 and 1922.
                                            Extensive Margin (Links)   Intensive Margin (Amount)
                                             1911          1922         1911            1922

           New York                          19.37          12.47       10.63         6.884
                                            (19.02)        (16.55)     (16.93)       (13.91)

           Chicago                           0.105         0.0163      0.0564          0.01
                                            (0.791)        (0.293)     (0.471)       (0.0908)

           Baltimore                         9.126          6.816       10.33         6.948
                                            (17.73)        (16.39)     (23.45)       (19.70)

           Washington, DC                    2.226          1.719       1.812         1.556
                                            (7.787)        (9.725)     (7.506)       (10.73)

           Richmond                          20.81          22.22       28.09         26.85
                                            (20.14)        (27.98)     (32.56)       (34.53)

           Reserve Cities in Other States    2.592          3.404       2.554         3.987
                                            (7.774)        (13.46)     (8.465)       (16.68)

           Country Banks in VA               43.07          50.59       42.46         51.76
                                            (29.04)        (34.87)     (37.56)       (40.74)

           Country Banks in Other States     2.701          2.769       3.174         1.704
                                            (10.70)        (10.25)     (14.80)       (9.389)

           Obs.                              218            323         218            323


Notes : Rows indicate the location of correspondent banks. New York was a central reserve city. Baltimore
and Washington, DC, were reserve cities. Richmond was not a reserve city in 1911 but became one in 1922.
Columns indicate the location of respondent banks. Extensive margins are the proportions of links in each
location against total links. Intensive margins are proportions of correspondent deposits held at different
locations against total due-from deposits.
Source : Virginia State Bank Examination Reports .


                                                      36
Table 5 shows the nature of the short-term borrowing network (funding network). We find
that creation of the central bank encouraged more local short-term borrowing relationships.
Before the agency's creation, 40% of country banks borrowed short-term funds from their cor-
respondents, particularly from Richmond banks. After the agency's creation, banks borrowed
more heavily from other country banks in Virginia instead of from Richmond banks.

   Table 5: "Short-term Borrowing" Relationships, Virginia State Banks, 1911 and 1922.
                                                 Extensive Margin (Links)   Intensive Margin (Amount)
                                                  1911          1922         1911            1922

                New York                          8.427          8.992       7.661         8.376
                                                 (23.11)        (22.35)     (22.40)       (22.57)

                Baltimore                         11.33          7.045       11.35         6.936
                                                 (28.43)        (22.98)     (29.23)       (23.18)

                Washington, DC                    2.060          1.599       1.814         1.589
                                                 (11.74)        (11.52)     (11.20)       (11.64)

                Richmond                          32.68          21.57       32.14         21.10
                                                 (41.73)        (35.19)     (42.40)       (35.41)

                Reserve Cities in Other States    3.464          4.186       3.684         4.162
                                                 (13.92)        (17.39)     (15.14)       (17.39)

                Country Banks in VA               38.58          52.42       36.56         49.66
                                                 (42.67)        (43.64)     (42.87)       (44.43)

                Country Banks in Other States     3.464          4.186       2.340         4.127
                                                 (14.37)        (18.05)     (12.51)       (18.04)

                Obs.                               89            172          91            172


Notes : Rows indicate the location of correspondent banks. Extensive margins provide information on the
proportions of links in each location against total links. Intensive margins provide information on the
proportions of borrowed money from correspondents at different locations against total borrowed money.
Source : Virginia State Bank Examination Reports .


To identify more clearly the change in the geographical concentration of the interbank system,
we compute the distances in miles between respondent and correspondent banks. Table 6
shows the distance between state banks and the correspondent banks with which they placed
deposits and the distance between state banks and the correspondent banks from which they
borrowed short-term funds. In placing deposits after creation of the central bank, Virginia
state banks chose to reduce their connectivity to New York City and placed their deposits
in local banks. Likewise in borrowing short-term funds after creation of the central bank,
those same banks chose to borrow from banks located in close geographic proximity, for any
member bank independent of location could access the central bank's discount window.
The shift in the network structure toward geographically closer links suggests that the exis-
tence of the Federal Reserve System enabled banks to rely more on the provision of public

                                                           37
               Table 6: Distance between Respondent and Correspondent Banks
                                        Due-froms        Short-term borrowing
                                     1911       1922      1911        1922

             Longest Distance            347.1         253.3         187.9           167.7
                                        (156.8)       (267.5)       (147.5)         (427.0)

             Shortest Distance           20.76         31.08         64.16           67.68
                                        (34.29)       (224.1)       (83.45)         (414.9)

             Mean Distance               134.4         111.0         118.3           108.2
                                        (63.72)       (227.7)       (95.23)         (415.0)

             Median Distance             105.8         84.64         107.2           91.78
                                        (74.10)       (229.0)       (97.07)         (416.1)

             Total Distance             1107.8         587.1         307.2           238.5
                                       (1125.3)       (698.9)       (313.9)         (457.3)

             Number of Banks              218            323           86             169
             Obs.                         997            1047         145             303

Table 6 provides information on geographical distance between respondent and correspondent banks in
miles. It shows that the existence of the Federal Reserve led banks to choose correspondents located in
close geographic proximity.
Source : Virginia State Bank Examination Reports .




                                                    38
liquidity through closer banks and less on the provision of private liquidity through farther
banks. The importance of New York City banks in providing private insurance arrangements
for regional liquidity shocks before the advent of the Federal Reserve has been well docu-
mented (Carlson and Wheelock (2018a)). By pooling bank reserves from banks in different
regions, New York City banks had been able to accommodate liquidity transfers between
regions, thereby smoothing interregional flows (Gilbert (1983), James and Weiman (2010)).
As our analysis shows, however, the provision of liquidity by the central bank reduced the
relevance of New York City banks in the U.S. interbank network. In this way, the central
bank liquidity provision crowded out previous private liquidity insurance, plausibly at the
cost of using public funds to cover such public insurance.
To summarize, the introduction of liquidity provided by a central bank changed the structure
of the interbank system for nonmember banks as well as for member banks. By injecting
public liquidity into the banking system, the existence of the Federal Reserve reduced the
need for nonmember banks to maintain correspondent relationships across multiple cities and
outside the state. In addition, the provision of public liquidity eliminated the role of New
York City banks as the ultimate liquidity provider and allowed country banks to rely on local
banks to access liquidity. The shift of correspondent relationships away from New York and
toward local banks transformed what had been a national core-periphery structure based in
New York City into a regional core-periphery structure based in reserve cities.



5    Conclusion

The provision of public liquidity by the Federal Reserve System, revitalized by the financial
crisis of 2007-2009 and the COVID-19 pandemics, is a subject of heated debate among aca-
demics and policymakers. Answers to questions like How much? To whom? For how long?
are usually "contaminated" by the closeness to the events and by the complexity and variety
of modern banking. This paper takes a different approach as we study, both theoretically
and empirically, the role of public liquidity provision at its inception, during the creation of
the Federal Reserve System.
In 1913 the Federal Reserve Act was passed to provide liquidity to member banks that sat-
isfied stringent reserve requirements. While this public insurance came at the social cost of
taxation, it also brought the benefit of regulating and supervising members. We provide a
model that suggests, in addition to the intended benefit, three possible unintended conse-
quences of public liquidity. That all three were in fact realized is borne out by our novel
historical dataset on banks' relations.

                                              39
The first unintended consequence was that many banks decided against joining; though this
enabled them to bypass regulations, by using the interbank network they could still access
public liquidity. This led to less private liquidity holding, less diversification, and more
systemic risk. The second unintended consequence was that interbank borrowing increased,
with a concomitant increase in the intensity of interbank relations. This increased intensity
made the entire network more vulnerable to shocks and therefore more exposed to contagion.
The third unintended consequence was that private insurance across regions was crowded
out. Before creation of the Federal Reserve System, New York City had been at the center
of the interbank system, and its centrality ensured private cross-regional liquidity insurance.
After the Federal Reserve's creation, however, the interbank system with a common center
was transformed into a system with a diffuse set of relationships, and the role of cross-regional
insurance was transferred to the public sphere.
Thus, while in "normal times" the provision of public liquidity may have stabilized the system
as intended (perhaps at a cost in terms of taxation and distortions), these three unintended
consequences were lurking in the background to make the system more prone to endogenous
larger collapses that might require larger interventions (perhaps at even large social costs).
These results have natural implications for current policy discussion and for assessing post-
reform attempts to prevent non-bank financial institutions from accessing public liquidity.
As our results show, restricting "official" access to public liquidity does not prevent "real"
access to public liquidity, and an attempt to prevent real access by restricting official access
may indeed backfire by creating a landscape favorable to the flourishing of shadow banks
that operate with illiquid assets and generate systemic risk.




                                               40
References
Acemoglu, D., A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2015): "Systemic Risk and
 Stability in Financial Networks," American Economic Review, 105, 564­608.
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2009): "Money, liquidity, and monetary policy," American
 Economic Review, 99, 600­605.
Allen, F., A. Babus, and E. Carletti (2012): "Asset Commonality, Debt Maturity and
 Systemic Risk," Journal of Financial Economics, 104, 519­534.
Anbil, S. and A. Vossmeyer (2017): "Liquidity from Two Lending Facilities," Tech. rep.,
 Federal Reserve Board Working Paper.
Anderson, H., M. Paddrik, and J. J. Wang (2019): "Bank Networks and Systemic Risk:
 Evidence from the National Banking Acts," American Economic Review, 109, 3125­61.
Bengui, J., J. Bianchi, and L. Coulibaly (2019): "Financial Safety Nets," International
 Economic Review, 60, 105­132.
Bernstein, A., E. Hughson, and M. D. Weidenmier (2010): "Identifying the effects of
 a lender of last resort on financial markets: Lessons from the founding of the fed," Journal
 of Financial Economics, 98, 40­53.
Bianchi, J. and S. Bigio (2020): "Banks, Liquidity Management, and Monetary Policy*,"
  Working Paper, UCLA.
Calomiris, C., M. Jaremski, and D. Wheelock (2019): "Interbank Connections, Con-
 tagion and Bank Distress in the Great Depression," NBER Working Paper 25897.
Calomiris, C. W. (1994): "Is the Discount Window Necessary? A Penn Central Perspec-
 tive," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 76, 31.
Carlson, M. and D. Wheelock (2013): "The lender of last resort: lessons from the Fed's
 first 100 years," Tech. rep., Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper.
Carlson, M. and D. C. Wheelock (2018a): "Did the founding of the Federal Reserve
 affect the vulnerability of the interbank system to contagion risk?" Journal of Money,
 Credit and Banking, 50, 1711­1750.
Carlson, M. A. and D. C. Wheelock (2018b): "Furnishing an 'Elastic Currency': The
 Founding of the Fed and the Liquidity of the US Banking System," Federal Reserve Bank
 of St. Louis Review, 17­44.
Chang, B. and S. Zhang (2019): "Endogenous Market Making and Network Formation,"
 Working Paper, LSE.
Chen, K., J. Ren, and T. Zha (2018): "The nexus of monetary policy and shadow banking
 in China," American Economic Review, 108, 3891­3936.
Committee Branch Group (1935): The Dual Banking System in the United States, Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.



                                             41
CQ Researcher (1923): "Why State Banks Do Not Join the Federal Reserve System, the
 Effect on the System and the Issues Involved," Editorial research reports, 1, 57.
Erol, S. (2018): "Network hazard and bailouts," Available at SSRN 3034406.
Erol, S. and G. Ordoñez (2017): "Network reactions to banking regulations," Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 89, 51­67.
Freixas, X., A. Martin, and D. Skeie (2011): "Bank Liquidity, Interbank Markets, and
 Monetary Policy," Review of Financial Studies, 24, 2656­2692.
Gilbert, R. A. (1983): "Economies of scale in correspondent banking: note," Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking, 15, 483­488.
Gorton, G. and G. Ordonez (2020): "The Supply and Demand for Safe Assets," Working
 Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Hackley, H. H. (1973): Lending functions of the Federal Reserve Banks: a history, Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
James, J. A. (1978): Money and capital markets in postbellum America, vol. 1436, Princeton
  University Press.
James, J. A. and D. F. Weiman (2010): "From drafts to checks: the evolution of correspon-
  dent banking networks and the formation of the modern US payments system, 1850­1914,"
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42, 237­265.
Jaremski, M. and D. C. Wheelock (2019): "The Founding of the Federal Reserve,
  the Great Depression, and the Evolution of the US Interbank Network," The Journal of
  Economic History, 1­31.
Kemmerer, E. W. (1910): Seasonal variations in the relative demand for money and capital
 in the United States: A statistical study, vol. 588, US Government Printing Office.
Mankiw, N. G., J. A. Miron, and D. N. Weil (1987): "The Adjustment of Expectations
 to a Change in Regime: A Study of the Founding of the Federal Reserve," The American
 Economic Review, 77, 358.
Miron, J. A. (1986): "Financial panics, the seasonality of the nominal interest rate, and
 the founding of the Fed," The American Economic Review, 76, 125­140.
Mitchener, K. J. and G. Richardson (2019): "Network contagion and interbank am-
 plification during the Great Depression," Journal of Political Economy, 127, 465­507.
Ordonez, G. (2018): "Sustainable Shadow Banking," AEJ: Macroeconomics, 10, 33­56.
Sprague, O. M. W. (1910): History of crises under the national banking system, vol. 538,
  US Government Printing Office.
White, E. N. (2014): The regulation and reform of the American banking system, 1900-
 1929, vol. 525, Princeton University Press.
Wicker, E. (2000): The banking panics of the Great Depression, Cambridge University
 Press.

                                           42
A     Virginia State Bank Examination Reports

In Figure A1 we present images of representative pages in the state bank examination reports
used for this study. The reports provide information on three types of interbank relationships:
on the asset side of the balance sheet, the amounts due from other banks by individual debtor
banks; on the liability side of the balance sheet, the amounts due to other banks by individual
creditor banks; and the amounts of borrowed money and the provider of these short-term
loans. In some cases, the reports provide information on collateral used for securing short-
term funds.

                     Figure A1: Virginia State Bank Examination Reports
            Interbank Deposits          Short-term Borrowing       Collateral for Borrowing




                                               43
B      Aggregate Balance Sheet Analysis in More Detail

In the main text, we provide summary statistics of the balance sheet data aggregated at the
state level. In Figure B2, we plot the movement of balance sheet ratios from 1910 to 1929.
Figure B2 shows that in the 1920s, short-term borrowing increased and liquid assets declined.

                      Figure B2: Aggregate Balance Sheet Ratios, 1910-1929
                                                             National Banks                                                                                                                                                    State Banks

                                                                  (a): Short-Term Borrowing as Share of Total Liabilities
                       Ratio                                                                                                                                                     Ratio
                      0.04                                                                                                                                                      0.04




                      0.02                                                                                                                                                      0.02




                      0.00                                                                                                                                                      0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                         1910
                                                                                                                                                                                                1911
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1912
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1913
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1914
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1915
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1916
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1917
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1918
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1920
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1922
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1923
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1924
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1927
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1928
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1929
                               1910
                                      1911
                                             1912
                                                    1913
                                                           1914
                                                                  1915
                                                                         1916
                                                                                1917
                                                                                       1918
                                                                                              1919
                                                                                                     1920
                                                                                                            1921
                                                                                                                   1922
                                                                                                                          1923
                                                                                                                                 1924
                                                                                                                                        1925
                                                                                                                                               1926
                                                                                                                                                      1927
                                                                                                                                                             1928
                                                                                                                                                                    1929



                                                                                   (b): Vault Cash as Share of Total Bank Assets
                      Ratio                                                                                                                                                     Ratio
                      0.10                                                                                                                                                      0.10


                      0.08                                                                                                                                                      0.08


                      0.06                                                                                                                                                      0.06


                      0.04                                                                                                                                                      0.04

                      0.02                                                                                                                                                      0.02

                      0.00                                                                                                                                                      0.00
                               1910
                                      1911
                                             1912
                                                    1913
                                                           1914
                                                                  1915
                                                                         1916
                                                                                1917
                                                                                       1918
                                                                                              1919
                                                                                                     1920
                                                                                                            1921
                                                                                                                   1922
                                                                                                                          1923
                                                                                                                                 1924
                                                                                                                                        1925
                                                                                                                                               1926
                                                                                                                                                      1927
                                                                                                                                                             1928
                                                                                                                                                                    1929




                                                                                                                                                                                         1910
                                                                                                                                                                                                1911
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1912
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1913
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1914
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1915
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1916
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1917
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1918
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1920
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1922
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1923
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1924
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1927
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1928
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1929
                                         (c): Deposits due from other banks as Share of Total Bank Assets
                      Ratio                                                                                                                                                     Ratio
                      0.14                                                                                                                                                      0.14

                      0.12                                                                                                                                                      0.12

                      0.10                                                                                                                                                      0.10

                      0.08                                                                                                                                                      0.08

                      0.06                                                                                                                                                      0.06

                      0.04                                                                                                                                                      0.04

                      0.02                                                                                                                                                      0.02

                      0.00                                                                                                                                                      0.00
                               1910
                                      1911
                                             1912
                                                    1913
                                                           1914
                                                                  1915
                                                                         1916
                                                                                1917
                                                                                       1918
                                                                                              1919
                                                                                                     1920
                                                                                                            1921
                                                                                                                   1922
                                                                                                                          1923
                                                                                                                                 1924
                                                                                                                                        1925
                                                                                                                                               1926
                                                                                                                                                      1927
                                                                                                                                                             1928
                                                                                                                                                                    1929




                                                                                                                                                                                         1910
                                                                                                                                                                                                1911
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1912
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1913
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1914
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1915
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1916
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1917
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1918
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1920
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1922
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1923
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1924
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1927
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1928
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1929




                                       (d): Deposits due to other Banks as Share of Total Bank Liabilities
                      Ratio                                                                                                                                                     Ratio

                      0.25                                                                                                                                                      0.25


                      0.20                                                                                                                                                      0.20


                      0.15                                                                                                                                                      0.15


                      0.10                                                                                                                                                      0.10


                      0.05                                                                                                                                                      0.05


                      0.00                                                                                                                                                      0.00
                               1910
                                      1911
                                             1912
                                                    1913
                                                           1914
                                                                  1915
                                                                         1916
                                                                                1917
                                                                                       1918
                                                                                              1919
                                                                                                     1920
                                                                                                            1921
                                                                                                                   1922
                                                                                                                          1923
                                                                                                                                 1924
                                                                                                                                        1925
                                                                                                                                               1926
                                                                                                                                                      1927
                                                                                                                                                             1928
                                                                                                                                                                    1929




                                                                                                                                                                                         1910
                                                                                                                                                                                                1911
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1912
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1913
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1914
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1915
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1916
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1917
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1918
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1920
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1922
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1923
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1924
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1927
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1928
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1929




Figure B2 plots the ratio of short-term borrowing to total liabilities for national and state banks. All data
are aggregated by the OCC: data for national banks are aggregated across all states, 17 reserve cities, and 3
central-reserve cities; data for state banks are aggregated across all states, all reserve cities, and reserve
cities.
Source : Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency .

In addition, we check the robustness of our findings by restricting the data in two dimensions.
First, we restrict our sample using state bank participation rate. As shown in Figure 2, states
with financial and manufacturing sectors displayed a higher proportion of state bank mem-
bership than agricultural states. Given the irregular geographic distribution of membership,
one might be concerned that the described changes were generated by state member banks

                                                                                                                                                                           44
and that therefore our classifying all state banks as nonmembers clutters the analysis. To
alleviate this concern, we restrict our sample and compare the asset composition of member
and nonmember banks only in states where the membership ratio of state banks was under
10% in 1920.
Second, we restrict our sample using state-level reserve requirements. Changes in the liquidity
of the state banking system might be driven by changes in reserve requirements by state
regulators rather than by voluntary liquidity changes. To rule out this possibility, we divided
states into three groups: (1) states that decreased their reserve requirements, (2) states
that increased their reserve requirements, and (3) states that did not change their reserve
requirements. Between 1910 and 1929, 22 states reduced reserve requirements, 10 states
increased reserve requirements, and 16 states kept reserve requirements unchanged.19
For states where the state bank participation rate was below 10%, Figure B3 plots the fraction
of total assets that state banks in those states held in borrowing, cash, and interbank deposits.
In all cases, and regardless of the change in reserve requirements, nonmember banks reduced
cash and interbank deposits and increased borrowing after the Federal Reserve came into
existence (in 1914).
To summarize, we find that the existence of the Federal Reserve reduced liquidity (in the
form of cash and interbank deposits) and intensified interbank relations (in the form of higher
short-term borrowing) for both member and nonmember banks. Furthermore, member banks
significantly reduced their relations with other member banks, but not their relations with
nonmember banks. These factors suggest less private cross-insurance but still exposure to
withdrawals, which contributed to the possibility of more contagion and greater vulnerability
of the financial system.




  19
     See White (2014) for information on state reserve requirements. We classify CA, DE, GA, IN, KS, KY,
LA, MI, MN, MT, NM, NY, OK, OR, PA, SD, TX, VA, WA, WI, WV as states with decreasing reserve
requirements. In addition, we classify AR, CO, IA, MD, MS, NH, SC, TN, VT, WY as states with increasing
reserve requirements. Last, we classify AL, CT, FL, ID, IL, MA, ME, MO, NC, ND, NE, NJ, NV, OH, OK,
UT as states that did not change reserve requirements.

                                                  45
  Figure B3: Bank Liquidity and Changes in State-Level Reserve Requirements, 1910-1929
              Borrowing                  Vault Cash             Due From Other Banks
                                                                                                                                                                   Ratio                                                                                                                                                 Ratio
                                                                                                                                                                   0.12                                                                                                                                                  0.18
             Ratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.16
            0.06                                                                                                                                                   0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.14
Reduced




                                                                                                                                                                   0.08                                                                                                                                                  0.12
            0.04                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.10
                                                                                                                                                                   0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.08
                                                                                                                                                                   0.04                                                                                                                                                  0.06
            0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                                                                                   0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.02

            0.00                                                                                                                                                   0.00                                                                                                                                                  0.00
                                                                                                                                                                            1910
                                                                                                                                                                                   1911
                                                                                                                                                                                          1912
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1913
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1914
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1915
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1916
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1917
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1918
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1920
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1922
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1923
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1924
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1927
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1928
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1929




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1910
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1911
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1912
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1913
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1914
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1915
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1916
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1917
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1918
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1920
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1922
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1923
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1924
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1927
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1928
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1929
                      1910
                             1911
                                    1912
                                           1913
                                                  1914
                                                         1915
                                                                1916
                                                                       1917
                                                                              1918
                                                                                     1919
                                                                                            1920
                                                                                                   1921
                                                                                                           1922
                                                                                                                  1923
                                                                                                                         1924
                                                                                                                                1925
                                                                                                                                       1926
                                                                                                                                              1927
                                                                                                                                                     1928
                                                                                                                                                            1929




                                                           National Banks                                 State Banks                                                                                            National Banks                                 State Banks                                                                                            National Banks                                      State Banks



                                                                                                                                                                    Ratio                                                                                                                                               Ratio
No Change




            Ratio
                                                                                                                                                                   0.12                                                                                                                                                 0.18
            0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.16
            0.05                                                                                                                                                   0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.14
            0.04                                                                                                                                                   0.08                                                                                                                                                 0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.10
            0.03                                                                                                                                                   0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.08
            0.02                                                                                                                                                   0.04                                                                                                                                                 0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.04
            0.01                                                                                                                                                   0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.02
            0.00                                                                                                                                                   0.00                                                                                                                                                 0.00
                                                                                                                                                                            1910
                                                                                                                                                                                   1911
                                                                                                                                                                                          1912
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1913
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1914
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1915
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1916
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1917
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1918
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1920
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1922
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1923
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1924
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1927
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1928
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1929




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1910
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1911
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1912
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1913
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1914
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1915
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1916
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1917
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1918
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1920
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1922
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1923
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1924
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1927
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1928
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1929
                      1910
                             1911
                                    1912
                                           1913
                                                  1914
                                                         1915
                                                                1916
                                                                       1917
                                                                              1918
                                                                                     1919
                                                                                            1920
                                                                                                   1921
                                                                                                           1922
                                                                                                                  1923
                                                                                                                         1924
                                                                                                                                1925
                                                                                                                                       1926
                                                                                                                                              1927
                                                                                                                                                     1928
                                                                                                                                                            1929




                                                            National Banks                                State Banks                                                                                             National Banks                                State Banks                                                                                           National Banks                                      State Banks


              Ratio                                                                                                                                                Ratio                                                                                                                                                 Ratio
            0.06                                                                                                                                                   0.12                                                                                                                                                 0.18
Increased




            0.05                                                                                                                                                   0.10                                                                                                                                                 0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.14
            0.04                                                                                                                                                   0.08                                                                                                                                                 0.12
            0.03                                                                                                                                                   0.06                                                                                                                                                 0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.08
            0.02                                                                                                                                                   0.04                                                                                                                                                 0.06
            0.01                                                                                                                                                   0.02                                                                                                                                                 0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.02
            0.00                                                                                                                                                   0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.00
                      1910
                             1911
                                    1912
                                           1913
                                                  1914
                                                         1915
                                                                1916
                                                                       1917
                                                                              1918
                                                                                     1919
                                                                                            1920
                                                                                                   1921
                                                                                                           1922
                                                                                                                  1923
                                                                                                                         1924
                                                                                                                                1925
                                                                                                                                       1926
                                                                                                                                              1927
                                                                                                                                                     1928
                                                                                                                                                            1929




                                                                                                                                                                            1910
                                                                                                                                                                                   1911
                                                                                                                                                                                          1912
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1913
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1914
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1915
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1916
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1917
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1918
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1920
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1922
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1923
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1924
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1927
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1928
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1929




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1910
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1911
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1912
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1913
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1914
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1915
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1916
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1917
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1918
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1920
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1922
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1923
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1924
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1926
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1927
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1928
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1929
                                                           National Banks                                 State Banks                                                                                            National Banks                                 State Banks                                                                                            National Banks                                     State Banks




Figure B3 the share of short-term borrowing against total liabilities, the share of vault cash against total
assets, and the share of deposits due from other banks against total assets for states with different reserve
requirements. Data are further restricted for states where the Federal Reserve membership ratio of state
banks was under 10% in 1920. All data are aggregated by the OCC: data for national banks are aggregated
across all states, 17 reserve cities, and 3 central-reserve cities; data for state banks are aggregated across all
states, all reserve cities, and reserve cities.
Source : Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  46
                           ONLINE APPENDIX

C     Remarks on the model and assumptions

The size of the liquidity shocks. We assume that the liquidity shock can exceed D so we
do not deal with the corner solutions. In particular, the liquidity shock  is 0 w.p. 1 -  and
U [0, Z ] w.p.  where Z > D. The story is as follows. There are legacy assets and liabilities.
M captures the sum of legacy liabilities and K captures the sum of returns from illiquid
legacy assets. These are safe but the the return time for legacy assets and withdrawal time
for legacy liabilities are random. K  M so there is no solvency issue. There can be an
illiquidity issue. At the time of the liquidity shock, if the return so far from legacy assets is k
and the amount of legacy liabilities realized so far is m, and the realized liquidity withdrawal
from depositors (who have seniority) is d  [0, D] then the actual liquidity need at the time
of the liquidity shock is l = d + m - k . We assume that l has distribution U [-K, D + M ].
Now denote  = DD       +M
                      +M +K
                             and Z = D + M . Then l  0 w.p. 1 -  and l  U [0, Z ] w.p.
. Now let  = l+ the private liquidity need. (We use the notation z+ = max{z, 0}.) Then
 = 0 w.p. 1 -  and U [0, Z ] w.p. . When there is central bank liquidity m, the effect of
m will be to make the private liquidity need ( - m)+ .
Notation. Going forward, the fundamentals of the model are rx , ry , r for the return rates,
                                                          -)
, Z ,  , for shocks, D, m for liquidity. Denote Z,m = Z (1   + m. For a random variable
X , FX denotes its CDF. Also, f  g means that f and g are monotone transformations of
                                  z
each other as functions of z .
Discussion of parametric assumptions. We will take Z to be large enough compared to
D and m in order to avoid corner issues in the algebra. In particular, Z > m + D so that even
the entire liquidity in the system may not suffice, although this event has small probability.
This way, we do not need to worry about cumbersome corner solutions in the algebra. This,
in a way, "convexifies" the problem.

Assumption 1. 0  m  Z - D.

Also, for technical reasons and for the simplicity of algebra, we will restrict attention to 
that is not too large.
                               Z
Assumption 2.    =           Z +D
                                    where

                                          2                  r
                           = max 0,              2(1 - ) -        -1
                                         2-                  ry

                                                47
The major role of this assumption is to make sure that the reserve requirements bind and
y = L. Finally, we assume that rx and ry are relatively large compared to r.

Assumption 3. (1 - )rx > 2r and (1 - )ry > r.

The condition on ry is innocuous. If (1 - )ry were less than r, y would not borrow. The
condition on rx deserves some discussion. One might think, at first, that by rx > r, bank x's
own project is a better investment than the "interbank investment" of lending to y . Since
each investments provide buffer against liquidation of the other, each investment would be
non-zero under sufficiently high risk. But by rx > r, Ix would be larger than L. But this
simple logic is missing a critical point. Bank y pays interest on the full loan L, not the
investment size Iy . At least L is kept by y as reserves, which is a source of short term
liquidity for x at the time of shocks. That is, interbank investment has an extra benefit
above and beyond its investment value and diversification value. This complicates proofs.
For this reason we make a simplifying assumption (1 - )rx > 2r that makes sure there is a
pecking order: first priority is the project of bank x, then the interbank investment.



D      Proofs

Proof. (Proof of Lemma 1)
Here we provide a general proof that allows for public liquidity m  0. The proof of Lemma
1 can be obtained by replacing m with 0 below.
It is easy to see that for a given portfolio profile (Ix , L, Iy ) and a level of liquidity shortage
 = ( - m - x - y )+ , liquidations induced by the optimal behavior of x at the liquidation
stage is given by

    · If  = 0, nothing is liquidated.

    · If 0 <   min{Ix , Iy }, then

         ­ If Lr  Ix rx , then Iy is liquidated.
         ­ If Lr > Ix rx , then Ix is liquidated.

    · If min{Ix , Iy } <   max{Ix , Iy }, then max{Ix , Iy } is liquidated.

    · If max{Ix , Iy } <  , then both Ix and Iy are liquidated.

Then Iy does not get liquidated iff one of the following hold:

                                                48
   ·  =0

   · 0 <   min{Ix , Iy } and Lr > Ix rx

   · Iy <   Ix .

Then the expected profit of y is

y (Iy ) = F (0) + 1Lr>Ix rx (F (min{Ix , Iy }) - F (0)) + 1Ix >Iy (F (Ix ) - F (Iy )) (Iy ry - Lr)
               
                 u1 (Iy ) := Iy - Lr
                                  ry
                                      (Z,m + D - Iy )             if Lr > Ix rx
               
        = ry × u2 (Iy ) := Iy - Lrry
                                      (Z,m + D - 2Iy )            on Ix  Iy if Lr  Ix rx
          Z    
                                          ,m + D - Ix - Iy ) on Ix  Iy if Lr  Ix rx  Ix  L(1 - )
               u (I ) := I - Lr (Z
               
                   3 y        y   ry


All of u1 , u2 , u3 are concave quadratics. They are increasing up to their unique unconstrained
arg max and decreasing afterwards. The unconstrained arg max of u1 , u2 , u3 are given by

                                     1            Lr
                                I1 =     Z,m + D +
                                     2            ry
                                     1   Z,m + D Lr
                                I2 =            +
                                     2      2      ry
                                     1                    Lr
                                I3 =     Z,m + D - Ix +
                                     2                    ry

Then Iy
      
        = arg max y (Iy ) in these three regions are given by
           
           
                               
            u1 (min {L(1 - ), I1 })         if Lr > Ix rx
           
 y (Iy )=                           
            u2 (min {L(1 - ), Ix , I2 })    on Ix  Iy if Lr  Ix rx
          Z
           u (max {I , min {L(1 - ), I  }}) on I  I if Lr  I r  I  L(1 - )
           
             3        x                  3       x    y       x x  x


By Assumption 2, we have L(1 - )  I3
                                   
                                     . Also clearly I3
                                                         
                                                        I1 . Then

                                                             
               min {L(1 - ), I1 } = max {Ix , min {L(1 - ), I3 }} = L(1 - )




                                              49
Then
                  
                   u1 (L(1 - ))                    if Lr > Ix rx
                  
                  u2 (min {L(1 - ), I2
                                       })          on Ix  Iy if Lr  Ix rx  Ix  L(1 - )
                  
           
       y (Iy ) =
                 Z               
                  u2 (min {Ix , I2 })              on Ix  Iy if Lr  Ix rx  Ix  L(1 - )
                  
                  u (L(1 - ))                      on Ix  Iy if Lr  Ix rx  Ix  L(1 - )
                  
                    3



For the first case [if Lr > Ix rx ], Iy
                                      
                                        = L(1 - ). For the second case [on Ix  Iy if Lr 
Ix rx  Ix  L(1 - )] note that Ix  L(1 - ) implies both Ix  Iy and Lr  Ix rx . So this
case can be restated as simply [Ix  L(1 - )]. For the third and fourth cases jointly, we
compare u2 (min {Ix , I2
                         }) and u3 (L(1 - )) under [Lr  Ix rx  Ix  L(1 - )]. Note that

                                                             2
                                   1     Z,m + D Lr
                       u2 (I2 )=                 -
                                   2         2      ry
                                                 Lr
                u3 (L(1 - )) =         L(1 - ) -      (Z,m + D - Ix - L(1 - ))
                                                 ry

                                               Z,m +D                                  Z,m +D
Suppose I2
         
           < L(1-). Then we have           1
                                           2     2
                                                        +   Lr
                                                            ry
                                                                 < L(1-), and so   1
                                                                                   2     2
                                                                                                -   Lr
                                                                                                    ry
                                                                                                         <
L(1 - ) - Lrry
               . Also Z,m 2
                            +D
                               - Lr
                                 ry
                                     < (Z,m + D - Ix - L(1 - )). Thus, u2 (min {Ix , I2       
                                                                                               }) 
u2 (I2
       ) < u3 (L(1 - )). Now suppose I2       
                                                L(1 - ). Then by Ix  L(1 - ) we have
I2  Ix . Then u2 (min {Ix , I2 }) = u2 (Ix ). Recall that u2 (Ix ) = u3 (Ix ), L(1 - )  I3
                                                                                         
                                                                                           , and u3
is increasing up to I3
                     
                       . Then we have Ix  L(1 - )  I3      
                                                             and u3 (Ix )  u3 (L(1 - ))  u3 (I3  
                                                                                                  ).
Combining these we have u2 (min {Ix , I2 }) = u2 (Ix ) = u3 (Ix )  u3 (L(1 - )). So in general,
                                           

               
u2 (min {Ix , I2 })  u3 (L(1 - )) and Iy  
                                             = L(1 - ) in the union of third and fourth cases,
i.e. [Lr  Ix rx  Ix  L(1 - )]. Therefore,
                               
                               min {L(1 - ), I  } if I > L(1 - )
                                              2       x
                          Iy =
                               L(1 - )            otherwise

Under Ix > L(1 - ) and Assumption 2, we have L(1 - )  I2
                                                       
                                                         and so Iy
                                                                 
                                                                   = L(1 - ).
Next consider the optimal portfolio of x. Let (Ix , L) be optimal and suppose that Ix <
L(1 - ). Then the expected profit of x is

                        x =F (0) (Ix rx + Lr)
                              + (F (Ix ) - F (0)) max {Lr, Ix rx }
                              + (F (L(1 - )) - F (Ix )) Ix rx


                                                  50
                          (Z,m + D - Ix - L(1 - )) (Ix rx + Lr)
                       (Ix ,L)

                                 + Ix max {Lr, Ix rx } + (L(1 - ) - Ix ) Ix rx

By Ix < L(1 - ), right partial derivative w.r.t. Ix must be negative and left partial derivative
w.r.t. L must be positive. If Ix rx = Lr, these derivatives are given by the following: The
F.O.C. w.r.t. Ix is

                      0  - (Ix rx + Lr) + rx (Z,m + D - Ix - L(1 - ))
                           
                           Lr        if Lr > Ix rx
                         +
                           2I r if Lr < I r
                                     x x                   x x

                            + (L(1 - ) - 2Ix ) rx
                                             
                                             2I r
                                               x x                  if Lr > Ix rx
                      =rx (Z,m + D - 2Ix ) -
                                             Lr                     if Lr < Ix rx
                                        
                                        2I if Lr                    > Ix rx
                                             x
                     = Z,m + D  2Ix +
                                         Lr if Lr                   < Ix rx
                                                          rx


The F.O.C. w.r.t. to L is

                  0  - (1 - ) (Ix rx + Lr) + r (Z,m + D - Ix - L(1 - ))
                       
                       I r if Lr > I r
                          x             x x
                     +
                       0      if Lr < I r           x x

                       + (1 - )Ix rx
                   =r (Z,m + D - Ix - 2L(1 - ))
                       
                       I r if Lr > I r
                         x            x x
                     +
                       0     if Lr < Ix rx
                                               
                                               I r
                                                x                      if Lr > Ix rx
                  = Z,m + D  Ix + 2L(1 - ) -
                                               0                       if Lr < Ix rx

Combining the two, we get
                                         
                                         2I
                                                x   if Lr > Ix rx
                                 2Ix +
                                          Lr
                                           rx
                                                    if Lr < Ix rx


                                                          51
                                          
                                          I r if Lr > I r
                                             x            x x
                          Ix + 2L(1 - ) -
                                          0      if Lr < Ix rx
                                               
                                               3I if Lr > I r
                                                   x           x x
                         = 0  Ix - 2L(1 - ) +
                                                Lr if Lr < I r
                                                       rx          x x


Under Lr < Ix rx , we get

                                             Lr
                     0  Ix - 2L(1 - ) +         < Ix - 2L(1 - ) + Ix < 0
                                             rx

So we must have Lr > Ix rx . Then 2Ix  L(1 - ). But then 2Ix rx  L(1 - )rx > 2Lr, by
Assumption 3. Hence Ix rx > Lr. This is a contradiction.
So we must have Ix rx = Lr. This implies that Ix = 0. Then the right partial derivative of
the profit w.r.t. Ix must be negative and left partial derivative of the profit w.r.t. Ix must
be positive. In particular, the right derivative is

                                     rx (Z,m + D - 2Ix ) - Lr

and the left derivative is
                                   rx (Z,m + D - 2Ix ) - 2Ix rx

Then the left derivative is smaller than the right derivative. Contradiction. So the optimal
portfolio satisfies Ix  L(1 - ) = L - y . By (1 - )rx > r this further implies that
Ix rx > Lr.

Proof. (Proof of Proposition 1 and Proposition 2)
Proposition 1 is simply a corollary of Proposition 2, obtained by replacing m with 0, so we
provide the proof for Proposition 2.
By the proof of Lemma 1 above, which allows for m  0, we have y = L and Ix > L(1 - ).
Then the ex-post profit for bank x is given by

                       
                        Ix rx + Lr     if 0    m + x + L
                       
                                       if m + x + L <   m + x + L
                       I r
                             x x
                 x =
                        Lr             if m + x + L <   m + x + L + Ix
                       0               if m + x + L + Ix < 

The expected profit is

                                               52
                                                                    Z,m + D
               x  rx (Z,m + D - Ix ) Ix + 2(1 - )r                          -L L
                    (Ix ,L)                                         2(1 - )

The unconstraint maximizer is

                                         Z,m + D        Z,m + D
                                    L=           , Ix =
                                         4(1 - )           2

At these values, L, Ix  0 and Ix  L(1 - ) hold. The remaining constraint is

                                                                Z
                              D  L + Ix   
                                                                1-2
                                                        Z +D    3-2
                                                                      -m


(Note that this lower bound is less than  for m = 0 if rry  2(1-3
                                                                2)(1-)
                                                                  -2
                                                                        , which makes this
region of parameters is non-empty for m = 0. This guarantees that the following regions are
also non-empty for m = 0. As m grows, it is natural that some regions become obsolete in
the pecking order.)
Next consider  <     Z +D( 1
                            Z
                             -2        (D 1 -2
                                          3-2
                                               < Z,m ). The constraint Ix + L  D binds. Under
                           3-2 )
                                -m
constraint Ix = D - L  [0, D], the FOC gives

                dx            D (4(1 - )r + rx - r) + Z,m (rx - r)
                   = 0 = Ix =
                dL                     2 (rx + 2(1 - )r)

As rx > r we have L  D and Ix  0. On the other hand

                                                            Z
                                    L  0                   rx +r
                                                     Z+   Dr x -r
                                                                    -m

This also ensures Ix  D. The last constraint Ix  L(1 - ) holds trivially.
Finally, under  <           Z
                          (r +r )      (D rx +r
                                          rx -r
                                                < Z,m ), we have L = 0 and Ix = D.
                     Z +D (rx -r) -m
                              x

Summarizing these:

  1. If    >     Z +D( 1
                        Z
                         -2          (D 1 -2
                                        3-2
                                              Z,m ),
                       3-2 )
                            -m


                                  D + Z,m      D + Z,m
                       Ix =               , L=          , x = D - Ix - L > 0
                                     2         4 (1 - )



                                                   53
  2. If   Z +D( 1
                 Z
                  -2        >>            Z
                                        (r +r )      (D r x +r
                                                        rx -r
                                                                         1-2
                                                               > Z,m > D 3 -2
                                                                              ) then
                3-2 )              Z +D (rx -r) -m
                     -m
                                         x



                                     D (4(1 - )r + rx - r) + Z,m (rx - r)
                                  Ix =
                                                2 (rx + 2(1 - )r)
                                     D (rx + r) - Z,m (rx - r)
                                  L=                           , x = 0
                                         2 (rx + 2(1 - )r)

  3. If          Z
               (r +r )      >  (Z,m > D rx +r
                                        rx -r
                                              ), then
          Z +D (rx -r) -m
                x



                                             Ix = D,     L = 0, x = 0.




Proof. (Proof of Proposition 3) Note that there is some inconsequential multiplicity in
the amount of ex-post short term borrowing. As the short-term borrowing is risk-free in
the model, for simplicity, we have assumed away interest on it. For robustness, we assume
the smallest amount of short-term borrowing to meet the shock takes place. If  < x ,
there is no need for short-term borrowing. For x <   x + y + m, y can lend the
shortage  - x to x to avoid liquidations. If  > x + y + m, liquidation is inevitable. If
x + L + m >  > x + y + m, x liquidates L. This gives L extra liquidity to x on top of
its reserves x . Bank x can still borrow m from y in this case. But if  < L + x , x does not
need to borrow from y . Only when  > L + x , there is borrowing from y at the amount of
shortage  - L - x . Therefore, when x + L + m >  > max {x + y + m, L + x }, there
is  - L - x borrowing. Continuing with the same logic, we find that the ex-post amount
of short-term borrowing by x from y under m is given by
                
                  - x                 if x <   x + y + m
                
                 - L -                if x + max {L, y + m} <   x + L + m
                
                         x
             b=
                  - Ix - x            if x + max {Ix , L + m} <   x + Ix + y + m
                
                                      otherwise
                0


The expectation of this w.r.t.  is

                
          B=      2(m + y )2 + m2 - max {0, m + y - L}2 - max {0, m + L - Ix }2
                Z




                                                        54
Under D 1 -2
        3-2
              Z,m , this is

           
     B=      2(m + y )2 + m2 - max {0, m - (1 - )L}2 - max {0, m - (1 - 2)L}2
          2Z
                                        D+Z,m        Z,m
Note that D 31-2
              -2
                   Z,m implies L =      4(1-)
                                                >    1-2
                                                           >    m
                                                               1-2
                                                                   .   So B =    
                                                                                2Z
                                                                                     (2(m + y )2 + m2 )
which is increasing in m.
For the case of D 3
                  1-2
                    -2
                       < Z,m , note that B is continuous in m. Also, the negative terms
max {0, m + y - L} and max {0, m + L - Ix } are increasing in m. So if

                    2(m + y )2 + m2 - (m + y - L)2 - (m + L - Ix )2

is increasing in m, then B is increasing in m. The derivative of this expression w.r.t. m is 2
times

                  dL                                            dL                              dL   dIx
2(m + y ) 1 +           + m - (m + y - L) 1 - (1 - )                    - (m + L - Ix ) 1 +        -
                  dm                                            dm                              dm dm

Under Z,m > D r x +r
              rx -r
                     this is

            2(m + y ) + m - (m + y - L) - (m + L - Ix ) = m + y + Ix > 0

Under D rx +r
        rx -r
              > Z,m > D 1 -2
                        3-2
                             this is

                 dL                                 dL                       dL
 2(m + y ) 1 +       + m - (m + y - L) 1 - (1 - )       - (m + 2L - D) 1 + 2
                 dm                                 dm                       dm
           rx - r           (5 - 2) (rx - r)
>D 1 -                +L                     - (1 - ) > 0
       rx + 2(1 - )r       2 (rx + 2(1 - )r)

Thus, B is continuous and increasing.



Proof. (Proof of Proposition 4)
Now suppose that m is independently drawn from distribution Fm with support [0, m] and
mean m . Assume m < Z - D.
In principle, stochastic m could complicate the algebra dramatically. But, as the shocks can
always be larger than the shocks the all results regarding portfolios still hold with m instead
of m. In order to formalize this, go back to the liquidations induced by the optimal behavior
of x after the shock, as outlined in the proof of Lemma 1. The last region of the shock


                                                55
where both project are liquidated is given by max{Ix , Iy } <  =  - m - x - y . This is,
 > max{Ix , Iy } + m + x + y . By m < Z - D,

             max{Ix , Iy } + m + x + y < max{Ix , Iy } + Z - D + x + y < Z

Therefore, there is positive probability that both project get liquidated regardless of the
portfolio. So all regions of shocks in the cases for liquidations have positive probability.
Then the expected payoffs are given by

      Z
        Em [x ] = (Z,0 + m + D - Ix - Iy ) (Ix rx + Lr) + min{Ix , Iy } max {Lr, Ix rx }
      
                  + (max{Ix , Iy } - min{Ix , Iy }) min{Ix , Iy }rarg minz Iz
      Z
        Em [x ] = (Iy ry - Lr) (Z,0 + m + D - Ix - Iy ) + 1Ix rx <Lr min{Ix , Iy }
      
                  + 1Ix <L (max{Ix , Iy } - min{Ix , Iy })

So the solution is identical, just by replacing m with m now.
                                                                           
For closed form results we suppose that m is 0 w.p.  and U [0, 2
                                                               1-
                                                                 m
                                                                   ] w.p. 1 -  where
m < 2 (Z - D). Note that this has mean m .
      1-                                    


We first consider the event that all funded projects get liquidated, which we call systemic
risk. This is,  > Ix . (Under D r  x +r
                                  rx -r
                                         Z,m y 's project is indeed funded. Otherwise, the
only funded project is x's.) Systemic risk is

                  
                    (Z - D + (1 - )L - m )
                  Z             
                                  D+Z,m
                                                          if D 1 -2
                                                                     Z,m
                                 4(1-)                         3-2
                                
                                     +r)-(rx -r)Z,m
              - m + (1 - ) D(rx2(     rx +2(1-)r)
                                                          if D rx +r
                                                               rx -r
                                                                               1-2
                                                                     > Z,m > D 3 -2
           (m , )               
                                                          if Z,m > D r
                                                                     rx +r
                                0
                                                                       x -r



The first term -m is the direct effect of the availability of public liquidity. This has a natural
effect of reducing the risk of liquidations. The second term after the bracket is the equilibrium
effect of public liquidity. The availability of public liquidity influences the availability of
private liquidity in the system through the portfolio choices, in particular, through L. The
equilibrium effect increases in m up to D 3    1-2
                                                -2
                                                    - Z,0 and decreases afterwards. The net
effect is always to reduce systemic risk.
Next consider contagion risk, the probability that the project of y gets liquidated. This
event is the union of  > Ix (systemic risk) and 0 <   L(1 - ), "only-contagion." The


                                               56
probability of only-contagion is Z
                                 
                                   L(1 - ). This is increasing in m for m < D 1 -2
                                                                              3-2
                                                                                   - Z,0
and decreasing afterwards m . We have already calculated systemic risk. Then contagion
risk is
                     
                       (Z - D + 2(1 - )L - m )           2(1 - )L - m
                     Z                               
                                                  (m , )

This is always decreasing in m .
Now consider direct risk, the probability that the project of x gets liquidated. This event is
given by L(1 - ) <  . The part Ix <  is the systemic risk. The part of L(1 - ) <   Ix
is "only-direct-risk." Only-direct-risk is given by

                  
                    (Ix - L(1 - ))
                  Z
                  
                    D+Z,m
                  
                        4
                                                      if D 3
                                                           1-2
                                                             -2
                                                                 Z,m
                  
                    D(3(1-)r-r+rx )+(2-)(rx -r)Z,m
              
                             2(rx +2(1-)r)
                                                      if D rx +r
                                                           rx -r
                                                                           1-2
                                                                 > Z,m > D 3 -2
            (m , ) 
                                                      if Z,m > D rx +r
                  D
                                                                 rx -r


This is always increasing in m . The public liquidity always increases the only-direct-risk.
This is perhaps particularly relevant for the Great Depression. The combined direct-risk to
x is

                
                  (Z - D + (1 - )L - m + Ix - L(1 - ))
                Z      
                         D+Z,m
                       
                            2
                                                     if D 3
                                                          1-2
                                                            -2
                                                                 m + Z,0
                       
            - m + D(4(1-)2(     r+rx -r)+Z,m (rx -r)
                                 rx +2(1-)r)
                                                     if D r
                                                          rx +r               1-2
                                                                > m + Z,0 > D 3
         (m , )                                            x -r                 -2
                       
                                                     if m + Z > D rx +r
                       D
                                                               ,0     rx -r


This is always decreasing in m . The public liquidity always reduces the direct-risk to x.
Finally, we consider vulnerability, that is, the risks conditional on m = 0. Systemic vulnera-
bility is given by

                                   
                                     (Z - D + (1 - )L)
                                   Z

This is increasing in m for small m and decreasing for large m . Contagion vulnerability is

                                   
                                     (Z - D + 2(1 - )L)
                                   Z

This is also increasing in m for small m and decreasing for large m . Direct vulnerability



                                             57
is

                                                   
                                                     (Ix - L(1 - ))
                                                   Z

This is always increasing in m .



Proof. (Proof of Proposition 5)
Now there is  probability that xi gets a shock. Then Proposition 1 goes through by replacing
 with . Note that Z +D 1Z          >1  >  so we do not have the region in which xi > 0.
                        ( 3- 2
                           -2 )
                                -m   2

Now suppose that the the core banks can borrow each others reserves. We assume Z > 2D +m
so that the shock can always be larger than the total cash in the system and we can avoid
corner cases. For the pair i, the cash reserves of yi act as an addition to m. Also note that
xi and xj do not keep reserves and so we do not need to worry about xi short-term lending
to yi and yi intermediating this to yj . Thus, for xi , the best response is given by

                                             D (rx + r) - (Z,m + Lj ) (rx - r)
                                    Li =
                                                     2 (rx + 2(1 - )r)           +


The symmetric equilibrium is given by

                                             D (rx + r) - (Z,m + L) (rx - r)
                                    L=
                                                    2 (rx + 2(1 - )r)            +


     1. If   1
             2
                 >>            Z
                             (r +r )       (D rx +r
                                              rx -r
                                                    > Z,m ) then
                        Z +D (rx -r) -m
                                x



                                               D (rx + r) - Z,m (rx - r)
                                    Lxi =                                , Ix = D - L
                                            2 (rx + 2(1 - )r) + (rx - r)

     2. If          Z
                  (r +r )      > , (D rx +r
                                      rx -r
                                            < Z,m ) then
             Z +D (rx -r) -m
                   x



                                                     Lxi = 0, Ixi = D




Proof. (Proof of Lemma 2)
For D rx +r
      rx -r
            < Z,m , LC = LD = 0. There is no network. So consider the region D r  rx +r
                                                                                   x -r
                                                                                        > Z,m .
From the earlier analysis we know that if both banks connect to their regional correspondents,

                                                          58
in equilibrium,

                  Z C
                    = (Z,m + D - Ix ) Ix rx + (Z,m + D - 2(1 - )L) Lr
                   xi

where
                                            D (rx + r) - Z,m (rx - r)
                                LC =
                                                2 (rx + 2(1 - )r)
If both regions connect to NY, in equilibrium,

        Z N
          = (Z,m + L + D - Ix ) Ix rx + (Z,m + L + D - 2(1 - )L) Lr - c(L)
         xi

where
                                           D (rx + r) - Z,m (rx - r)
                               LN =
                                        2 (rx + 2(1 - )r) + (rx - r)

Note
                                             Z C
                                        d     
                                              xi
                                                   =Ix,C rx + LC r
                                             dm

and
                               Z N
                           d    
                                xi                                    dLN
                                            = (Ix,N rx + LN r) 1 + 
                               dm                                     dm

Denote A = 2 (rx + 2(1 - )r) and B = D (rx + r) - Z,m (rx - r). Then

                      Zd    Cxi                  B
                                = Drx - (rx - r)
                           dm                    A
                      Zd    Nxi                       B                         A
                                = Drx - (rx - r)
                           dm                     A + (rx - r)              A + (rx - r)
        Z   d C xi   d N xi                              B
                   -                = Drx - (rx - r)
              dm       dm                                A
                                        Dr(rx - r)
                                    >                >0
                                        A + (rx - r)




Proof. (Proof of Proposition 6)
Since the difference in the derivative is bounded away from zero, as m grows, C xi exceeds
xi eventually. The switching point mc depends on the fixed cost c as well. If the cost c is
  N




                                                    59
very large, the stable network is regional for all m. In this case, mc = D r x +r
                                                                           rx -r
                                                                                  - Z 1-
                                                                                       
                                                                                         
                                                                                          . If c is
very small, the stable network is central for all m. Then mc = 0. In between as c grows, mc
grows from 0 to D r x +r
                   rx -r
                         - Z 1-
                              
                                
                                 .




                                                60
