Data-intensive Innovation and the State: Evidence from AI Firms in China
Martin Beraja, David Y. Yang, and Noam Yuchtman
NBER Working Paper No. 27723
August 2020, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. E0,H4,L5,L63,O25,O30,O40,P00,P16,Z21

                                            ABSTRACT

Data-intensive technologies, like AI, are increasingly widespread. We argue that the direction of
innovation and growth in data-intensive economies may be crucially shaped by the state because:
(i) the state is a key collector of data and (ii) data is sharable across uses within firms, potentially
generating economies of scope. We study a prototypical setting: facial recognition AI in China.
Collecting comprehensive data on firms and government procurement contracts, we find evidence
of economies of scope arising from government data: firms awarded contracts providing access to
more government data produce both more government and commercial software. We then build a
directed technical change model to study the implications of government data access for the
direction of innovation, growth, and welfare. We conclude with three applications showing how
data-intensive innovation may be shaped by the state: both directly, by setting industrial policy;
and indirectly, by choosing surveillance levels and privacy regulations.


Martin Beraja                                      Noam Yuchtman
Department of Economics                            London School of Economics
MIT                                                Houghton St.
50 Memorial Drive                                  London WC2A 2AE
Cambridge, MA 02142                                United Kingdom
and NBER                                           and CEPR
martinberaja@gmail.com                             and also NBER
                                                   n.yuchtman@lse.ac.uk
David Y. Yang
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-31
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
davidyang@fas.harvard.edu
             Data-intensive Innovation and the State:
                Evidence from AI Firms in China

                  Martin Beraja      David Y. Yang      Noam Yuchtman*

                                    September 18, 2020



                                            Abstract
      Data-intensive technologies, like AI, are increasingly widespread. We argue
      that the direction of innovation and growth in data-intensive economies may
      be crucially shaped by the state because: (i) the state is a key collector of
      data and (ii) data is sharable across uses within firms, potentially generating
      economies of scope. We study a prototypical setting: facial recognition AI in
      China. Collecting comprehensive data on firms and government procurement
      contracts, we find evidence of economies of scope arising from government
      data: firms awarded contracts providing access to more government data pro-
      duce both more government and commercial software. We then build a di-
      rected technical change model to study the implications of government data
      access for the direction of innovation, growth, and welfare. We conclude with
      three applications showing how data-intensive innovation may be shaped by
      the state: both directly, by setting industrial policy; and indirectly, by choosing
      surveillance levels and privacy regulations.
      Keywords: data, innovation, artificial intelligence, economies of scope, di-
      rected technical change, industrial policy, China, privacy, surveillance
      JEL Classification: O30, P00, E00, L5, L63, O25, O40

    * Beraja: MIT and NBER. Email: maberaja@mit.edu.            Yang: Harvard University and
NBER. Email: davidyang@fas.harvard.edu. Yuchtman: LSE, NBER, and CESifo. Email:
n.yuchtman@lse.ac.uk. We are especially grateful for the extraordinary research assistance pro-
vided by Haoran Gao, Andrew Kao, Shuhao Lu, and Wenwei Peng. We also thank Shiyun Hu, Junxi
Liu, Shengqi Ni, Yucheng Quan, Linchuan Xu, Peilin Yang, and Guoli Yin, for their excellent work
as research assistants as well. Many appreciated suggestions, critiques and encouragement were
provided by Daron Acemoglu, Dominick Bartelme, Ryan Bubb, Paco Buera, Ernesto Dal Bó, Dave
Donaldson, Ruben Enikolopov, Raquel Fernández, Richard Freeman, Chad Jones, Pete Klenow,
Monica Martinez-Bravo, Andy Neumeyer, Juan Pablo Nicolini, Arianna Ornaghi, Maria Petrova,
Torsten Persson, Nancy Qian, Andrei Shleifer, Chris Tonetti, John Van Reenen, and Daniel Xu, as
well as many seminar and conference participants. Yuchtman acknowledges financial support from
the British Academy under the Global Professorships program.
1     Introduction
Artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies ("AI" for brevity) are in-
creasingly widespread. Because of their potential, they have attracted a great deal
of attention from economists and others (see Agrawal et al., eds, 2019 for a review).
Developing these technologies is data-intensive. The importance of data can be seen
in recent breakthroughs from translation, to speech and facial recognition, to chess
grand mastery: all of these were driven as much by access to massive amounts of
data as by algorithmic advances.1
    Data differs from other inputs into innovation in two important ways. First,
throughout history and up to the present, states have collected massive quantities
of data to fulfill their primary objectives. From administrative data that make soci-
ety "legible" (Scott, 1998) and allow the state to collect taxes and provide services;
to geographic and scientific data used for national defense; to surveillance data
used to provide public security, among others. Tellingly, "state" is at the root of
the word "statistics." Second, data can be shared across multiple uses within a
firm. These two features may generate economies of scope from government data.2
In particular, a firm gaining access to government data collected by the state could
use that same data to develop new products for government uses as well as prod-
ucts intended for much larger commercial markets. In this paper, we argue that,
because of these two features of data, the direction of innovation and growth in
data-intensive economies may be crucially shaped by the state.
    To examine the empirical relevance of the two features of data we have high-
lighted, we study a prototypical data-intensive sector in which the state has a sig-
nificant public security interest: the facial recognition AI industry in China. We
find evidence of economies of scope arising from government data: following
the receipt of a government contract to supply AI software, firms produce more
software both for government and commercial purposes when the contract provides
access to more government data. To study the aggregate implications of firms' ac-
   1 See Sejnowski (2018). Kai-Fu Lee (former director of Microsoft Research Asia and president of

Google China) has even argued that, as opposed to researchers, ". . . it is data that is crucial to the
implementation of AI technologies . . . " (source: https://bit.ly/34gJkgu).
   2 The sharability of data across multiple uses within the firm is related to the non-rivalry of data

across firms, which has been highlighted by Jones and Tonetti (2018), among others. Seminal work
by Panzar and Willig (1981) shows how economies scope may arise when inputs are sharable.



                                                  1
cess to government data, we build a general equilibrium directed technical change
model where some firms choose to engage in data-intensive innovation, the state
and private sector demand data-intensive software to produce "surveillance" ser-
vices and consumption goods, respectively, and government data gives rise to
economies of scope. We show that increasing the amount of government data
provided to firms can indeed increase the economy's growth rate and bias the di-
rection of private innovation towards data-intensive software. However, because
innovation crowds-out resources from consumption, government data provision
increases welfare only when economies of scope are sufficiently strong. We con-
clude with three applications which illustrate the varied ways that data-intensive
innovation may be shaped by the state: both directly, by setting industrial policies;
and indirectly, by choosing public surveillance levels as well as enacting privacy
regulations. These applications demonstrate that the welfare implications of gov-
ernment data collection and provision are further complicated by potential mis-
alignment between citizens' and states' preferences for surveillance and privacy.
    Our paper begins by presenting a simple conceptual framework where economies
of scope in data-intensive innovation arise from government data being sharable
across multiple uses. We derive a key prediction that guides our subsequent em-
pirical analysis: a government contract that results in an exogenous increase in the
government data available to a firm will lead to increased production of both gov-
ernment and commercial software. Yet, we note that economies of scope may not
arise even when government data can be shared across uses. For instance, firms
may not increase commercial software production upon receipt of a government
contract if, in order to fulfill it, the firm needs to reallocate substantial resources
towards government software production and away from commercial software
production.
    The facial recognition AI industry in China is a uniquely suited empirical con-
text to study this question. Firms developing facial recognition software require
large datasets.3 The Chinese state both collects huge amounts of personal data and
demands facial recognition software for surveillance purposes. A firm receiving a
government contract would thus receive access to government data which is not
   3 Depending  on the application, firms can train algorithms using identifiable data (e.g., video
surveillance feeds not linked to administrative records), identified data (e.g., linked faces and names
in ID databases), or both in combination.



                                                  2
publicly available, using this data to develop the software it was contracted to pro-
duce. For example, when obtaining a contract with a police department to produce
surveillance software, it could receive access to video from street cameras, and
potentially a database of labeled personal images as well. It could then develop
surveillance software by training an AI algorithm that matches individuals across
video feeds or from video feeds to labeled images. Crucially, the detection of indi-
viduals from video (or photo) data is also key to any commercial facial recognition
AI application, for instance, facial recognition platforms for retail stores. There-
fore, to the extent that the government data (or fine-tuned detection algorithm) is
sharable across uses, there may exist economies of scope.
    Reflecting this discussion, our empirical strategy compares changes in firm
software output following the receipt of data-rich versus data-scarce government
contracts. In order to operationalize it, we overcome three data challenges. First,
linking AI firms to government contracts. To do so, we collect data on (approx-
imately) the universe of Chinese facial recognition AI firms and link this data to
a separate database of Chinese government contracts, issued by all levels of the
government. Second, quantifying AI firms' software production and, as impor-
tant, classifying firms' software by intended use. We do this by compiling data
on all Chinese facial recognition AI firms' software development based on the
digital product registration records maintained by the Chinese government. Us-
ing a Recurrent Neural Network model, we categorize software products based
on whether they are directed towards the commercial market or government use.
Third, measuring the amount of government data to which firms have access. To
do this, we construct two proxies for the data-richness of an AI contract. We begin
by distinguishing among government contract awarding agencies. Procurement
contracts awarded by a public security agency are most likely to provide access
to massive, linkable, personal data, collected for monitoring purposes, while con-
tracts with other agencies likely provide access to less data.4 Thus, our first proxy
for a data-rich contract is one that came from a public security agency, whereas
a data-scarce contract is one that did not. We next distinguish among contracts
within the set of public security contracts, identifying those that are likely to be
especially rich in data. These are contracts with public security agencies possess-
   4 Non-publicsecurity agencies (e.g., banks or schools) do not have access to large scale surveil-
lance camera networks and cover narrower groups of individuals.


                                                 3
ing greater surveillance capacity, which we measure using prefectural government
contracts for surveillance cameras. Thus, our second proxy for a data-rich con-
tract is one that came from a public security agency located in a prefecture with
above-median surveillance capacity at the time the contract was awarded, whereas
a data-scarce contract is one coming from a public security agency located in a pre-
fecture with below-median surveillance capacity. We prefer this proxy as it allows
us to make comparisons within a set of very similar public security contracts.
    Using these newly constructed datasets, we use a triple differences design to
estimate the effect of access to greater amounts of government data on facial recog-
nition AI firms' subsequent software development. Specifically, we compare firms'
software releases before and after they receive their first government contract, con-
trolling for firm and time period fixed effects. To help pin down the importance of
access to government data, rather than other benefits of government contracts, such
as capital, reputation, and political connections, we exploit variation in the type
of contract: data-rich or data-scarce. We find that receipt of a data-rich contract
differentially increases both government and commercial software production, rela-
tive to receipt of a data-scarce contract. Our evidence is thus consistent with the
presence of economies of scope, reflecting crowding-in rather than crowding-out.
Using our preferred proxy for data-richness, we find that in the three years after
the receipt of a contract, data-rich contracts generate an additional 3 government
software products (over and above the effects of a data-scarce contract), and an
additional 2 commercial software products.
    We provide a range of corroborating evidence for our proposed mechanism
of access to government data contributing to product innovation. First, we ob-
serve lower bids (even controlling for firm fixed effects) for data-rich contracts,
as well as more bidders overall. Second, we find that production of non-AI, data-
complementary software (e.g., software supporting data storage and transmission)
significantly, and differentially, increases after firms receive data-rich public secu-
rity contracts. Finally, we find that firms that produce video facial recognition AI
software for the government -- which requires access to particularly large amounts
of data -- exhibit differentially large increases in data-complementary software
production, and greater commercial and government AI software production too.




                                          4
    We conclude our empirical analysis by evaluating a range of threats to identi-
fication and alternative mechanisms. First, we show that systematic firm selection
into receiving contracts at a particular time is unlikely to drive our main results:
our event-study estimates show no differential software production prior to receipt
of a data-rich contract, and our findings are robust to allowing pre-contract firm
characteristics to flexibly affect post-contract output. Second, we provide evidence
showing that our main results are also unlikely to be explained by differences be-
tween data-rich and data-scarce contracts in their terms and tasks required, poten-
tial for learning-by-doing, access to capital, signaling value, associated commercial
opportunities, or connections to local government.
    Significant microeconomic consequences of economies of scope arising from
government data do not necessarily imply that provision of government data would
promote aggregate innovation or increase welfare. To examine the macroeconomic
implications of government data access, we develop a directed technical change
model, building on Acemoglu (2002). We let innovator firms develop and supply
differentiated varieties of data-intensive government and commercial software, as
well as other, non-software varieties which do not use data as an input. Com-
mercial software and non-software are used to produce a final good. Government
software is purchased by the state to produce a government good, which we call
"surveillance" for concreteness. A representative household owns all firms and
consumes the final good.
    There are two types of data in the economy: government and private. Govern-
ment data is necessary for producing government software. We assume that the
same government data could simultaneously be used for producing both govern-
ment and commercial software, generating economies of scope. Government data
is produced as a by-product of surveillance, whereas private data is a by-product
of total private transactions (as measured by final good output). Both types of data
are excludable, but only private data can be purchased in the market. As in our em-
pirical context, government data can only be accessed by producing government
software for the state after procuring a government contract.
    We show conditions under which there is a unique balanced growth path (BGP)
equilibrium with free-entry of innovators and three types of firms being present:




                                         5
those producing both government and commercial software using government
and private data, those producing private software using private data alone, and
those producing non-software. Then, we study how government data access af-
fects innovation and welfare. When commercial software and non-software are
sufficiently substitutable, an increase in government data provided to firms in-
creases the BGP rate of innovation and biases private innovation towards data-
intensive software. However, the welfare effect is more ambiguous: while govern-
ment data provision does lead to a direct positive effect on welfare through higher
consumption growth, this is offset by a decrease in the level of consumption due
to crowding-out by resources used in innovation. Thus, we consider a second-best
problem where the state can only choose the level of government data provided
to firms in order to maximize household welfare. We find that, even if neither the
state nor the representative household derives utility from surveillance, it may be
optimal for the state to produce it in order to provide firms with the government
data that is generated as a by-product. This is because, in doing so, it can in-
crease the rate of private software innovation and thus consumption growth when
there are economies of scope. Importantly, such a policy is only justified when
economies of scope are strong enough and, as a result, the increase in the growth
rate is sufficiently large to compensate for the crowding-out of resources.
     Finally, in three applications, we illustrate the varied ways that data-intensive
innovation may be shaped by the state, both directly and indirectly, because of
the features of data that we highlight. First, we show that industrial policy in
the form of government data provision can be justified on grounds which dif-
fer from those that motivate traditional industrial policy. Second, we show that
surveillance states' desire to monitor and control their citizens aligns with promot-
ing data-intensive innovation and growth, but may reduce citizen welfare when
states' objectives and citizens' preferences do not coincide. Third, we show that
regulation limiting government data collection reduces data-intensive innovation
and growth but may benefit citizens overall when they value privacy.


2    Related literature
Our work most directly contributes to an emerging literature on the economics of
AI and data, particularly work that aims to understand the role of AI technology

                                          6
and data in fostering innovation, and firm and aggregate growth (see, e.g., Aghion
et al., 2017; Agrawal et al., 2018; Farboodi et al., 2019;Acemoglu and Restrepo,
2019). We contribute to this literature by examining direct and indirect ways in
which data-intensive innovation may be shaped by the state, and identifying two
crucial characteristics of data that shape the impact of the state on innovation. Our
analysis complements a recent literature studying the effects of specific charac-
teristics of information and data on innovation: Williams (2013) studies the non-
excludability of government research on genes (in contrast with the excludability
of private sector research); and, Aghion et al. (2017) and Jones and Tonetti (2018)
study non-rivalry of data across firms. We instead study economies of scope aris-
ing from the sharability of government data across government and commercial
applications within a firm.
    Our examination of the link between the state and the private sector AI industry
builds on literatures on both industrial policy and innovation policy. Rodrik (2007)
and Lane (2020) provide recent overviews of the industrial policy literature, with
the latter highlighting quasi-experimental evidence of effective industrial policy.
Recent research on innovation policy also suggests an important role for the state
in encouraging R&D -- see Bloom et al. (2019).5 We make three primary contribu-
tions to these literatures. First, we study a frontier technology: the effects of the
state on the development of modern AI innovation, a technology which has enor-
mous economic potential, and which also may be particularly sensitive to state
policy. Second, we conceptualize and empirically identify a specific within-firm
mechanism underlying spillovers from government expenditure to private inno-
vation in our setting. We highlight that economies of scope across government
and commercial uses could generate consequences similar to those achieved by
industrial policy and innovation policy, despite the incidental nature of the state's
engagement, for example, due to states' demand for surveillance or due to citizens'
demand for privacy protection. Third, we provide a justification for government
data provision that differs from that of traditional industrial policies. For example,
Costinot et al. (2019) evaluate the case for industrial policy to correct for learning-
by-doing externalities. We show that because states are key collectors of data, and
   5 Among   others, Howell (2017) shows that the US Department of Energy's funding helps firms
to innovate; Azoulay et al. (2018) show that public grants increase patenting by pharmaceutical and
biotechnology firms; Moretti et al. (2019) show that defense R&D expenditures of OECD countries
crowd in private R&D; and Moser (2005) studies how intellectual property rights shape innovation.


                                                7
because government data can give rise to economies of scope, it may be optimal
to directly provide such data to data-intensive software producers, even in the
absence of externalities. In this sense, we also contribute to a macroeconomic lit-
erature on the role of government spending in promoting economic growth (e.g.,
Murphy et al., 1989, Barro, 1990).
    By placing our analysis of AI innovation within a model of directed techni-
cal change, we contribute to the body of work on these models (Acemoglu, 1998;
Acemoglu et al., 2012; Lewis, 2013; Hemous, 2016). We add to this literature by
studying a novel application -- data-intensive innovation and the role of the state.
Our empirical analysis contributes to a much smaller body of empirical work on
directed technical change (Popp, 2002; Acemoglu et al., 2006; Hanlon, 2015; Aghion
et al., 2016; Costinot et al., 2019). We add to this literature by documenting how
an increase in the supply of data, as a result of receiving a government contract,
induces Chinese firms to develop (data-intensive) commercial applications of AI
technologies.
    Finally, we highlight the political dimension of data-intensive AI innovation.
Data is valued -- and thus accumulated -- by modern surveillance states, partic-
ularly by autocratic states (Guriev and Treisman, 2019). In addition, a fundamen-
tal aim of AI technology -- to make accurate predictions -- is aligned with their
surveillance and social control agenda (Zuboff, 2019). Therefore, AI is a technol-
ogy that can buttress rather than threaten autocratic regimes. Combining these
insights, our project contributes to our understanding of how political economy
affects the rate and direction of technical change. Traditionally, scholars have em-
phasized limits on entrepreneurship under autocracies arising from the misaligned
incentives facing entrepreneurs and political elites.6 In the domain of AI technol-
ogy, however, surveillance states' objectives and data collection, along with the
economies of scope arising from data as an input, facilitate data-intensive inno-
vation even for commercial applications. Thus, the alignment between the state
and private sector could offset the expropriation risks and commitment problems
traditionally faced by private entrepreneurs under autocracy, although, as we em-
   6 Therisk of ex post taxation or expropriation of entrepreneurs will mean ex ante less invest-
ment (North et al., 2009; Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012). Threats to elites arising from successful
entrepreneurs will mean that elites may ex ante tax entrepreneurs to preserve their political rents
(Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006). Corruption and other public sectors distortions will also discour-
age innovation and investment (Shleifer and Vishny, 2002).


                                                8
phasize, such alignment may still be detrimental to citizens overall. Our analysis
thus may also help explain the puzzle of China's global leadership in AI innova-
tion and more generally suggests that modern autocracy may be compatible with
technical change along specific trajectories.7


3     Economies of scope from government data
Suppose that a firm may develop data-intensive software for both the state and
the private sector. Assume that developing software for the state uses government
data d g as an input. Imagine -- as is the case in reality -- that there exist types
of government data that lack close substitutes (e.g., surveillance video from street
cameras) and that are not made publicly available.8 In order to obtain access to
these government data, the firm must obtain a contract from the state to produce
government software. Government software production also uses a number of
other inputs, including other forms of data, which can be purchased in the market,
and which we denote in vector form by x g . Then, we let Fg (d g , x g ) be the produc-
tion function of government software Sg .
    Moreover, assume that if a firm has access to government data d g , then it can
use that same data to produce commercial software for the private sector. That
is, government data can be shared across uses. We let Fc (d g , xc ) be the production
function of commercial software Sc , where xc is again a vector other types of in-
puts. As an example of government data and its shared uses, consider video from
street surveillance cameras and administrative records with the names of individ-
uals linked to images of their faces. This data is used to train an algorithm with
the ability to recognize faces in video and identify individuals in administrative
records. That trained identification algorithm may then also be part of a more com-
plex software application that performs the predictive task of identifying potential
security threats. That same data, though, is also a crucial input to train algorithms
    7 A large literature studies the Chinese economy and its spectacular growth in the recent decades

(e.g., Song et al., 2011), as well as innovation in China more specifically (e.g., Wei et al., 2017; Bom-
bardini et al., 2018). Much of the work on China's political economy highlights institutional features
that allow China to grow despite the lack of institutional constraints on the Chinese Communist
Party. In contrast, our work (along with others, like Bai et al., 2019) identifies a mechanism through
which autocratic power can actually promote economic growth.
    8 Other examples of potentially valuable government data include personally-identified health

records and data on earnings, as well as geographic and geological data, among others.


                                                   9
that perform a wide range of commercial recognition and prediction tasks, such as
identifying a customer in video from store cameras or predicting their purchases.9
    Following Panzar and Willig (1981), it is possible that economies of scope arise
         Fc
when     d g > 0. Intuitively, this is because the firm obtaining more government
data by producing government software could produce a given level of commer-
cial software Sc with less of the other inputs, and thus at lower cost.10 This gener-
ates a testable implication about the firm-level impact of obtaining a government
contract that is richer in data, when there are economies of scope. Consider a firm
that is already producing commercial software. Suppose it receives a government
contract to produce government software, which provides access to government
               Fc
data (with    d g > 0). Then this firm could begin to produce not only more gov-
ernment software (using government data), but also more commercial software,
because the government data to which it receives access can be used for commer-
cial software production as well.
    Note, however, that these economies of scope are not guaranteed. For instance,
when a firm uses resources to produce more government software, this may crowd-
out resources that would have been used for commercial software production. If
such crowding-out effects are relatively strong, obtaining a government contract
that is richer in government data would induce the firm to produce more govern-
ment software but less commercial software. Observing increases in both govern-
ment and commercial software production following receipt of a data-rich govern-
ment contract would thus be strong evidence for economies of scope arising from
government data, where the ability to share data across uses more than offsets any
crowding out of resources.
    In the next section, we test for this implication of economies of scope in the
context of China's AI industry:

Implication of economies of scope arising from government data: Obtaining a gov-
    ernment contract that is richer in government data induces a firm to produce
   9 An   alternative plausible specification of the technologies is one where government data is not
shared across uses per se, but is instead used to train a "base algorithm," which is used as an input
to both government and private software. For the purposes of our paper, these two are equivalent.
  10 Imagine that the firm splits in two: one only producing government software (with ac-

cess to government data) and the other one only producing private software (without access to
government data). Formally, let input prices be  and let C (Sg , Sc , d g ,  ), Cg (Sg , 0, d g ,  ), and
Cc (0, Sc , 0,  ) be the cost functions of the firms producing both types of software and each type sep-
arately. Then, there are economies of scope when C (Sg , Sc , d g ,  ) < Cg (Sg , 0, d g ,  ) + Cc (0, Sc , 0,  ).

                                                       10
         both more government and commercial software.


4       The state and China's facial recognition AI industry
4.1       Empirical context
China's facial recognition AI sector is a prototypical setting in which to examine
the impact of access to government data on innovation and to provide evidence
of economies of scope arising from such data. First, because facial recognition AI
is extremely data-intensive: the development of the technology requires access to
large image or video datasets. Second, because the Chinese state collects huge
amounts of personal data and demands AI software in order to monitor citizens.
The value of government data is clear to private sector entrepreneurs: in 2019, a
founder of a leading Chinese AI firm stated, "The core reason why [Chinese] AI
achieves such tremendous success is due to data availability and related technol-
ogy. Government data is the biggest source of data for AI firms like us."11 Impor-
tantly, data acquired privately are not currently a close substitute for government
data: in 2019, the former premier, Li Keqiang, stated that, "At this time, 80% of the
data in China is controlled by various government agencies."12
    Consider an example in which a private firm receives a procurement contract
to provide facial recognition software to a municipal police department in China.
The firm implicitly receives access to large quantities of government data which
are not publicly available. Such data could include video from street surveillance
cameras as well as labeled images with names and faces of individuals. The firm
uses this data to train an AI algorithm; e.g., a "tracking" algorithm that matches
faces across video feeds or a "detection" algorithm that matches faces from video
to the database of individuals. Then, economies of scope can arise from the gov-
ernment data being used to train a separate algorithm that results in a commercial
AI product, for example, AI software designed for retail firms who may wish to
track or detect individual shoppers throughout their stores, and then predict their
consumption choices.
    11 Source:Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference: https://bit.ly/3gdo2T6.
    12 Ibid.
          It is important to note that Chinese government support of AI innovation is not limited to
data provision, but also includes a range of subsidies. Industrial policy that broadly affects all firms
(whether or not they receive government data) is thus an important characteristic of the setting we
study. It is also more broadly a characteristic of AI innovation around the world.


                                                  11
    This context allows us to empirically test for economies of scope arising from
access to government data. In particular, in the next section we exploit within-firm
variation over time in the receipt of procurement contracts, together with variation
in the data available to firms under different contracts. This allows us to estimate
the effect of access to more government data on both government and commercial
software production.


4.2    Data sources
Operationalizing our empirical analysis faces three data-related empirical chal-
lenges: first, the need to link AI firms to government contracts; second, the need
to compile information on AI firms' software production, and specifically the ori-
entation of software toward government or commercial use; and, third, the need
to measure the quantity of government data to which firms have access. We ad-
dress these challenges by constructing a novel dataset combining information on
Chinese facial recognition AI firms and their software releases, and information on
local governments' procurement of AI software and of surveillance cameras.13
Linking Chinese facial recognition AI firms to government contracts We iden-
tify (close to) all active firms based in China producing facial recognition AI using
information from Tianyancha, a comprehensive database on Chinese firms licensed
by China's central bank.14 We extract firms that are categorized as facial recogni-
tion AI producers by the database, and we validate the categorization by manually
coding firms based on their descriptions and product lists. We complement the
Tianyancha database with information from Pitchbook, a database owned by Morn-
ingstar on firms and private capital markets around the world.15 Using the over-
lap between sources, we validate the coding of firms identified in the Tianyancha
database. We also supplement the Tianyancha data by adding a small number of
AI firms that are listed by Pitchbook but omitted by Tianyancha. Overall, we iden-
tify 7,837 Chinese facial recognition AI firms.16 We also collect an array of firm
  13 Appendix   Table A.1 describes the core variables and their sources.
  14 See  Supplementary Figure S.1 for an example entry.
   15 See Supplementary Figure S.2 for an example entry.
   16 These firms fall into 3 categories: (i) firms specialized in facial recognition AI (e.g., Yitu); (ii)

hardware firms that devote substantial resources to develop AI software (e.g., Hik-Vision); and (iii)
a small number of distinct AI units within large tech conglomerates (e.g., Baidu AI).



                                                    12
level characteristics such as founding year, capitalization, major external financing
sources, as well as subsidiary and mother firm information.
    We extract information on 2,997,105 procurement contracts issued by all levels
of the Chinese government between 2013 and 2019 from the Chinese Government
Procurement Database, maintained by China's Ministry of Finance.17 The contract
database contains information on the good or service procured, the date of the
contract, the monetary size of the contract, the winning bid, as well as the num-
ber of bidders for a subset of the contracts. To identify contracts procuring facial
recognition AI, we match the contracts with the list of facial recognition AI firms,
identifying 26,200 procurement contracts involving at least one facial recognition
AI firm. Many firms receive multiple contracts; overall, 1,095 of the facial recogni-
tion AI firms in our dataset receive at least one contract.
Counting and classifying novel facial recognition AI software products We
collect all software registration records for our facial recognition AI firms from
China's Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, with which Chinese
firms are required to register new software releases and major upgrades. We are
able to validate our measure of software releases (using a single large firm), by
cross-checking our data against the IPO Prospectus of MegVii, the world's first fa-
cial recognition AI company to file for an IPO.18 We find that our records' coverage
is comprehensive (at least in the case of MegVii): MegVii's IPO Prospectus contains
103 software releases, all of which are included in our dataset.
    We use a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) model with tensorflow -- a frontier
method for analyzing text using machine learning -- to categorize software prod-
ucts according to their intended customers and (independently) by their function.
Our categorization by customer distinguishes between software products devel-
oped for the government (e.g., "smart city -- real time monitoring system on main
traffic routes") and software products developed for commercial applications (e.g.,
"visual recognition system for smart retail"). We allow for a residual category
of general application software whose description does not clearly specify the in-
tended user (e.g., "a synchronization method for multi-view cameras based on
FPGA chips"). By coding as "commercial" only those products that are specifi-
cally linked to commercial applications, and excluding products with ambiguous
 17 See   Supplementary Figure S.3 for an example contract.
 18 Source:  https://go.aws/37GbAZG.


                                                13
use, we aim to be conservative in our measure of commercial software products.
    Our categorization by function first identifies software products that are di-
rectly related to AI (e.g., "a method for pedestrian counting at crossroads based on
multi-view cameras system in complicated situations"). Within the category of AI
software, we also separately identify a subcategory of software that is particularly
data-intensive: video-based facial recognition, which (as opposed to static images)
requires N-to-1 or even N-to-N matching algorithms that are extremely data de-
manding. Finally, we identify a separate category of non-AI software products
that are data-complementary, involving data storage, data transmission, or data
management (e.g., "a computer cluster for webcam monitoring data storage").
    To implement the two dimensions of categorization using the RNN model, we
manually label 13,000 software products to produce a training corpus. We then
use word-embedding to convert sentences in the software descriptions into vec-
tors based on word frequencies, where we use words from the full dataset as the
dictionary. We use a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) algorithm, configured with
2 layers of 32 nodes. We use 90% of the data for algorithm training, while 10% is
retained for validation. We run 10,000 training cycles for gradient descent on the
accuracy loss function. The categorizations perform well in general: we are able to
achieve 72% median accuracy in categorizing software customer and 98% median
accuracy in categorizing software function in the validation data. Appendix Fig-
ure A.1 shows the summary statistics of the categorization output by customers
and by function; and, Appendix Figure A.2 presents the confusion matrix (Type-I
and Type-II errors) of the predictions relative to categorization done by humans.19
Measuring the quantity of government data to which firms have access We con-
struct two proxies for access to greater amounts of government data. We begin
by distinguishing among government contract awarding agencies. Procurement
contracts awarded by a public security agency are most likely to provide access
to massive, linkable, personal data, collected for monitoring purposes, while con-
tracts with other agencies likely provide access to less data. Take, as an example
from our dataset, a public security contract signed between an AI firm and a mu-
nicipal police department in Heilongjiang Province to "increase the capacity of its
identity information collection system" on August 29th, 2018. The contract spec-
  19 Supplementary Table S.1 presents the top words (in terms of frequency) used for the categoriza-

tion. Supplementary Figure S.4 presents the density plots of the algorithm's category predictions.


                                                14
ifies that the AI firm shall provide a facial recognition system that can store and
analyze at least 30 million facial images -- a substantial amount of data to which
the firm obtains access. In contrast, consider a non-public security contract in our
dataset signed between an AI firm and a provincial bank in Gansu Province to
"establish its facial recognition system" on November 20th, 2018. The system is
aimed at providing identification services for the bank's clients, suggesting that
the AI firm obtains access to a relatively small amount of data (i.e., identified faces)
compared to a public security contract.
    Our first empirical definition of a data-rich contract is a contract with a pub-
lic security agency, the effects of which we compare to those of data-scarce pro-
curement contracts, awarded by government agencies unrelated to public security
(e.g., contracts with schools to monitor cheating during exams). Such non-public
security contracts indicate a firm's relationship with the government, but do not
provide access to large amounts of personally identified facial data.20
    Our measure of public security contracts is comprehensive. We capture the fol-
lowing four types of contracts from the Chinese Government Procurement Database:
(i) all contracts for China's flagship surveillance/monitoring projects -- Skynet
Project, Peaceful City Project, and Bright Transparency Project; (ii) all contracts with lo-
cal police departments; (iii) all contracts with the border control and national secu-
rity units; and, (iv) all contracts with the administrative units for domestic security
and stability maintenance, the government's political and legal affairs commission,
and various "smart city" and digital urban management units of the government.
    We identify 28,023 public security procurement contracts involving at least one
facial recognition AI firm. Many firms receive multiple contracts: 7.2% (12.6%) of
the facial recognition AI firms in our dataset receive at least one public security
(non-public security) procurement contract; and 5.2% of the facial recognition AI
firms receive at least one contract of each type.
    We next distinguish among contracts within the set of public security contracts,
identifying those that are likely to be especially rich in data for facial recognition
AI firms. In particular, we identify contracts with public security agencies possess-
ing greater video surveillance capacity, which we measure using 5,837 prefectural
  20 We identify 410,510 public security contracts in total. Both the public security and non-public
security contracts have steadily increased since 2013. See Supplementary Figure S.5.




                                                15
 Figure 1: Circle size indicates the number of first AI contracts awarded in the prefecture. Circle
 shading indicates the fraction of first AI contracts that were data-rich or data-scarce, where the
within-prefecture variation comes from changes in the number of surveillance cameras over time.

government contracts for surveillance cameras.21 We sum the number of cameras
procured in each prefecture up to a certain date and divide this by the prefecture's
population to form a time-varying measure of the video surveillance capacity of a
particular prefecture.22 Our second -- and preferred -- empirical definition of a
data-rich contract is one with a public security agency located in a prefecture that
has above-median surveillance capacity (measured by cameras per capita) at the
time the contract was awarded. Therefore, this captures the amount of identifiable
data that a firm may gain access to.23 Figure 1 shows the distribution of data-rich
and data-scarce contracts across prefectures according to this second, preferred
definition.24 We compare the effects of these data-rich contracts to data-scarce
public security contracts, now defined as contracts awarded by a public security
agency, but located in a prefecture that has below-median surveillance capacity at
the time the contract was awarded. We prefer this definition of a data-rich con-
tract given the fineness of the comparison within a set of firms that selected into a
similar set of public security contracts.
Summary statistics Appendix Table A.2 presents summary statistics describing
  21 There  are on average 77 contracts per prefecture. In Supplementary Figure S.6, we present a
time series plot of the number of cameras in our data over time.
  22 This measure captures the stock of newer surveillance cameras at the time, but not the older

ones. The focus on newer cameras is appropriate given their higher resolution and thus greater
usefulness in identifying and matching faces. This is affirmed in the Chinese central government's
official directive on public security video surveillance; source: https://bit.ly/3dqdjU0.
  23 Note that the existence of a national ID system in China likely implies that there is limited

variation across local public security agencies in identified personal images. Moreover, even if firms
did not gain access to identified data, surveillance video alone would still be useful for many AI
applications.
  24 By measuring data-richness at the time of the contract, we ensure that secular trends in surveil-

lance capacity do not skew our measure toward coding later contracts as data-richer.


                                                 16
the firms in our sample. Firms receiving different types of contracts differ substan-
tially from each other, so accounting for differences (both observable and unob-
servable) between the firms receiving data-rich and data-scarce contracts will be
crucial to identify the effects of the contracts. Interestingly, some patterns of selec-
tion into contracts that are data-rich differ depending on the definition used: for
example, firms receiving public security contracts are better capitalized than firms
receiving non-public security contracts (40 vs. 13 million USD), but firms receiving
public security contracts in high-surveillance prefectures are less well capitalized
than firms receiving public security contracts in low-surveillance prefectures (13
vs. 61 million USD). This suggests that simple selection stories will not easily ac-
count for effects of data-rich contracts seen along both margins of comparison.
    Appendix Table A.3 presents summary statistics describing the contracts procur-
ing AI services in our sample.25 Data-scarce and data-rich contracts differ on di-
mensions other than in the quantity of data to which firms receive access, so ac-
counting for alternative mechanisms (other than data provision) through which
data-rich contracts might affect software production will be crucial to identifying
the causal effects of interest. However, it is worth noting that the differences ob-
served between data-rich and data-scarce contracts often reverse depending on
which definition of data-rich is used. For example, public security contracts are on
average issued by a lower administrative unit than non-public security contracts
(28% vs. 34% by provincial level or above), but public security contracts issued
in prefectures with above-median surveillance capacity are issued by a higher ad-
ministrative unit than public security contracts issued in prefectures with below-
median surveillance capacity (31% vs. 14% by provincial level or above). Finding
consistent effects of data-rich contracts across definitions will argue against simple
alternative hypotheses regarding unobserved contract characteristics.


5       The impact of access to government data on AI firms
5.1         Empirical model and identification strategy
We use a triple differences design to identify the effects of accessing government
data on facial recognition AI firms' subsequent product development and inno-
    25 In
       Appendix Table A.4, we provide descriptive statistics for the prefectures where contracts
were issued, again disaggregating by the type of agency and by surveillance capacity.


                                              17
vation. The empirical strategy exploits variation across time and across firms in
the receipt of a government contract, and across types of government contracts
that firms receive. Specifically, as in an event study design, we compare firms'
outcomes -- their software releases -- before and after they receive their first gov-
ernment contracts, controlling for firm and time period fixed effects. To help pin
down the importance of access to government data, rather than other benefits of
government contracts, such as capital, reputation, and political connections, we
exploit variation in the type of the government contract received.
    We test whether firms receiving data-rich contracts differentially increase their
software production following receipt of the contract. To do so, we estimate the
following empirical model:

               yit =    1T Tit Datai +  2T Tit + t + i +  Tit Xi +                 it .
                       T                    T                         T
The outcome variable, yit , is the cumulative number of software releases by firm
i up to the semi-year period t. The explanatory variables of interest are the in-
teraction terms between a set of dummy variables, Tit , indicating semi-year time
periods before or since firm i received its first contract, and Datai , a dummy vari-
able indicating whether the firm's first contract was data rich, as defined above.26
    The coefficients on the interaction terms (i.e., on  Tit × Datai ) non-parametrically
capture a firm's differential production of new software approaching or following
the arrival of initial data-rich contracts, relative to data-scarce ones. To account
for time-varying sources of variation in software production common to all facial
recognition firms (for example, government industrial policy promoting AI), we
include time period fixed effects, t in all specifications. We also include firm fixed
effects, i , in all specifications, allowing us to control for all (observable or un-
observable) time-invariant firm characteristics. Finally, in addition to estimating a
parsimonious model without controls, we also estimate a model including a vector
of pre-contract firm characteristics (Xi ) interacted with time period fixed effects.27
We allow the error term it to be correlated not only across observations for a single
firm, but also across observations for firms that are related by common ownership
by a single mother firm.28
  26 We focus on the effect of the initial contract, because the receipt of subsequent contracts is
endogenous to firms' performance in their initial contracts.
  27 Controls are firms' year of establishment, capitalization, and pre-contract software production.
  28 We cluster standard errors at the mother firm-level to be conservative; clustering standard



                                                 18
    Our empirical strategy allows us to address important threats to identification.
A particular concern is non-random assignment of contracts to firms. We account
for fixed firm characteristics that may determine selection into data-rich contracts
as well software production by including a full set of firm fixed effects. We can test
whether firms produced different amounts of software prior to receipt of a data-
rich contract by testing whether  1T differ from zero prior to contract receipt (that
is, conducting a test of parallel pre-treatment trends). To address the possibility
that ex ante firm characteristics shape selection into contracts and software produc-
tion in a time-varying way, we control for firm characteristics interacted with time
periods. A second important concern is that contract characteristics other than
data may affect software production. Many of these (such as a signal of a firm's
connection to the government) are accounted for by differencing out the effects of
data-scarce contracts, and we will also directly control for a contract's monetary
size and a prefecture's GDP per capita interacted with time period fixed effects. In
addition to including these controls, we will also present more direct evidence on
the importance of data, as well as evidence against alternative mechanisms.


5.2     Results
5.2.1   Baseline estimates and robustness checks

We first estimate our baseline specification, comparing the effects of public secu-
rity contracts to non-public security contracts on firms' production of software. In
Figure 2, Panel A, we plot the coefficients  1T , describing the differential software
production around the time when a public security contract was received, rela-
tive to a non-public security contract (all coefficients are presented in Appendix
Table A.5). We show 95% confidence intervals for all coefficients, from models
with and without controls ( T Tit Xi ). In Panel A(a), one can see that receipt of
a public security contract is associated with differentially more government soft-
ware production than receipt of a non-public security contract. Suggesting a causal
interpretation of the effect of a public security contract, we find no evidence of
pre-contract differences in software production levels or trends. The inclusion of
controls for time-varying effects of firm characteristics has little effect on our find-
ings. In Panel A(b), one can see that receipt of a public security contract is also
errors at the firm level allows us to make even more precise inferences.


                                                19
                      (a) Government                          (b) Commercial




                    Panel A: Public security vs. non-public security contracts

                      (a) Government                          (b) Commercial




      Panel B: Public security contracts with high vs. low surveillance capacity prefectures


   Figure 2: Differential software development intended for government (left column) or for
     commercial uses (right column), resulting from data-rich contracts, relative to data-scarce
contracts, controlling for firm and time period fixed effects. Panel A defines data-rich contracts as
all public security contracts. Panel B defines them as public security contracts in prefectures with
above-median surveillance capacity. Translucent lines/markers additionally interact pre-contract
                   firm characteristics with a full set of time-period fixed effects.


associated with differentially more commercial software production than receipt of
a non-public security contract. Again supporting a causal interpretation of the ef-
fect of a public security contract, we find no evidence of pre-contract differences
in software production levels or trends. The inclusion of controls for time-varying
effects of firm characteristics has little effect on our findings.
    We next, in Figure 2, Panel B, plot regression coefficients analogous to those
in Panel A, but now considering variation in data-richness within the set of public
security contracts. Specifically, we compare the effects of public security contracts
in prefectures with above-median surveillance capacity (data-rich contracts) with
those that have below-median surveillance capacity (data-scarce contracts). All
coefficients are presented in Appendix Table A.6. This is our preferred proxy of


                                                 20
data-richness as it accounts for two potential concerns about our previous com-
parison between public and non-public security contracts. First, that firm selection
into public and non-public security contracts may be different. Second, that public
and non-public security contracts may differ beyond the quantity of government
data the firms can access (e.g., the type of government software developed and
its production process could also differ). We focus on our preferred proxy for
data-richness in our subsequent empirical analyses, but results are qualitatively
identical comparing public security and non-public security contracts instead.
     In Figure 2, Panel B(a), we examine government software production. One can
see that receipt of a data-rich public security contract is associated with differen-
tially more government software production than receipt of a data-scarce public
security contract. Suggesting a causal interpretation of the effect of a data-rich
public security contract, we find no evidence of pre-contract differences in soft-
ware production levels or trends. The inclusion of controls for time-varying effects
of firm characteristics does not affect our findings. In Figure 2, Panel B(b), one sees
that receipt of a data-rich public security contract is also associated with differ-
entially more commercial software production than receipt of a data-scarce public
security contract. Again supporting a causal interpretation, we find no evidence of
pre-contract differences in software production levels or trends. The inclusion of
controls for time-varying effects of firm characteristics has little effect on our find-
ings. In terms of magnitudes, we see in Figure 2, Panel B, that receipt of a data-rich
public security contract increases government software production by 2.9 and in-
creases commercial software by 1.9 products over 3 years -- on top of the effect of
a data-scarce public security contract.
Interpretation As discussed in Section 3, the results presented above indicate
economies of scope in AI innovation arising from government data being shared
across commercial and government uses. In particular, the results imply that the
benefits coming from access to government data outweigh any crowding-out of
other resources from commercial software production, and that other inputs avail-
able in the private market must not be close substitutes for the government data
firms are able to access. Importantly, our results are not merely capturing differen-
tially less crowding out: we observe an overall positive effect of all types of govern-




                                          21
ment contracts on commercial software production, and differentially larger effects
of data-rich contracts than data-scarce ones (see Appendix Figures A.3­ A.4).
    The results presented thus far do not appear to be the result of differential se-
lection by firms into data-rich contracts. First, we find no evidence of pre-contract
differences in software production levels or trends, which one would expect if
firms selected into data-rich government contracts as a function of their produc-
tivity trends. Second, by differencing out the effects of data-scarce contracts (ei-
ther non-public security contracts or public security contracts in prefectures with
below-median surveillance capacity), we account for time-varying selection into
receiving either a government or public security contract. Third, by controlling
for the time-varying effects of firms' age and pre-contract software production, we
address concerns about firms selecting into data-rich government contracts as a
function of their potential production growth. Finally, by controlling for the time-
varying effects of firms' pre-contract capitalization, we account for selection into
data-rich contracts on firms' potential benefit from the capital provided by a gov-
ernment contract. We find evidence of economies of scope arising from govern-
ment data even including this full range of controls. In Sections 5.2.2 and 5.2.3, we
provide further evidence of the importance of government data.
Robustness Given the complex process of constructing our dataset, it is impor-
tant to note that our findings are robust to varying several salient dimensions of
our analysis (see Appendix Table A.7). First, our results are robust to adjustments
of the key RNN LSTM classification algorithm parameter choices -- timestep, em-
bedding, and node (see Panel A). Second, the results are robust to adjustments of
the LSTM classification threshold (see Panel B). Third, our results are robust to con-
sidering a balanced panel of firms within a narrow window, and to expanding the
window of time around the receipt of the first contract that we study (see Panel C).
Finally, our results are robust to adjusting our classification of (data-rich) public
security contracts to exclude any ambiguous government agencies (e.g., contracts
with the government headquarters could be meant to provide security services just
for the government office building; see Panel D).




                                         22
5.2.2     Additional evidence of the importance of data as an input

Our proposed mechanism of economies of scope arising from government data
suggests that data-rich government contracts are more valuable to firms than data-
scarce contracts. It is thus natural to test whether: (i) firms submit lower bids for
data-rich contracts; and, (ii) more firms submit bids for data-rich contracts. While
we do not have bidding information for all contracts, we use those contracts for
which this information is available to estimate the relationship between bid val-
ues and local surveillance camera capacity at the time the contract was awarded,
as well as the relationship between the number of bidders and local surveillance
capacity. The patterns match what we expect (see Appendix Figure A.5): data-rich
contracts are associated with lower bids -- even controlling for bidding firm fixed
effects (p-value = 0.13) -- and with more bidding firms (p-value = 0.05).
    Under our proposed mechanism, firms receiving access to unprecedented quan-
tities of data may need to develop tools to manage that data (e.g., software support-
ing data storage). We next test whether firms receiving data-rich contracts differen-
tially produce data-complementary software. Importantly, these data-complementary
software products are distinct from the AI software studied above. In Appendix
Figure A.6, Panel A, we present estimates from the same specification as in Panel B
of Figure 2, but now considering the outcome of data-complementary software
products. One can see that the data-complementary software production differen-
tially increases after the receipt of a data-rich public security contract.29 We find no
evidence of pre-contract differences in data-complementary software production
levels or trends, suggesting a causal effect of data-rich public security contracts.30
    Our proposed mechanism suggests that access to government data will not
only increase the quantity of software production, but also the quality. While
we cannot directly observe the quality of software produced, we can test whether
  29 We  find that data-complementary software increases after receipt of both data-scarce and data-
rich contracts, with effects being significantly greater in the latter (see Appendix Figure A.6, Panel
A, left and middle columns).
   30 The production of data-complementary software can be seen as an alternative empirical proxy

for firms' receiving access to particularly large quantities of data. Analogous to our previous com-
parison between high and low surveillance capacity public security contracts, one would expect
differentially more government and commercial AI software production among firms that pro-
duced data-complementary software after receiving a public security contract. In Appendix Fig-
ure A.7, one can see that public security contracts that led to data-complementary software pro-
duction within the first year of the contracts were associated with differentially more government
and commercial software production.


                                                 23
data-rich contracts lead to increased production of the most demanding form of
facial recognition AI: that using video. Indeed, we find significantly greater video
facial recognition AI software production following receipt of a data-rich contract
(see Appendix Figure A.8).
    A final set of tests arises from an examination of firms that produced video
facial recognition AI software for the government following receipt of a public se-
curity contract: this software is the most data-intensive facial recognition AI soft-
ware, presumably requiring access to the greatest quantity of government data.31
We examine whether these firms also differentially produce more government and
commercial software after receiving a data-rich public security contract. One can
see in Appendix Figure A.9 that indeed they do. Moreover, we note that the mag-
nitudes of the coefficients when considering the post-contract production of gov-
ernment video AI as a proxy for the data-richness of the contract are nearly double
those using our other proxies, consistent with the idea that video AI software is
particularly data-intensive.
    A range of tests, exploiting multiple margins of variation in access to govern-
ment data, all point in the same direction: beyond other mechanisms through
which contracts may affect output, access to government data plays a crucial role.

5.2.3   Evaluating alternative hypotheses

While a range of analyses suggest an important role for economies of scope aris-
ing from access to government data in shaping firms' production of AI software,
it is important to consider alternative mechanisms, including alternative sources
of economies of scope. For a parsimonious presentation of the varied empirical
exercises to come, in Figure 3 we plot regression coefficients and confidence inter-
vals only for differential effects of data-rich contracts 3 years following contract
receipt, defining data-rich contracts as those public security contracts from prefec-
tures with above median surveillance capacity. The figure plots these estimates
specification-by-specification. We also present more complete sets of estimates in
Appendix Tables A.5 to A.8, including those resulting from defining data-rich con-
tracts as public security contracts instead.
  31 Firms that produce video facial recognition AI for the government after receiving a data-
rich public security contract also differentially produce more data-complementary software post-
contract. See Appendix Figure A.9 and Figure A.6, Panel B.


                                              24
                      (a) Government                        (b) Commercial




 Figure 3: Software development intended for government (left, (a)) and commercial (right, (b))
 use relative to the time of receiving initial procurement contract. Figure shows coefficient on the
interaction for high surveillance capacity 3 years after public security contract receipt, controlling
for firm and time period fixed effects and adding various controls. Solid dots indicate significance
                 at the 10% level or better. Results presented in Appendix Table A.6.

Differences in the terms and tasks under data-rich contracts One naturally won-
ders whether firms receiving data-rich public security contracts are engaged in
similar work to firms receiving data-scarce public security contracts. We first ex-
amine whether differences in contractual terms may play a role in generating our
results. To quantify the content of each public security contract (high or low capac-
ity), we calculate the vector distance between the language of each public security
contract in our dataset and a random sample of 500 non-public security contracts
using Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT; Devlin et
al., 2018). We control for this contract-specific distance measure interacted with
time period fixed effects, and find that it cannot fully explain our results (see Fig-
ure 3 and Appendix Table A.8, Panel A).
     We next compare the registered descriptions of firms' government software
produced immediately following receipt of a data-rich or data-scarce public se-
curity contract. To quantify the content of each government software product de-
scription, we calculate the vector distance between the language of the government
software descriptions and a random sample of 500 commercial software product
descriptions, again using BERT. We test whether receipt of a data-rich contract dif-
ferentially affects the government software produced by a firm (relative to receipt
of a data-scarce contract); we find a very tight null result (government software
descriptions change by around 1% of a standard deviation, with a p-value of 0.89).
These results suggest that our findings are not driven by differences in the content
of government software produced under data-rich and data-scarce contracts.
Learning by doing It is possible that data-rich contracts generate more AI soft-
ware not because of the data they provide, but because of firms' opportunities for


                                                 25
learning by doing under these contracts. In particular, we evaluate two such al-
ternative hypothesis. First, producing more government software might directly
increase productivity in commercial software production. Second, due to differ-
ences in production processes, some types of government software may increase
firm productivity in commercial software production more than others.
     Note, however, that while learning by doing may be important in explaining
the overall effects of contracts on software production, for it to explain our differen-
tial effects between data-rich and data-scarce contracts, it would have to be that the
potential for learning (either due to the quantity or type of government software)
was positively correlated with data-richness.32 Two pieces of evidence suggest that
such systematically different learning by doing is not driving our main results.
     First, the potential for learning due to the quantity of software produced should
presumably be stronger for firms with lower levels of production prior to the re-
ceipt of a contract. The time-varying control for pre-contract software production
in the specification with controls (estimated above) allows us to (imperfectly) ac-
count for this. In addition, we estimate our baseline specification, but now includ-
ing time-varying controls for pre-contract government software production, soft-
ware production in the corresponding category, or software production in the op-
posite category (e.g., controlling for government software production when exam-
ining commercial software production as outcomes). These controls only slightly
reduce the effect of a data-rich contract (see Appendix Table A.8, Panel B).
     Second, systematic differences in the type of government software may be more
of a concern when we compare public and non-public security contracts, since the
production processes for the associated government software may be different.
Yet, for our preferred comparison within the set of public security contracts, we
view such positive correlation as much less likely. In fact, we have shown above
that the description of government software produced following the receipt of a
data-rich public security contract is very similar to the software produced after the
receipt of a data-scarce one, suggesting that the underlying production processes
and types of government software should be similar as well.
  32 Some  forms of what could be thought of as learning by doing are precisely part of the mecha-
nism that we are trying to capture. For example, we expect improved algorithmic performance as a
result of more predictions made on larger datasets. If algorithms, as opposed to data, are sharable
across uses we would also label this as economies of scope arising from government data.




                                                26
Government contracts as sources of capital Another important consideration is
that contracts may affect firms' software production through the provision of capi-
tal. We attempted to account for this channel above by differencing out the impact
of "data-scarce" contracts and by controlling for the time-varying effects of firms'
pre-contract capitalization, but we can also address this concern in two other ways.
First, we can directly control for the monetary value of the contract interacted with
time period fixed effects (formally  T Tit valuei ). We add these interactions to our
baseline specification and find that they do not affect our results (see Figure 3 and
Appendix Table A.8, Panel A). Second, we add to our baseline specification inter-
actions between a firm's pre-contract amount of external financing and the full set
of time period fixed effects (formally  T Tit × f inancingi ). Again, they have no
impact on our results (see Figure 3 and Appendix Table A.8, Panel A).
Government contracts as signals It is also possible that receipt of a data-rich con-
tract may function as a signal of firm quality or potential: perhaps firms receiving
a government contract receive additional benefits from local industrial policy, or
attract additional external funding, human capital, or customers, all of which con-
tribute to the production of software. To test whether the signaling value of data-
rich contracts accounts for our findings, we first examine the effects of a firm's first
contract, but limiting our analysis to subsidiary firms belonging to a mother firm
that has already received a government contract through a different subsidiary. Ar-
guably, the signaling value of these first contracts should be lower (mother firm
quality is already observed), while access to data remains potentially extremely
valuable. In Appendix Table A.8, Panel C, one can see that within this sample of
first contracts there is still a significant differential effect of receiving a data-rich
contract on both government and commercial software production.
Different commercial opportunities associated with data-rich contracts A last
important set of concerns is that contracts with governments in prefectures with
high surveillance capacity may offer different commercial opportunities for rea-
sons other than the additional data to which firms gain access. First, high-surveillance
prefectures may also be richer commercial markets; a contract with a local gov-
ernment in a richer prefecture could affect software production. To evaluate this
possibility, we control for the GDP per capita of the administrative unit where a




                                           27
firm's first government contract was issued, interacted with time period fixed ef-
fects (formally  T Tit × marketi ). Adding these interactions to our baseline specifi-
cation does not affect our results (see Figure 3 and Appendix Table A.8, Panel A). A
second possibility is that contracts with two very specific high-surveillance prefec-
tures may disproportionately affect our results: Beijing and Shanghai. Contracts
with these powerful local governments may offer a range of political and eco-
nomic opportunities that go beyond access to data. To rule out the possibility that
our findings are distorted by contracts with these two local governments, we esti-
mate our baseline specification, but excluding contracts with Beijing and Shanghai
governments. Our findings are qualitatively unchanged (see Appendix Table A.8,
Panel D). A third possibility is that contracts with a firm's home-province govern-
ment may give the firm some commercial advantage, beyond the effects of data.
To rule this out, we estimate our baseline model, but excluding contracts signed
between firms and any government in their home province. We again find that
our results are unaffected (see Appendix Table A.8, Panel D).

    Our empirical results thus paint a clear picture: after receiving government
contracts that provide them with greater access to government data, firms are able
to use that data to develop not only government software products, but also com-
mercial software products. This is possible due to the economies of scope aris-
ing from government data, rather than other mechanisms. We next explore the
macroeconomic implications of these findings.


6    Macro implications of firms' government data access
In our empirical analysis of Section 5, we have observed some of the firm-level con-
sequences of access to government data: an increase in government data available
to firms increases their data-intensive innovation. However, this evidence does
not imply that such policy will shift the aggregate direction of innovation or the
economy's growth rate. There are two main reasons why the microeconomic and
macroeconomic implications may diverge. The first is that increases in innovation
by firms accessing government data may crowd-out resources from other innovat-
ing firms. The second is that, in general equilibrium, relative prices may change,
thus affecting innovation as well. Moreover, even if the economy's growth rate


                                         28
did increase, it would not necessarily imply that increasing firms' access to gov-
ernment data would increase welfare. A higher consumption growth rate is offset
by a lower level of consumption due to crowding-out of resources by innovation
and government data production.
   Thus, in this section, we examine how access to government data affects the
direction of innovation, growth, and welfare in data-intensive economies, with
these considerations taken into account. To do so, we build a directed technical
change model (Acemoglu, 2002) with data as an input and economies of scope.


6.1    A directed technical change model with data as an input

Model overview We model an economy in which firms innovate to develop and
supply differentiated varieties of government and commercial (private) software --
which require data in production -- as well as other, non-software, varieties --
which do not. Commercial software and non-software varieties are intermediate
inputs into the production of a final good. A representative household consumes
the final good and owns all firms. Government software varieties are purchased by
the state as intermediate inputs to produce a government good. To be concrete and
link it to our empirical setting, we refer to this government good as "surveillance."
    As in Section 3, we assume that government data can be shared across uses
within the firm. Specifically, government data is necessary for producing gov-
ernment software and the same data can simultaneously be used for producing
commercial software -- where it is not necessary and is instead a gross substitute
with private data. Government data is supplied by the state and is produced as
a by-product of surveillance. Private data is supplied by a representative firm as
a by-product of all private transactions in the economy as measured by total out-
put of the final good.33 Furthermore, while both types of data are excludable, we
assume that only private data can be purchased in the market. In contrast, as in
Section 3, government data can only be accessed by obtaining a contract for pro-
ducing government software varieties for the state.
    The state chooses a policy that involves: a level of expenditures on surveillance
(which determines the amount of government data produced), an amount of gov-
  33 This corresponds, for instance, to information collected from consumers when performing on-
line transactions. Note that, with this setup, we are ignoring interesting issues regarding how to
allocate private data property rights between firms and consumers.

                                               29
ernment data supplied to firms that obtain a contract to produce government soft-
ware varieties, and the levels of lump sum taxes of, and transfers to, households.
Given a state policy, potential entrants can choose to innovate on and supply new
varieties of government software, commercial software, both types of software, or
only non-software varieties. Firms will innovate and enter such that, in a balanced
growth path equilibrium, all sectors grow at the same rate, and profits are equal-
ized across sectors. We next describe this economy formally.
Goods production Consider an economy with three intermediate good sectors
producing: commercial (private) software Yc , government software Yg , and other
non-software products Yz . Within each sector i, there is a measure Ni of differenti-
ated product varieties j of quality qi ( j). A representative sectoral firm has produc-
tion technology:
                                          1               Ni             1
                                 Yi =           1
                                                               qi ( j)1-  dj.                  (1)
                                         1-           0

We assume the firm is competitive and maximizes static profits taking sectoral
prices pi and product variety prices pi ( j) as given. This gives inverse demand
schedules:
                                                                    1
                                        pi ( j ) = pi qi ( j )-  .                             (2)

   A representative firm then combines private software and non-software to pro-
duce a final good Y using a CES aggregator:
                                           -1                           -1   -1
                              Y = aYz           + (1 - a)Yc                       .            (3)

We again assume the firm is competitive and maximizes profits given prices pc and
pz , and the price of Y which we normalize to 1. This implies that prices satisfy:
                                                                                       1
                                           1-                                1-       1-
                        1 = ( a) ( pz )             + (1 - a ) ( p c )                     .   (4)

Innovators A software variety j is supplied by a monopolist "innovator." As in
Section 3, we assume that producing software of a higher quality is data-intensive.34
Dropping the j index for notational convenience, government software production
uses government data d g and intermediate goods x g to produce a variety of quality
q g . Commercial software production uses both government and private data, d g
  34 For example, one measure of quality of AI facial recognition software is prediction accuracy.
This is higher when larger datasets are used in training the AI algorithms.

                                                     30
and d p , as well as intermediates xc to produce a variety of quality qc .
    Specifically, we assume that the firms may produce government and commer-
cial software using the following technologies (a special case of those in Section 3):
                                                       1- 
                        q g (d g , x g ) = (d g )  x g                                           (5)
                                                                              
                                                     -1                 -1    -1 
                                                                                     1- 
                    qc (d g , d p , xc ) =         d g  + (1 -  ) d p               xc     ,     (6)

where  < 1 governs the relative productivity of government vis-à-vis private
data, and  > 1 describes their gross substitutability in commercial software pro-
duction.35 With this specification,  is a key parameter governing the strength of
economies of scope generated by government data.
   Next, we consider the profit maximization problem for a software variety of
quality q. We assume that private data can be purchased in the market at price pd .
Moreover, we assume that intermediate goods x g , xc cost  units of the final good
(whose price is normalized to 1) and that varieties never depreciate.36
   These assumptions, together with demand schedules for a variety having con-
stant elasticity  imply that, for any sectoral price pi and government data d g , the
flow of profits from a variety are:
                                                                   1
                      g (d g , p g ) = max p g q g (d g , x g )1-  -  x g                        (7)
                                             xg
                                                                        1
                 c (d g , pc , pd ) = max pc qc (d g , d p , xc )1-  -  xc - pd d p ,            (8)
                                         x c ,d p

and the corresponding input demand schedules are d p (d g , pc , pd ), xc (d g , pc , pd ), x g (d g , p g ).
    Next, we describe how new varieties are introduced. We assume that innova-
tors can invest 1 unit of the final consumption good in R&D in order to produce
µi new varieties in sector i -- thus becoming the monopolist supplier of those va-
rieties forever.37 Then, given total R&D spending Ri for sector i, new varieties
accumulate according to:
                                                     i = µi Ri
                                                    N                                            (9)
  35 The  assumption of gross substitutability is important because, as will be seen below, it allows
innovators to produce commercial software even without access to government data.
  36 As in Acemoglu (2002), if varieties depreciate slowly, this would not change the balanced-

growth path equilibrium -- which will be our focus -- but only the transitional dynamics.
  37 We use a "lab equipment model" of innovation which emphasizes reproducible resources, like

electricity and hardware, that play an important role in the context of AI. A more realistic model
would incorporate researchers too, as in a "knowledge-based R&D model" (Acemoglu, 1998).



                                                          31
     The entry decision is somewhat nuanced due to the fact that government data
can be shared across uses and that there is no market for such data. We assume
the following sequence of events takes place. A software innovator can first decide
whether to attempt to obtain a government contract or not by paying a cost F. If
the innovator decides not to make an attempt, it can choose to introduce a new
commercial software variety without access to government data (d g = 0). If it
decides to make an attempt, it obtains a government contract with probability .
The contract commits the innovator to produce a new government software variety
and provides the innovator with access to a fixed quantity of government data
d¯g . The innovator can then choose to also introduce a new commercial software
variety using government data in its production. Finally, if the innovator does not
obtain the government contract, it can again choose to introduce a new commercial
software variety without access to government data.
     We consider a balanced growth path (BGP) with constant interest rate r and
free-entry of innovators. This implies that the expected present discounted value
of profits net of the unit cost of R&D investment must be zero for both government
and commercial software innovators. Given these assumptions and setting µ g =
µc = 1, a BGP equilibrium with both types of software firms present requires:38
           g (d¯g , p g )             c (d¯g , pc , pd )                                c (0, pc , pd )
F=                        - 1 + max                      - 1, 0          + (1 - ) max                   - 1, 0 ,
               r                             r                                               r
                                                                                             (10)
     c (0, pc , pd )
1=                   .                                                     (11)
           r
Finally, for non-software innovators which do not require data as an input, the
                                                         1- 
R&D investment yields new varieties with quality qz = xz , where xz is again
intermediate goods. This results in profits:
                                                          1
                                                       1- 
                               z ( pz ) = max pz qz            -  xz .                       (12)
                                             xz

   The free-entry condition for non-software innovators is then:
                                                  z ( pz )
                                        1 = µz             .                                 (13)
                                                    r
  38 As seen in equation (10), we abstract from the possibility that government production crowds-

out resources from commercial production. We do so for simplicity and because, empirically, we
have shown that the sharability of government data dominates, resulting in overall crowding-in.



                                                  32
Representative household We assume the existence of a representative house-
                                      1- 
hold with CRRA flow utility u(C ) = C1- , where C is consumption of final goods
and  is the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Then, given
discount rate , the present discounted utility is:
                                            
                                               e-t u(Ct )dt                                 (14)
                                        0
    The household maximizes utility subject to the budget constraint:
                                       t  At rt + t - Tt ,
                                 Ct + A                                                     (15)

where At are assets, t are profits coming from all firms, and Tt are taxes.
Data supply and the state The state purchases the government software aggre-
gate Yg at price p g in order produce surveillance G with linear technology G = Yg .
It sets lump sum taxes T on households so that budget balance holds at each time:

                                            pg G = T.                                       (16)

   Aggregate government data Dg is produced as a by-product of government
surveillance: specifically, one unit of surveillance, G, produces  g units of govern-
ment data.39 Then, given a measure Ng of government software innovators and a
dataset available to them d  ¯g , we have that:

                                     Ng d¯g = Dg =  g G.                                    (17)

As can be seen in equation (17), we assume that government data is not sharable
across firms. We do so for two reasons. First, to conceptually focus on the posi-
tive and normative implications of the sharability of government data across uses
within a firm (the consequences of non-rival private data across firms have been
studied by, e.g., Jones and Tonetti, 2018). Second, because in our empirical setting
this seems to be the more relevant case. While sharing government data across
firms may be feasible from a technological standpoint, we observe local govern-
ments collecting their own surveillance data and contracting with specific firms to
analyze it, thus implicitly excluding other firms from its use. We note though, that
allowing government data to be sharable across firms as well would magnify the
overall importance of government data in our model.
  39 Inour empirical context, this government data could correspond, for example, to the video
feed from street cameras or individual administrative records. These are themselves produced as a
consequence of the surveillance and other activities of governments.



                                                 33
   We are now ready to formally define a state policy. Because we will consider a
balanced growth path, we find it more useful to define the policy in terms of vari-
ables that are stationary. In particular, we divide the level of government software
expenditures for surveillance and lump sum taxes by the level of private output.

Definition 1 (State policy) A state policy is a dataset available to government soft-
ware innovators d  ¯g , government software expenditures for surveillance purposes relative
to final good output p g G /Y, and lump sum taxes relative to final good output T /Y that
satisfy equations (16) and (17).

   Finally, we complete the description of the economy's environment with the
production of private data. A representative firm produces D p by "mining" data
out of private transactions as measured by total private output Y . Suppose it can
mine  p Y units of data out of Y , then the supply of private data is:40

                                             D p =  p Y.                                            (18)

Equilibrium We now consider a balanced growth path equilibrium (BGP) where
                                                     ~ c the total number of commer-
all variables grow at constant rate  . We denote by: N
cial software varieties produced by firms without a government contract, Ng the
number produced by firms with a government contract (which is also the number
of government software varieties), and Nz the number of non-software varieties.

Definition 2 (BGP Equilibrium) Given a state policy {d               ¯g , p g G /Y , T /Y }, a balanced-
growth path equilibrium is a set of prices { pc , pz , p g , pd , r }, relative varieties N  ~ c / Nz and
Ng / Nz , and growth rate  such that firms and households are optimizing, there is free-
entry of innovators, and all markets clear.

   Because we endogeneize the production of data and new software varieties, it is
possible that, for some parameterizations, no BGP equilibrium exists with entry of
both types of software firms: i.e., those producing commercial software alone and
those producing both government and the commercial software.41 Proposition 1
  40 Note   that this firm will be making positive profits in equilibrium. One interpretation of these
profits is that they are rents from ownership of a fixed factor that is needed in order to mine private
data. For example, in reality, the fixed factor could be the "land" on which data centers are built.
  41 This is the empirically relevant equilibrium: most AI firms produce commercial software with-

out access to government data.



                                                   34
in Appendix A.1 lays out sufficient conditions for a BGP to exist and be unique
where all types of firms are present.
   We now formally define two objects that will be of interest next. The first is the
economy's BGP growth rate  , which equals the rate of innovation in any sector i:
                                                            i
                                                            N
                                               =               .                        (19)
                                                            Ni
   The second is the bias of private innovation towards data-intensive software,
which we define as commercial software varieties relative to non-software varieties
along the BGP:
                                       Nc
                                          ,   nc =                       (20)
                                       Nz
where Nc is an output-weighted average of commercial software varieties Nc 
                                                                1- 1
~ c  + Ng (1 -  ), with  =                   qc (0, pc ,d p )
N                                                  1- 1                        1    .
                                qc (0, pc ,d p )          +qc (d¯g , pc ,d p )1- 



6.2   The consequences of government data provision
We now focus on two questions, one positive and one normative: first, how does
government data provision affect the rate and direction of innovation? Second,
how does government data provision affect welfare?
How does government data provision affect the rate and direction of innova-
tion? The next theorem shows the conditions under which policies that directly
provide more government data to innovating firms increase the economy's growth
rate and bias the direction of private innovation towards data-intensive software.

Theorem 1 (Government data provision and innovation) Assume the sufficient
conditions in Proposition 1 for a unique BGP equilibrium to exist hold. Then, an increase
in government data provided to firms (d ¯g ) will increase the rate of innovation ( ). More-
               +  (  -1)
over, if  1+ (-1) , it will also bias private innovation towards data-intensive software
(increase nc ).

Proof. See Appendix A.2.
   Beyond the formal proof, we also provide an intuitive discussion of the the-
orem in Appendix A.2. In brief, the higher profits earned by firms using gov-
ernment data will drive up the return on investment (r) under free-entry and,

                                                      35
therefore, induce higher R&D spending and increase the rate of innovation on the
BGP. Moreover, in equilibrium, innovators must be indifferent among developing
software varieties using government data, developing commercial software with-
out using government data, and developing non-software varieties. The neces-
sary price adjustments for such indifference imply that commercial software sells
at lower prices in the new equilibrium. If relative demand is sufficiently elastic
       +  (  -1)
(  1+ (-1) ), this implies that the new entry of commercial software innovators
will be sufficient to bias private innovation towards data-intensive software.
    Finally, we establish an equivalence between state policy choices which antic-
ipates some of the results in Section 7: the indirect effects of a state's choice of
surveillance levels and data collection will, in a BGP, be analogous to the direct
effects of government data provision. See Supplementary Material B.1 for a proof.

Remark 1 In a BGP equilibrium, the consequences of an increase in d    ¯g are equivalent to
those arising from an increase in surveillance spending p g G /Y or aggregate government
data Dg /Y as a share of final good output.


How does government data provision affect welfare? We showed above that
increases in d¯g can lead to a higher growth rate  . Yet, there is no reason for the
state to increase  per se. The appropriate objective for a benevolent state is to
maximize household utility. Assuming  -  (1 -  ) > 0 on a BGP (i.e., utility is
bounded), the present discounted utility of the representative household is (aside
from the initial level of output which we normalize to 1):
                                                1- 
                                   1       C              1
                           U=                                     .
                                  1-       Y           -  (1 -  )
The increase in  leads to a direct positive effect on welfare, since the growth rate of
consumption is higher. But, from the aggregate resource constraint (shown below),
we see that there are two forces that may offset such increase by decreasing the
consumption to output ratio Y C
                                (and therefore welfare) following an increase in d   ¯g :

       C                  F    g
                               N   ~
                                   N     1 Nz               -1             pg G
                                     c
         = 1-        2+          +     +                -      (1 -  ) 1 +                  .
       Y                       Y   Y     µz Y                               Y
                      Resources used in innovation           Resources used in production

First, the crowding-out of resources from consumption that are used instead for
creating new varieties (i.e., innovation). Second, the crowding-out of resources

                                               36
              1                                                                                                                          0.15




                                                                                                 Second-best government spending share
            0.99




            0.98
                                                                                                                                          0.1


            0.97
  Welfare




            0.96


                                                                                                                                         0.05
            0.95




            0.94




            0.93                                                                                                                           0
                   0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12    0.14   0.16   0.18   0.2                                                   0.7   0.75       0.8        0.85      0.9   0.95
                                     Government spending share                                                                                           Economies of scope ( )


 Figure 4: Left panel: government data provision and welfare; Right panel: Economies of scope
                                                                and second-best government data provision.

from consumption that are used instead as intermediates inputs in surveillance.
     Given this discussion, we next consider a second-best problem where the gov-
ernment chooses the level of government data provision to maximize household
welfare.42 Figure 4 shows how welfare changes when the share of government
                              p G
spending in total output Y +gpg G changes. These changes are brought about by dif-
ferent levels of government data provision d     ¯g . We report welfare in consumption
equivalent units relative to the maximum attainable welfare. To make the analysis
transparent, the benchmark parameterization underlying the figure is such that: (i)
the economy is symmetric in the sense that the direction of innovation is unbiased
 N~c     N                                                  pc Yc         pz Yz          pg G
(N z
      = Ng z
             = 1), all sectors have an identical share ( Y +  pg G = Y+ pg G = Y+ pg G =
1/3), and private and government data are identical (d      ¯g = d p (d ¯g , pc , pd )); and, (ii)
economies of scope (as governed by ) are consistent with our benchmark esti-
mates from the empirical section (to be precise, the relative elasticity of commer-
cial to government software production of around two-thirds implies  = 0.82).43
Then, we vary the level of government data provision d            ¯g from this benchmark
parameterization, keeping all other parameters fixed.
     We view this numerical exercise (and the ones in the following sections) as
qualitatively illustrating the forces at play. While we have shown direct empirical
evidence that disciplines , a comprehensive quantitative assessment would fur-
ther require measuring a number of other parameters about which we still have a
large degree of uncertainty (e.g., the substitutability of data with other inputs or
the substitutability between commercial software and non-software).
     In Figure 4, left panel, one sees that, given our parameterization of the model,
  42 Itis a second-best problem because of distortions coming from the monopoly power of inno-
vators in the decentralized equilibrium.
  43 See Supplementary Material B.3 for a more detailed description of the calibration.




                                                                                            37
the second-best government data provision results in a government spending share
of 8%. Moreover, one can see that deviations from this second-best can be rather
costly. For example, when government data is relatively scarce and the govern-
ment spending share is only 2%, then welfare is about 2% lower in consumption
equivalent units. The reason is that the growth rate is lower, and this is not suf-
ficiently compensated by less crowding-out of resources from consumption by in-
novation. The opposite is true when government data provision is too generous.
    These results beg the question as to what determines the welfare maximizing
government data provision. Is it always the case that an interior solution exists?
Or, would it sometimes be optimal for the state not to provide government data at
all? To answer this, Figure 4, right panel, shows how the welfare maximizing gov-
ernment spending share changes as economies of scope become stronger. We find
that when  is below 0.7 then it is never optimal for the state to supply government
data. Therefore, when economies of scope are sufficiently low, the second-best BGP
equilibrium would only feature the production of commercial software using pri-
vate data alone, and no production of government software or surveillance. As
economies of scope become greater, so does the second-best government spending
share, because a higher level of government data provision to firms causes larger
changes in the economy's growth rate.


7       Roles of the state in data-intensive economies
In this section, we present three applications which illustrate the varied ways that
data-intensive innovation may be shaped by the state, both directly and indirectly.

States' choice of industrial policy Traditional forms of industrial policy entail
giving direct production subsidies to a sector or subsidizing a key input. The stated
goal of such policies is often to shift the relative size of sectors (and/or the direc-
tion of innovation) to correct for market failures. Alternatively, states sometimes
directly provide key inputs that are used by private firms. These include, for exam-
ple, infrastructure -- such as transportation, water, or electric power -- as well as
public services that increase worker productivity -- such as education or health.44
    44 For
       example, see Barro (1990) for a canonical endogenous growth model with government
provided goods as an input in production.


                                          38
    Our evidence and model suggest another justification for industrial policy in
the age of data-intensive innovation. Because states are key collectors of data
and government data gives rise to economies of scope, in Section 6.2 we have
shown that it may be optimal to directly provide such data to data-intensive soft-
ware producers when they contract with the government.45 The justification is
even stronger when government services that produce data as a by-product (like
surveillance) are also directly valued by either the state or households.
    Our model also suggests that differences in production technologies across
data-intensive economies can have important effects on industrial policies. For
instance, Figure 4 has shown the consequences of variation in economies of scope,
which themselves may be due to differences in sectoral composition across economies.
    Finally, the next two applications show that, even without intending to do
so, different state policies may also have important industrial policy components,
echoing the arguments of Rodrik (2007).

States' choice of surveillance level All states engage in citizen monitoring for
the preservation of public security, potentially generating massive surveillance
datasets. At the extreme are autocratic states that aim to monitor and control their
populations to maintain power (Guriev and Treisman, 2019). In the modern world,
this need to monitor is likely to produce substantially greater data collection and
data analysis -- particularly using AI. Indeed, AI has been described by the Wall
Street Journal as part of the "autocrat's new tool kit."46 China is one prototypical
example of this phenomenon, leading the world in surveillance capacity: there
will be around 560 million public surveillance cameras installed in China by 2021,
versus approximately 85 million in the US.47
    Our model and empirical results suggest a potential alignment between surveil-
lance states and data-intensive innovation. Greater purchases of government soft-
ware and surveillance production will not only increase the state's political control,
but also produce the government data (as a by-product) that fuels innovation.
    We consider an extension of our model where the flow utility is:

                                            u(C ) +  G.                                          (21)
  45 While  we do not observe this in our empirical setting, a policy that provides government data
to all firms, not just those contracting with the state, would further foster innovation in our model.
  46 Source: https://on.wsj.com/2H1sIgu.
  47 Source: https://on.wsj.com/2UOuuIJ.



                                                 39
This captures the social welfare function of a state that values both household util-
ity and also G directly. For example,  > 0 can capture an autocratic state wanting
higher G to better monitor the population or, alternatively, a representative house-
hold that cares about security provided by the government in democracies facing
security threats.48 Differences in  across states will result in differences in govern-
ment spending and, as a result, in growth rates and the bias of private innovation.
    More concretely, consider the following thought experiment. Imagine that the
only differences between the US and Chinese economies was their . Moreover,
imagine that this fully explains why government spending on domestic security
was 40% lower in the US than China in 2018.49 We assume that the symmetric econ-
omy associated with our benchmark calibration was China. Holding all else fixed,
                                                                                  p G
we ask: what are the consequences of decreasing surveillance spending ( Y +gpg G )
by 40%? We find that the annual growth rate decreases from the benchmark 6% to
4.7% and the bias of innovation decreases from the benchmark 1 to 0.84.
    These results show that surveillance states' preferences for monitoring and con-
trolling their population may result in an inherent advantage in data-intensive in-
novation by expanding surveillance spending and the provision of government
data. While a previous literature (discussed in Section 2) has pointed out that more
autocratic regimes may impose a "tax" on private innovation through the hold
up or expropriation of entrepreneurs, our findings suggest that this autocratic tax
may be offset by surveillance states' advantage in data-intensive innovation. Note,
however, that optimal government data provision to firms and surveillance levels
chosen by the state could be very different from those preferred by citizens -- states
and citizens may have different values of . Thus, surveillance states may promote
data-intensive innovation and growth, but significantly reduce citizen welfare.

States' choice of privacy protection States not only collect and hold data, but
also regulate the collection and exchange thereof. This regulation often reflects
citizen norms regarding privacy, as many individuals express discomfort when
private data -- especially government data -- are collected and commoditized.
    We focus here on restrictions on the state's collection and sharing of data. Our
model suggests that the expression of norms regarding privacy (ultimately re-
  48 Evenselfish autocrats may value u(C ) if the probability of staying in power increases with it.
  49 US
      spending was 0.8% of GDP vis a vis 1.32% of GDP for China. Sources: https://bit.ly/
3hdzxeO, and https://bit.ly/3aDw32N.

                                                40
flected in regulation) can significantly affect the rate and direction of innovation.
Consider an extension of our model where the flow utility is:

                                           u(C ) -  Dg .                          (22)

A positive  captures households' distate towards government data production
and data sharing. If households can enforce these preferences through regulation,
then a benevolent state would produce a lower level of aggregate government
data in a BGP (i.e., a lower Dg /Y ). As a result, if such preferences vary across
economies, then the rate and direction of innovation will vary as well. However,
reduced government collection of data could be welfare-enhancing for citizens
who value privacy, despite lower growth rates and less data-intensive innovation.
    More concretely, we engage in the following thought experiment. Imagine
that the symmetric economy associated with our benchmark calibration was again
China. What would be the consequences of decreasing the amount of government
data to the level observed in Germany? Specifically, we consider decreasing Dg /Y
by 57% across BGP equilibria, which corresponds to the decrease from the number
of cameras in China (14.36 per 100 residents) to Germany (6.27 per 100 residents)
in 2018.50 We find that the annual growth rate ( ) decreases from the benchmark
6% to 4% and the bias of innovation (nc ) decreases from the benchmark 1 to 0.76.


8      Conclusion
In this paper, we analyzed direct and indirect ways in which data-intensive inno-
vation may be shaped by the state, highlighting two features of data as an input: (i)
historically, states have been key collectors of data, and (ii) data is sharable across
multiple uses within firms, giving rise to economies of scope when firms can ac-
cess government data and produce data-intensive software for government and
commercial uses.
    Our analysis suggests several directions for future research. First, we have pro-
vided a theoretical justification for government data provision as a policy to pro-
mote innovation, and evidence on one determinant of its consequences: economies
of scope. Yet, many uncertainties remain about the implications of this policy,
and a comprehensive quantitative assessment requires further measurement. For
    50 Source:   https://bit.ly/3gdoL6M.


                                                41
example, we know little about the substitutability of data with other inputs or
the technologies for supplying and collecting data. Moreover, studying a broader
range of countries and data-intensive technologies -- e.g., for health care or map-
ping -- will help us determine whether government data is as important elsewhere
as it is in China's facial recognition AI industry.
     Second, we have studied the consequences of government data collection and
provision to firms. One would also like to study the implications of private data
collection and dissemination. Private firms' possession of large datasets (e.g., those
collected by Alibaba, Baidu, Facebook, or Google) should also generate significant
economies of scope. Our analysis suggests that firm access to large private datasets
(or lack thereof) will have important consequences for innovation, competition,
and growth (see Jones and Tonetti, 2018). Empirically identifying such effects is an
important area for future work.
     Finally, our analysis sheds new light on interrelationships among innovation,
political institutions, and culture that require further study (see, e.g., Benabou et
al., 2015; Besley and Persson, 2019). Our work suggests that the alignment between
data-intensive innovation and the Chinese state's surveillance interests, as well as
permissive privacy norms, can help explain China's rise to pre-eminence in AI.
However, we find that the normative implications of greater data-intensive inno-
vation in surveillance states are complex, with higher economic growth potentially
coming at a significant welfare cost to citizens. More research is therefore needed
to understand the role of the state in determining economic, political, and social
outcomes in the age of data-intensive innovation.




                                         42
References
Acemoglu, Daron, "Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed
 Technical Change and Wage Inequality," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 November 1998, 113 (4), 1055­1089.

  , "Directed Technical Change," The Review of Economic Studies, October 2002, 69
  (4), 781­809.

   and James A Robinson, "Economic Backwardness in Political Perspective,"
  American Political Science Review, February 2006, 100 (1), 1­17.

   and , Why Nations Fail The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty, New
  York: Crown Business, August 2012.

   and Pascual Restrepo, "The wrong kind of AI? Artificial intelligence and the
  future of labour demand," Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, De-
  cember 2019, 13 (1), 25­35.

  , David Cutler, Amy Finkelstein, and Joshua Linn, "Did Medicare Induce Phar-
  maceutical Innovation?," American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, April
  2006, 96 (2), 103­107.

  , Philippe Aghion, Leonardo Bursztyn, and David Hemous, "The Environment
  and Directed Technical Change," American Economic Review, February 2012, 102
  (1), 131­166.

Aghion, Philippe, Antoine Dechezleprêtre, David Hemous, Ralf Martin, and
 John Van Reenen, "Carbon Taxes, Path Dependency, and Directed Technical
 Change: Evidence from the Auto Industry," Journal of Political Economy, Febru-
 ary 2016, 124 (1), 1­51.

  , Benjamin F Jones, and Charles I Jones, "Artificial Intelligence and Economic
  Growth," NBER Working Paper, October 2017, pp. 1­57.

Agrawal, Ajay, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, Prediction Machines The Simple
 Economics of Artificial Intelligence, Harvard Business Press, April 2018.

  , , and , eds, The Economics of Artificial Intelligence An Agenda, University of
  Chicago Press, 2019.

Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S Graff Zivin, Danielle Li, and Bhaven N Sampat, "Pub-
 lic R&D Investments and Private-sector Patenting: Evidence from NIH Funding
 Rules," The Review of Economic Studies, June 2018, 86 (1), 117­152.



                                       43
Bai, Chong-En, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Song, "Special Deals with Chinese
  Characteristics," Working Paper, May 2019, pp. 1­48.

Barro, Robert J, "Government Spending in a Simple Model of Endogeneous
  Growth," Journal of Political Economy, October 1990, 98 (5), 1­24.

Benabou, Ronald, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni, "Religion and Innova-
  tion," American Economic Review, May 2015, 105 (5), 346­351.

Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson, "The Dynamics of Environmental Politics
  and Values," Working Paper, May 2019, pp. 1­38.

Bloom, Nicholas, John Van Reenen, and Heidi L Williams, "A Toolkit of Policies
  to Promote Innovation," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2019, 33 (3), 163­184.

Bombardini, Matilde, Bingjing Li, and Ruoying Wang, "Import Competition and
  Innovation: Evidence from China," Working Paper, January 2018, pp. 1­44.

Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, Margaret Kyle, and Heidi L Williams, "The
 More We Die, The More We Sell? A Simple Test of the Home-Market Effect," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, January 2019, 134 (2), 843­894.

Devlin, Jacob, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova, "BERT:
 Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding,"
 arXiv.org, October 2018.

Farboodi, Maryam, Toxana Mihet, Thomas Philppon, and Laura L Veldkamp,
  "Big Data and Firm Dynamics," NBER Working Paper, January 2019, pp. 1­11.

Guriev, Sergei and Daniel Treisman, "Informational Autocrats," Journal of Eco-
 nomic Perspectives, November 2019, 33 (4), 100­127.

Hanlon, W Walker, "Necessity Is the Mother of Invention: Input Supplies and
 Directed Technical Change," Econometrica, February 2015, 83 (1), 67­100.

Hemous, David, "The dynamic impact of unilateral environmental policies," Jour-
 nal of International Economics, November 2016, 103 (C), 80­95.

Howell, Sabrina T, "Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D Grants," American
 Economic Review, April 2017, 107 (4), 1136­1164.

Jones, Charles I and Christopher Tonetti, "Nonrivalry and the Economics of
  Data," Working Paper, October 2018, pp. 1­43.

Lane, Nathaniel, "The New Empirics of Industrial Policy," Journal of Industry, Com-
  petition and Trade, January 2020, 59 (2), 1­26.


                                        44
Lewis, Ethan, "Immigration and Production Technology," Annual Review of Eco-
  nomics, August 2013, 5 (1), 165­191.

Moretti, Enrico, Claudia Steinwender, and John Van Reenen, "The Intellectual
 Spoils of War? Defense R&D, Productivity and International Spillovers," NBER
 Working Paper, November 2019, pp. 1­76.

Moser, Petra, "How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from
 Nineteenth-Century World's Fairs," American Economic Review, August 2005, 95
 (4), 1214­1236.

Murphy, Kevin M, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny, "Industrialization and
 the Big Push," Journal of Political Economy, October 1989, 97 (5), 1­25.

North, Douglass C, John Joseph Wallis, and Barry R Weingast, Violence and Social
 Orders, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, February 2009.

Panzar, John C and Robert D Willig, "Economies of Scope," American Economic
  Review: Papers & Proceedings, May 1981, 71 (2), 1­6.

Popp, David, "Induced Innovation and Energy Prices," American Economic Review,
  February 2002, 92 (1), 160­180.

Rodrik, Dani, "Industrial Development: Stylized Facts and Policies," Working Pa-
 per, August 2007, pp. 1­33.

Scott, James C, Seeing Like a State How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human
  Condition Have Failed, Yale University Press, 1998.

Sejnowski, Terrence J, The Deep Learning Revolution, MIT Press, October 2018.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W Vishny, The Grabbing Hand Government Patholo-
  gies and Their Cures, Harvard University Press, 2002.

Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, "Growing Like China,"
  American Economic Review, February 2011, 101 (1), 196­233.

Wei, Shang-Jin, Zhuan Xie, and Xiaobo Zhang, "From "Made in China" to "In-
 novated in China": Necessity, Prospect, and Challenges," Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, February 2017, 31 (1), 49­70.

Williams, Heidi L, "Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from
 the Human Genome," Journal of Political Economy, February 2013, 121 (1), 1­27.

Zuboff, Shoshana, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism The Fight for a Human Future
  at the New Frontier of Power, PublicAffairs, January 2019.


                                       45
                                          ONLINE APPENDIX




                          (a) Customers                                  (b) Function
Figure A.1: Summary statistics of categorization outcomes for software categorizations based on Recurrent Neural
 Network with Long Short-Term Memory algorithm. Top panel shows categorization by customers; bottom panel
                                        shows categorization by function.




                     (a) Customers
                                                               (b) Functions


  Figure A.2: Confusion matrix of categorization outcomes for software categorizations. True labels are based on
  training set constructed by human categozations (performed by two individuals). Predicted labels are outputs
based on Recurrent Neural Network with Long Short-Term Memory algorithm. Top panel shows categorization by
                            customers; bottom panel shows categorization by function.




                                                      A.1
                                                   (a) Government




                                                   (b) Commercial
 Figure A.3: Software development intended for government (Panel A) or for commercial uses (Panel B), resulting
 from public security contracts (right column) and non-public security contracts (left column), controlling for firm
and time period fixed effects. Translucent lines/markers additionally interact pre-contract firm characteristics with
                                        a full set of time-period fixed effects.




                                                        A.2
                                                   (a) Government




                                                   (b) Commercial
 Figure A.4: Software development intended for government (Panel A) or for commercial uses (Panel B), resulting
   from data-rich public security contracts (right column) and data-scarce public security contracts (left column),
controlling for firm and time period fixed effects. Translucent lines/markers additionally interact pre-contract firm
                              characteristics with a full set of time-period fixed effects.




                                                        A.3
Figure A.5: Binned scatterplots of size of bid versus prefecture surveillance capacity, conditional on company fixed
               effects (left); and of number of bidders versus prefecture surveillance capacity (right).




                        Panel A: Data-complementary, split by surveillance capacity




                    Panel B: Data-complementary, split by AI video production in year 1

Figure A.6: Panel A: Data-complementary software production resulting from data-scarce contracts (right column),
 data-rich contracts (middle column), and the difference between data-rich and data-scarce contracts (left column),
controlling for firm and time period fixed effects. Translucent lines/markers additionally interact pre-contract firm
    characteristics with a full set of time-period fixed effects. Panel B: Data-complementary software production
 resulting from public security contracts that led to government video facial recognition AI software within 1 year
 (right column), and public security contracts that did not (left column), controlling for firm and time period fixed
      effects. Translucent lines/markers additionally interact pre-contract firm characteristics with a full set of
                                                 time-period fixed effects.




                                                        A.4
                             (a) Government                               (b) Commercial




Figure A.7: Differential software development intended for government (left column) or for commercial uses (right
  column), resulting from public security contracts that led to data-complementary software production within 1
year, relative to public security contracts that did not, controlling for firm and time period fixed effects. Translucent
   lines/markers additionally interact pre-contract firm characteristics with a full set of time-period fixed effects.




                                                          A.5
     Panel A: Facial recognition AI involving video, public security vs. non-public security contracts




 Panel B: Facial recognition AI involving video, high capacity vs. low capacity public security contracts
Figure A.8: Facial recognition software development that involves video (N-to-N matching). Panel A: Results from
  non-public security contracts (left column), public security contracts (middle column), and the difference (right
column). Panel B: Results for public security contracts that are data-scarce (left column), data-rich (middle column),
       and the difference (right column). All figures control for firm and time period fixed effects. Translucent
   lines/markers additionally interact pre-contract firm characteristics with a full set of time-period fixed effects.




                                                         A.6
          (a) Data-complementary                     (b) Government                    (c) Commercial




 Figure A.9: Differential data-complementary software (left column) and differential AI software development
intended for government (middle column) or for commercial uses (right column), resulting from public security
  contracts that led to government video facial recognition AI software within 1 year, relative to public security
contracts that did not, controlling for firm and time period fixed effects. Translucent lines/markers additionally
                interact pre-contract firm characteristics with a full set of time-period fixed effects.




                                        Table A.1: List of core variables
          English name                Chinese name                                Source
Panel A: Raw data
Software                                                 Chinese Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
AI firms                                                                  Tianyancha, Pitchbook
Prefecture GDP                      GDP                 Global Economic Data, Indicators, Charts & Forecasts (CEIC)
Prefecture population                                   Global Economic Data, Indicators, Charts & Forecasts (CEIC)
Fim capitalization                                                              Tianyancha
Firm rounds of investment funding                                               Tianyancha
Monetary size of contracts                                      Chinese Government Procurement Database
Mother firm                                                                     Tianyancha
Panel B: Constructed data
Software customer and function                                                 Software text
Public security contracts                                                      Contract text
Camera capacity                                                                Contract text
Contract runner-up bidders                                                     Contract text




                                                       A.7
                           Table A.2: Summary statistics -- firms and their production
                                                                                           Public security contract
                                     Any contract           Public security contract       by surveillance capacity
                                    Yes          No              Yes        No          High              Low
                                    (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)              (6)
Panel A: Firm characteristics

Year firm established            2,009.335     2,013.781    2,008.832    2,010.586     2,008.143        2,009.129
                                  (6.389)        (4.244)     (6.523)      (5.445)        (6.581)         (6.458)
Capitalization (millions USD)      22.964         5.091       39.732       12.682        12.934           61.445
                                 (210.840)      (43.007)    (333.095)    (149.926)      (35.929)        (464.613)
Rounds of investment funding        2.517         2.046       2.431         2.333         2.500            2.370
                                  (1.961)        (3.258)     (1.668)      (1.803)        (1.627)         (1.708)
Observations                        1,093         6,041        310           497           140              155
Panel B: Software production before contract

Total amount of software           22.653       14.572       33.368       21.142        33.204           35.579
                                  (37.860)     (24.473)     (54.760)     (26.759)      (52.535)         (59.246)
Commercial                          9.020        6.283       11.821        9.282        12.759           11.404
                                  (17.087)     (12.502)     (20.580)     (14.007)      (22.587)         (19.503)
Government                          7.342        3.951       13.145        5.485        11.407           15.772
                                  (16.269)      (8.175)     (27.794)      (8.012)      (19.238)         (34.877)
AI-common                           3.878        2.580        4.974        3.973         5.500            4.789
                                   (7.300)      (6.280)      (8.616)      (6.630)      (10.633)          (6.623)
AI-video                            1.564        1.026        2.889        1.269         2.741            3.281
                                   (3.838)      (2.827)      (5.990)      (2.820)       (6.166)          (6.086)
Data-complementary                  9.235        5.632       13.821        8.533        12.981           15.140
                                  (16.704)     (10.763)     (24.485)     (12.831)      (19.440)         (29.441)
Observations                         956         6,042         234          443           108              114
Panel C: Software production after contract

Total amount of software           24.393                    35.569       19.903        33.157            40.568
                                  (59.812)         -        (83.577)     (37.582)      (59.391)         (103.702)
Commercial                          8.381                     9.968        7.985        11.557             9.226
                                  (19.628)         -        (18.936)     (14.193)      (21.325)          (17.362)
Government                          9.105                    16.547        5.664        11.257            22.723
                                  (34.029)         -        (59.669)     (10.574)      (19.375)          (82.114)
AI-common                           4.126                     5.601        3.557         5.086             6.503
                                  (11.623)         -        (15.593)      (7.038)       (9.858)          (19.950)
AI-video                            1.584                     2.270        1.202         2.286             2.465
                                   (4.014)         -         (4.860)      (2.941)       (4.524)           (5.344)
Data-complementary                 10.046                    15.428        7.791        14.957            17.084
                                  (26.230)        -         (36.886)     (13.484)      (30.123)          (43.561)
Observations                        1,095         0            311          411           140               155

Note: Observations at the firm level. Standard deviations are reported below the means.




                                                           A.8
                    Table A.3: Summary statistics -- procurement contracts
                                       Non-public
                                    security contracts                 Public security contracts
                                            All             All         Low capacity      High capacity
                                            (1)              (2)             (3)                   (4)
Panel A: All contracts
Admin level: provincial or above           0.340            0.277           0.138              0.306
                                          (0.474)          (0.448)         (0.345)            (0.461)
Year contract signed                     2,016.350        2,016.199       2,016.274          2,016.360
                                          (1.612)          (1.604)         (1.516)            (1.530)
Area GDP                                 4,248.551        3,931.975       2,629.278          5,379.756
                                        (4,979.406)      (4,567.528)     (3,364.656)        (5,272.500)
Area population                           479.825          480.804         404.782            569.690
                                         (264.595)        (263.863)       (221.149)          (284.979)
Cameras per million residents              4.311            3.392           0.138              6.920
                                          (8.914)          (7.493)         (0.321)            (9.644)
Observations                               15,523           10,677          4,880              4,500
Panel B: First contracts
Admin level: provincial or above            0.462            0.383          0.272               0.423
                                           (0.499)          (0.487)        (0.447)             (0.496)
Year contract signed                     2,015.935        2,015.594       2,015.893          2,015.920
                                           (1.840)          (1.976)        (1.883)             (1.875)
Area GDP                                 5,620.639        4,360.677       2,987.963          4,972.767
                                        (5,493.355)      (4,372.221)     (3,021.635)        (4,780.787)
Area population                           562.518          511.312         470.745            553.778
                                         (269.504)        (266.436)       (254.547)          (270.646)
Cameras per million residents               4.951            6.097          0.141              10.575
                                          (10.247)         (11.624)        (0.332)            (13.796)
Observations                                 796              308            103                 137
Note: Observations at the procurement contract level. Standard deviations are reported below the
mean. Administrative level of the contract is recorded as central government, provincial level, prefec-
ture level and county level; the mean of an indicator of provincial or above level (provincial and central
government) is shown. Local GDP is measured in millions of RMB, population in ten-thousand persons.




                                                  A.9
          Table A.4: Summary statistics -- localities with low vs. high surveillance capacities
                                    Low capacity localities     High capacity localities    Difference
                                            (1)                          (2)                    (3)
Panel A: Demographics
Population (10,000 persons)                  387.613                    461.803                74.189
                                            (263.367)                  (250.099)             (32.603)**
Urban population (1,000 persons)            1,434.740                  1,806.922              372.183
                                           (1,302.286)                (1,416.332)           (171.981)**
College students (1,000 persons)              96.034                    106.309                10.276
                                            (186.146)                  (193.176)              (23.506)
College teachers (1,000 persons)               5.256                      5.573                 0.318
                                             (10.285)                   (10.570)               (1.296)
Broadband household (1000s)                 1,164.550                  1,680.905              516.354
                                           (1,119.982)                (1,306.269)          (152.231)***
Mobile phone households (1000s)             4,366.004                  6,113.576             1,747.572
                                           (4,510.161)                (5,812.991)          (617.955)***
Observations                                  203                         102                   305
Panel B: Economics
Number of contracts                           57.369                    105.225                  47.856
                                            (117.253)                  (178.565)              (17.075)***
# of 1st contracts                             1.719                     3.010                    1.291
                                             (4.615)                    (8.179)                 (0.733)*
Monetary size (10,000 RMB)                  2,671.686                  2,352.398               -319.288
                                           (9,762.651)                (9,929.068)             (1,202.745)
GDP (100 Million RMB)                       1,858.525                  2,991.609               1,133.085
                                           (2,107.872)                (3,249.163)            (320.642)***
GDP per capita (RMB)                       49,138.492                 68,544.117              19,405.621
                                          (37,714.531)               (67,582.133)          (6,261.676)***
Fiscal expenditure (million RMB)           44,718.504                 56,296.723              11,578.219
                                          (46,643.832)               (58,102.457)            (6,295.382)*
Fiscal revenue (million RMB)               21,227.164                 33,746.250              12,519.088
                                          (39,860.871)               (50,784.539)           (5,433.332)**
Observations                                  203                         102                   305
Notes: Localities (at city level) are divided into below (Column 1) and above (Column 2) median in terms of their
province-level surveillance-related spending prior to 2015. Broadband households are households with broadband
internet connections, mobile phone households are households with a mobile phone, number of 1st contracts refers
to the number of firms which had their first contract in the city, while monetary size refers to the average monetary
size of all contracts. Fiscal expenditure and revenue refer to spending or revenue received by the city's government.




                                                         A.10
                                       Table A.5: Public security contracts vs. non-public security contracts
                                            Government      Commercial     Data-complementary       Government      Commercial      Data-complementary
                                                 (1)             (2)                 (3)                 (4)             (5)                  (6)
4 Semiyears Before                              -0.113          0.007              -0.115              -0.013           0.016               -0.009
                                                (0.195)       (0.132)              (0.158)             (0.218)        (0.149)               (0.174)
3 Semiyears Before                              -0.114         -0.000              -0.074              -0.048           0.006               -0.002
                                                (0.191)       (0.129)              (0.155)             (0.214)        (0.146)               (0.171)
2 Semiyears Before                               -0.103         -0.030              -0.077              -0.075          -0.011               -0.036
                                                (0.187)       (0.126)              (0.151)             (0.209)        (0.143)               (0.167)
Receiving 1st Contract                         0.412**        0.394***            0.450***               0.227        0.346**              0.343**
                                                (0.186)       (0.126)              (0.151)             (0.208)        (0.142)               (0.166)
1 Semiyear After                               0.871***       0.871***            0.971***            0.687***        0.793***             0.837***
                                                (0.201)       (0.135)              (0.162)             (0.224)        (0.152)               (0.178)
2 Semiyears After                              1.465***       1.357***            1.483***            1.286***        1.340***             1.353***
                                                (0.211)        (0.142)             (0.170)             (0.234)         (0.159)              (0.187)
3 Semiyears After                              2.191***       1.983***            2.254***            2.089***        1.915***             2.137***
                                                (0.223)        (0.150)             (0.180)             (0.248)         (0.169)              (0.198)
4 Semiyears After                              2.992***       2.628***            3.195***            3.000***        2.619***             3.107***
                                                (0.238)        (0.160)             (0.193)             (0.264)         (0.180)              (0.212)
5 Semiyears After                              3.881***       3.073***            3.941***            3.937***        3.036***             3.898***
                                                (0.256)        (0.173)             (0.207)             (0.285)         (0.194)              (0.228)
6 Semiyears After                              4.971***       3.761***            4.724***            5.231***        3.832***             4.797***
                                                (0.278)        (0.187)             (0.225)             (0.309)         (0.210)              (0.247)
4 Semiyears Before × Public Security             -0.149         -0.130              -0.076              -0.158          -0.121               -0.108
                                                (0.316)        (0.214)             (0.256)             (0.354)         (0.242)              (0.283)
3 Semiyears Before × Public Security             -0.049         -0.133              -0.067              -0.075          -0.128               -0.094
                                                (0.311)        (0.209)             (0.251)             (0.348)         (0.237)              (0.278)
2 Semiyears Before × Public Security              0.017          0.058               0.012               0.032           0.046               -0.004
                                                (0.306)        (0.206)             (0.247)             (0.342)         (0.234)              (0.273)
Receiving 1st Contract × Public Security          0.442       0.437**                0.383               0.167           0.254                0.150
                                                (0.301)        (0.203)             (0.244)             (0.336)         (0.230)              (0.269)
1 Semiyear After × Public Security             0.907***       0.662***            0.728***             0.676*         0.769***              0.505*
                                                (0.321)        (0.217)             (0.260)             (0.358)         (0.245)              (0.286)
2 Semiyears After × Public Security            1.395***       1.134***            1.261***            1.245***        1.162***             1.045***
                                                (0.337)        (0.228)             (0.272)             (0.376)         (0.257)              (0.300)
3 Semiyears After × Public Security            1.787***       1.555***            1.760***            1.409***        1.585***             1.484***
                                                (0.351)        (0.237)             (0.284)             (0.391)         (0.268)              (0.313)
4 Semiyears After × Public Security            2.424***       2.340***            2.511***            2.063***        2.614***             2.335***
                                                (0.370)        (0.250)             (0.300)             (0.413)         (0.282)              (0.330)
5 Semiyears Before × Public Security           3.012***       3.328***            3.410***            2.524***        3.570***             3.141***
                                                (0.391)        (0.264)             (0.316)             (0.437)         (0.298)              (0.349)
6 Semiyears After × Public Security            4.068***       4.199***            4.812***            3.568***        4.324***             4.620***
                                                (0.420)        (0.282)             (0.339)             (0.469)         (0.319)              (0.374)
Notes: Baseline specification (Columns 1­3) controls for time period fixed effects and firm fixed effects. Columns 4-6 include controls for firms' pre-
contract characteristics interacted with all semi-year indicators. Standard errors clustered at mother firm level are reported in parentheses. * significant
at 10% ** significant at 5% *** significant at 1%.
                                    Table A.6: Public security contracts -- high vs. low surveillance capacity
                                           Government     Commercial     Data-complementary      Government      Commercial       Data-complementary
                                                (1)            (2)                 (3)                 (4)            (5)                  (6)
4 Semiyears Before                            -0.177         -0.239              -0.310              -0.182         -0.243               -0.317
                                              (0.268)       (0.231)              (0.270)             (0.267)       (0.231)               (0.267)
3 Semiyears Before                            -0.040         -0.180              -0.118              -0.044         -0.183               -0.123
                                              (0.264)       (0.228)              (0.266)             (0.262)       (0.227)               (0.262)
2 Semiyears Before                             -0.002         -0.202              -0.151              -0.004         -0.203               -0.153
                                              (0.261)       (0.225)              (0.262)             (0.260)       (0.224)               (0.259)
Receiving 1st Contract                       0.750***       0.868***            0.959***            0.680**        0.833***             0.853***
                                              (0.279)       (0.239)              (0.280)             (0.277)       (0.239)               (0.277)
1 Semiyear After                             1.443***       1.663***            1.871***            1.378***       1.630***             1.772***
                                              (0.289)        (0.250)             (0.291)             (0.288)        (0.250)              (0.288)
2 Semiyears After                            2.243***       2.219***            2.576***            2.106***       2.174***             2.367***
                                              (0.301)        (0.258)             (0.301)             (0.300)        (0.258)              (0.297)
3 Semiyears After                            2.986***       3.122***            3.331***            2.917***       3.087***             3.223***
                                              (0.334)        (0.287)             (0.336)             (0.332)        (0.287)              (0.331)
4 Semiyears After                            3.984***       4.017***            4.362***            3.910***       3.980***             4.248***
                                              (0.360)        (0.309)             (0.362)             (0.358)        (0.308)              (0.357)
5 Semiyears After                            4.849***       4.857***            5.662***            4.771***       4.817***             5.543***
                                              (0.389)        (0.337)             (0.395)             (0.387)        (0.336)              (0.390)
6 Semiyears After                            5.595***       5.811***            6.383***            5.511***       5.769***             6.255***
                                              (0.444)        (0.378)             (0.443)             (0.441)        (0.378)              (0.438)
4 Semiyears Before × High Capacity             -0.279          0.633               0.130              -0.243          0.653                0.176
                                              (0.620)        (0.539)             (0.627)             (0.617)        (0.538)              (0.620)
3 Semiyears Before × High Capacity             -0.379          0.222              -0.124              -0.356          0.235               -0.099
                                              (0.565)        (0.488)             (0.570)             (0.562)        (0.487)              (0.563)
2 Semiyears Before × High Capacity             -0.209          0.351               0.118              -0.192          0.362                0.136
                                              (0.535)        (0.463)             (0.540)             (0.532)        (0.462)              (0.534)
Receiving 1st Contract × High Capacity          0.465          0.314               0.303               0.457          0.307                0.277
                                              (0.508)        (0.438)             (0.512)             (0.505)        (0.437)              (0.506)
1 Semiyear After × High Capacity                0.858          0.502               0.645               0.817          0.478                0.574
                                              (0.524)        (0.451)             (0.528)             (0.521)        (0.450)              (0.521)
2 Semiyears After × High Capacity               0.817       0.969**              0.909*                0.814       0.904**               0.890*
                                              (0.520)        (0.449)             (0.524)             (0.518)        (0.449)              (0.518)
3 Semiyears After × High Capacity             1.023*           0.526             0.963*                0.868          0.442                0.711
                                              (0.544)        (0.470)             (0.549)             (0.541)        (0.469)              (0.542)
4 Semiyears After × High Capacity            1.151**         0.823*             1.256**              0.987*           0.735              0.988*
                                              (0.565)        (0.487)             (0.570)             (0.562)        (0.486)              (0.563)
5 Semiyears Before × High Capacity           1.800***       1.205**             1.592***            1.623***       1.110**              1.303**
                                              (0.594)        (0.515)             (0.602)             (0.591)        (0.514)              (0.595)
6 Semiyears After × High Capacity            2.911***       1.861***            2.766***            2.715***       1.759***             2.452***
                                              (0.642)        (0.550)             (0.644)             (0.638)        (0.549)              (0.636)
Notes: All regressions estimated on the sample of firms with first contracts with a public security agency. Baseline specification (Columns 1­3) controls
for time period fixed effects and firm fixed effects. Columns 4-6 include controls for firms' pre-contract characteristics interacted with all semi-year
indicators. Standard errors clustered at mother firm level are reported in parentheses. * significant at 10% ** significant at 5% *** significant at 1%.
                                     Table A.7: Robustness
                                      Government       Commercial    Data-complementary
                                          (1)             (2)                 (3)
Panel A.1: LSTM categorization model configuration (vary timestep 10, embeddings 32, nodes 32)
4 semiyears before                        -0.113         -0.310               -0.371
                                         (0.275)        (0.324)              (0.242)
6 semiyears after                       4.637***        4.948***            3.847***
                                         (0.452)        (0.532)              (0.397)
4 semiyears before × high capacity       -0.328          0.521                0.456
                                         (0.638)        (0.760)              (0.563)
6 semiyears after × high capacity       2.516***        3.349***            3.579***
                                         (0.658)        (0.775)              (0.575)
Panel A.2: LSTM categorization model configuration (timestep 20, vary embeddings 16, nodes 32)
4 semiyears before                        -0.268         -0.269             -0.424*
                                         (0.288)        (0.270)              (0.245)
6 semiyears after                       6.102***        4.743***            5.505***
                                         (0.474)        (0.444)              (0.406)
4 semiyears before × high capacity       -0.181          0.418                0.463
                                         (0.669)        (0.634)              (0.570)
6 semiyears after × high capacity       2.532***        2.530***            2.513***
                                         (0.689)        (0.647)              (0.586)
Panel A.3: LSTM categorization model configuration (timestep 20, embeddings 32, vary nodes 16)
4 semiyears before                        -0.206         -0.353               -0.216
                                         (0.295)        (0.310)              (0.227)
6 semiyears after                       6.017***        4.485***            5.667***
                                         (0.485)        (0.509)              (0.374)
4 semiyears before × high capacity       -0.172          0.526                0.149
                                         (0.685)        (0.721)              (0.526)
6 semiyears after × high capacity       3.190***        2.652***            2.378***
                                         (0.706)        (0.741)              (0.541)
Panel B.1: LSTM categorization model threshold (60%)
4 semiyears before                        -0.139         -0.272               -0.309
                                         (0.234)        (0.309)              (0.255)
6 semiyears after                       3.465***        6.452***            5.826***
                                         (0.389)        (0.508)              (0.421)
4 semiyears before × high capacity       -0.237          0.525                0.553
                                         (0.543)        (0.721)              (0.595)
6 semiyears aafter × high capacity      2.811***        2.349***            2.765***
                                         (0.562)        (0.740)              (0.609)
Panel B.2: LSTM categorization model threshold (70%)
4 semiyears before                        -0.133         -0.280               -0.304
                                         (0.233)        (0.309)              (0.254)
6 semiyears after                       3.403***        6.411***            5.789***
                                         (0.387)        (0.507)              (0.419)
4 semiyears before × high capacity       -0.243          0.542                0.545
                                         (0.541)        (0.720)              (0.593)
6 semiyears after × high capacity       2.765***        2.324***            2.730***
                                         (0.560)        (0.739)              (0.607)




                                                A.13
Panel C.1: Time frame (full balanced panel)
4 semiyears before                          0.184          0.035                   -0.005
                                           (0.576)        (0.477)                  (0.563)
6 semiyears after                         5.634***        6.165***                6.614***
                                           (0.728)        (0.597)                  (0.706)
4 semiyears before × high capacity         -3.218          0.743                   -0.912
                                           (2.661)        (2.093)                  (2.472)
6 semiyears after × high capacity         3.404***        2.048**                 3.071**
                                           (1.237)        (1.024)                  (1.217)
Panel C.2: Time frame (extended time frame)
5 semiyears before                          -0.124         -0.204                   -0.245
                                           (0.274)        (0.236)                  (0.275)
8 semiyears after                         8.469***        6.986***                7.835***
                                           (0.572)        (0.488)                  (0.562)
5 semiyears before × high capacity         -0.342          0.269                   -0.248
                                           (0.686)        (0.597)                  (0.695)
8 semiyears after × high capacity         3.793***        4.150***                5.573***
                                           (0.756)        (0.648)                  (0.750)
Panel D.1: Drop ambiguous public security agencies
4 semiyears before                          -0.184         -0.260                   -0.319
                                           (0.270)        (0.230)                  (0.270)
6 semiyears after                         5.335***        5.916***                6.094***
                                           (0.448)        (0.377)                  (0.444)
4 semiyears before × high capacity         -0.375          0.625                   -0.026
                                           (0.649)        (0.557)                  (0.653)
6 semiyears after × high capacity         3.222***        1.371**                 2.897***
                                           (0.659)        (0.558)                  (0.657)
Notes: Specifications include full set of time indicators and interactions with public secu-
rity contracts; only selected coefficient estimates are presented. Standard errors clustered at
mother firm level are reported in parentheses. Panel A varies the LSTM specification. Ta-
ble A.6, Columns 1-3 use the default LSTM specification with a timestep (phrase length) of
20, embedding size (number of dimensions in a vector to represent a phrase) of 32, and 32
nodes in the model. Panel A.1 presents results for the same model trained with a timestep
of 10 instead; Panel A.2 presents results for the same model trained with an embedding
size of 16 instead; Panel A.3 presents results for the same model trained with 16 nodes in-
stead. The full set of combinations of results with varied model parameters do not look
qualitatively different. Table A.6, Columns 1-3 use the default LSTM specification with a
confidence threshold for the classification of software set at 50% (e.g. the model must be at
least 50% confident that a given software is government software to be classified as "gov-
ernment"). Panels B.1 and B.2 replicate the exercise setting the threshold to be higher, at
60% and 70% respectively. Panel C.1 restricts the sample to firms that have non-missing
observations during the entire time frame of 4 semi-years before and 6 semi-years after the
initial contracts; Panel C.2 extends the time frame to 5 semi-years before and 8 semi-years
after the initial contracts. Panel D.1 drops companies whose first contract is an ambiguous
contract, or one that contains the keywords `local government' ( `') or `government
offices' (`') which may be used for either public security or non-public security
depending on interpretation. * significant at 10% ** significant at 5% *** significant at 1%.




                                                A.14
                      Table A.8: Evaluating alternative hypotheses
                                       Government      Commercial   Data-complementary
                                             (1)          (2)               (3)
Panel A.1: Control for contract similarity
4 semiyears before                         -0.185         -0.219          -0.341
                                          (0.268)        (0.231)         (0.270)
6 semiyears after                        5.667***       5.630***         6.662***
                                          (0.445)        (0.380)         (0.445)
4 semiyears before × high capacity        -0.267          0.603           0.178
                                          (0.620)        (0.539)         (0.627)
6 semiyears after × high capacity        3.213***        1.091*          3.940***
                                          (0.664)        (0.569)         (0.666)
Panel A.2: Control for contract size
4 semiyears before                         -0.182         -0.243          -0.317
                                          (0.267)        (0.231)         (0.267)
6 semiyears after                        5.511***       5.769***         6.255***
                                          (0.441)        (0.378)         (0.438)
4 semiyears before × high capacity        -0.243          0.653           0.176
                                          (0.617)        (0.538)         (0.620)
6 semiyears after × high capacity        2.715***       1.759***         2.452***
                                          (0.638)        (0.549)         (0.636)
Panel A.3: Control for firm pre-contract size
4 semiyears before                         -0.175         -0.240          -0.310
                                          (0.268)        (0.231)         (0.270)
6 semiyears after                        5.579***       5.824***         6.381***
                                          (0.444)        (0.378)         (0.443)
4 semiyears before × high capacity        -0.277          0.632           0.131
                                          (0.620)        (0.539)         (0.627)
6 semiyears after × high capacity        2.898***       1.871***         2.764***
                                          (0.642)        (0.550)         (0.644)
Panel A.4: Control for first contract's local GDP
4 semiyears before                         -0.167         -0.249          -0.311
                                          (0.268)        (0.231)         (0.270)
6 semiyears after                        5.439***       5.957***         6.404***
                                          (0.443)        (0.378)         (0.443)
4 semiyears before × high capacity        -0.177          0.526           0.115
                                          (0.619)        (0.538)         (0.628)
6 semiyears after × high capacity        2.138***       2.605***         2.866***
                                          (0.645)        (0.553)         (0.648)
Panel A.5: Control for firm age
4 semiyears before                         -0.130         -0.237           -0.282
                                          (0.263)        (0.231)          (0.269)
6 semiyears after                       53.636***       7.926***         28.782***
                                          (1.226)        (1.078)          (1.261)
4 semiyears before × high capacity        -0.440          0.626            0.050
                                          (0.608)        (0.539)          (0.625)
6 semiyears after × high capacity        3.279***       1.876***         2.924***
                                          (0.630)        (0.550)          (0.642)
Panel A.6: All previous controls combined
4 semiyears before                        -0.133          -0.233           -0.326
                                         (0.262)         (0.230)          (0.265)
6 semiyears after                       52.516***       9.002***         28.815***
                                         (1.224)         (1.078)          (1.250)


                                                A.15
4 semiyears before × high capacity       -0.314          0.508               0.126
                                         (0.605)        (0.537)             (0.617)
6 semiyears after × high capacity       2.688***       1.786***             4.031***
                                         (0.651)        (0.571)             (0.660)
Panel B.1: Learning by doing - control for government pre-contract software production
4 semiyears before                        0.138          -0.076              -0.081
                                         (0.233)        (0.220)             (0.252)
6 semiyears after                       1.769***       3.846***             3.652***
                                         (0.386)        (0.362)             (0.415)
4 semiyears before × high capacity        0.170         0.869*               0.489
                                         (0.538)        (0.514)             (0.586)
6 semiyears after × high capacity       1.477***       1.116**              1.722***
                                         (0.556)        (0.525)             (0.602)
Panel B.2: Learning by doing - control for same category pre-contract software production
4 semiyears before                        0.138          0.034               -0.047
                                         (0.233)        (0.209)             (0.253)
6 semiyears after                       1.769***       2.577***             3.173***
                                         (0.386)        (0.344)             (0.418)
4 semiyears before × high capacity        0.170         0.841*               0.361
                                         (0.538)        (0.487)             (0.589)
6 semiyears after × high capacity       1.477***       1.132**              2.013***
                                         (0.556)        (0.498)             (0.605)
Panel B.3: Learning by doing - control for opposite category pre-contract software production
4 semiyears before                        0.080          -0.076              -0.061
                                         (0.250)        (0.220)             (0.256)
6 semiyears after                       2.399***       3.846***             3.474***
                                         (0.416)        (0.362)             (0.423)
4 semiyears before × high capacity       -0.078         0.869*               0.302
                                         (0.579)        (0.514)             (0.596)
6 semiyears after × high capacity       2.231***       1.116**              2.111***
                                         (0.599)        (0.525)             (0.612)
Panel C.1: Signalling - second contract within mother firm
4 semiyears before                        -0.078         -0.431              -0.184
                                         (0.213)        (0.362)             (0.283)
6 semiyears after                       4.606***       6.730***             6.370***
                                         (0.332)        (0.557)             (0.438)
4 semiyears before × high capacity         1.035         1.047               0.820
                                         (0.786)        (1.384)             (1.081)
6 semiyears after × high capacity       2.753***        1.975*               1.024
                                         (0.710)        (1.200)             (0.947)
Panel D.1: Access to commercial opportunities - drop Beijing and Shanghai
4 semiyears before                        -0.179         -0.242              -0.277
                                         (0.264)        (0.166)             (0.249)
6 semiyears after                       5.511***       5.873***             6.286***
                                         (0.423)        (0.264)             (0.397)
4 semiyears before × high capacity       -0.114         0.763*               0.235
                                         (0.634)        (0.404)             (0.603)
6 semiyears after × high capacity       2.983***       1.118***             2.863***
                                         (0.641)        (0.403)             (0.605)
Panel D.2: Access to commercial opportunities - firm based outside contract province



                                           A.16
4 semiyears before                          -0.195          -0.165                -0.293
                                           (0.209)         (0.245)               (0.218)
6 semiyears after                         5.254***        5.862***               6.153***
                                           (0.333)         (0.387)               (0.346)
4 semiyears before × high capacity         -0.053           0.721                 0.177
                                           (0.555)         (0.658)               (0.586)
6 semiyears after × high capacity         2.365***        2.747***               2.815***
                                           (0.542)         (0.636)               (0.567)
Notes: Specifications include full set of time indicators and interactions with public secu-
rity contracts; only selected coefficient estimates are presented. Standard errors clustered at
mother firm level are reported in parentheses. Panels B - G replicates the baseline specifi-
cation in Table A.6 but additionally interacts controls with time dummies, where Panel A.1
interacts contract similarity, Panel A.2 interacts the size of the contract, Panel A.3 interacts
the monetary size of the firm, Panel A.4 interacts the GDP of the first contract's location,
Panel A.5 interacts firm age, and Panel A.6 interacts with all the above controls. Panel B.1
controls for the total amount of government software produced by the firm at 1 semiyear
before the contract; Panel B.2 controls for the total of amount of software indicated in the
column by the firm at 1 semiyear before the contract; Panel B.3 controls for total amount of
opposite category software produced by the firm at 1 semiyear before the contract, where
opposite category references the other category in the pairings between government and
commercial intended software, and between AI and non-AI related software. Panel C.1
restricts the sample to only subsidiary firms that did not earn the first contract within the
mother firm--note that the number of observations falls to 9,300 observations in Panel C.1
from 17,400 in Table A.6. Panel D.1 excludes contracts from Beijing and Shanghai (the two
highest capacity prefectures/provinces), and Panel D.2 restricts the analysis to firms that
have their first contract outside of their home province. * significant at 10% ** significant at
5% *** significant at 1%.




                                              A.17
Appendix A                    Proofs

Appendix A.1               Existence and uniqueness of a BGP equilibrium
                           with entry of all types of firms
Proposition 1 (Existence and Uniqueness) Let pz ( pc ) be the implicit function defined
by the pricing equation (4) and pd ( pc ) be the implicit function defined by
                                          c (0, pc , pd ) = µz z ( pz ( pc )).                                  (23)

Let p g (d¯g ) be the unique solution to
                                            g ( pg , d¯g )      
                                        g                               =d¯g .                                  (24)
                                                pg         1 +  (  - 1)

                                                          ~ c / Nz > 0 and Ng / Nz > 0 to
    Given price pc , a necessary condition for a BGP with N
exist is
                                        1- 1                  pc -               ¯g , pc , pd ( pc ))1- 
                                                                                                        1
                   qc (0, pc , pd ( pc ))      Yc            1- a           qc (d
                                             <    =                       <          ¯g , pc , pd ( pc )) .     (25)
                     d p (0, pc , pd ( pc ))   Dp               p             d p (d


   If the condition above holds, sufficient conditions for a unique equilibrium to exist are
                                  > 1 +  (  - 1)                                                                (26)
                g ( p g (d ¯g ), d¯g ) + c (d  ¯g , p , pd ( p )) - 2 + F        c (0, p , pd ( p )) < 0        (27)
                                                      c          c                         c        c

                           ¯      ¯            ¯                            F
                g ( p g ( d g ), d g ) +  c ( d g , p          ¯ c )) - 2 +
                                                    ¯ c , pd ( p                 c (0, p
                                                                                       ¯ c , pd ( p
                                                                                                  ¯ c )) > 0,   (28)
                                                                            
             ¯ c are the smallest and largest pc such that pz ( pc ), pd ( pc ) are strictly
 where p and p
          c
positive.

   We now proceed to prove this proposition. From the representative house-
hold's Euler equation, we obtain that in a BGP:
                                                       r =  +                                                   (29)

Moreover, market clearing in the goods and data markets requires:1
                                                                                               -
                                          1
                   ~ c qc (0, pc , pd )1-  + Ng qc (d
                                                                           1
                                                     ¯g , pc , pd )1-  = Yc =               pc
                   N                                                                             Y              (30)
                                                                                          1-a
                                                                        1- 1              pz -
                                                         Nz qz ( pz )          = Yz =          Y                (31)
                                                                                          a
   1 Note that, as for the case of government data, we assume that private data is not sharable across

firms. This can be seen from (33). Again, we abstract from the sharability of data across firms to
transparently focus on the implications of the sharability of data across uses within a firm.


                                                          A.18
                                                                                     1
                                                             Ng q g (d¯g , p g )1-  = Yg = G                                                  (32)
                                      ~ c d p (0, pc , pd ) + Ng d p (d
                                      N                                ¯g , pc , pd ) = D p =  p Y                                            (33)
                                                                              Ng d¯g = Dg =  g G,                                             (34)

 From (4), it is straightforward to see that pz ( pc ) exist and has a negative deriva-
tive. Equations (23) follows directly from the free-entry conditions of private inno-
vators. Then, pd ( pc ) exists and has a positive derivative since profit functions are
increasing in their output price and decreasing in the data input price.
                                                                                        1
    Equation (24) follows from the fact that  g ( p g , d¯g ) = p g q g ( p g , d¯g )1-  1+ (-1)
                                                                                            
together with market clearing in the government data and goods markets.
    Then, combining the market clearing conditions in the private data and goods
markets, we obtain N   ~ c / Nz and Ng / Nz as functions of pc :
                          ~c                                                                                  -1
                          N                                    1- 1             ¯g , pc , pd ( pc ))1- 
                                                                                                         1              Yc
                          Nz               qc (0, pc , pd ( pc ))          qc (d                                        Nz
                          Ng    =                                                                                       Dp
                                             d p (0, pc , pd ( pc ))         d p (d ¯g , pc , pd ( pc ))
                          Nz                                                                                            Nz
                          Yc                 pc -
                          Nz                1- a            pz ( pc )                         1- 1
                          Dp    =                                           qz ( pz ( pc ))          .
                          Nz                  p                a

 When the determinant of the square matrix is negative, then N ~ c / Nz > 0 and
Ng / Nz > 0 if and only if the inequalities in (25) hold. We now show that the
determinant is indeed negative. This requires showing that
                                                                   1
                                             ¯g , pc , pd ( pc ))1-                          1- 1
                                        qc (d                          qc (0, pc , pd ( pc )) 
                                          d p (d ¯g , pc , pd ( pc )) > d p (0, pc , pd ( pc )) ,

which is also necessary for (25) to hold.
  The optimality condition for private data demand is,
                                                      1                                                                             (1- )(-1)
                                                                      -1
       1
             ¯g )
                     -1                         -1    -1   1+  (  -1)          (1 -  )                              (1 -  )          1+  (  -1)
  dp       (d             + (1 - )(d p )                                     =         ( p c ) 1+  (  -1)                                         .
                                                                                  pd                                   
                                                                                                                                              (35)

Then, using the definition of qc (.), we obtain
                               1- 1
            ¯g , pc , pd ( pc ))                                                              ¯g
       qc (d                            pd ( pc )                                            d                 -1

                ¯                   =                                                  ¯
                                                                                                                    +1                        (36)
         d p (d g , pc , pd ( pc ))    - 1  pc                  (1 -  )          d p (d g , pc , pd ( pc ))
                                                                1- 1                                    ¯g
                                         qc (0, pc , pd ( pc ))                                        d                      -1
                                       =                                                         ¯
                                                                                                                                   +1         (37)
                                           d p (0, pc , pd ( pc ))           (1 -  )       d p (d g , pc , pd ( pc ))
                                                                1- 1
                                            qc (0, pc , pd ( pc )) 
                                       >                              .                                                                       (38)
                                              d p (0, pc , pd ( pc ))
To conclude the proof, we need to show conditions under which pc exists and is
unique. From the free-entry conditions for software producing firms, we obtain



                                                                   A.19
one equation that implicitly defines pc :
                                   ¯g ), d¯g ) + c (d¯g , pc , pd ( pc )) - 2 +      F
                         g ( p g (d                                                       c (0, pc , pd ( pc )) = 0.
                                                                                     
 We first show that  > 1 + ( - 1) is a sufficient condition for the left-hand-side
(LHS) of this equation to be strictly increasing in pc . Totally differentiating
 LHS   c (d ¯g , pc , pd )      F c (0, pc , pd )    c (d¯g , pc , pd )      F                                         c (0, pc , pd )         pd
     =                     - 2+                   +                     - 2+
  pc         pc                       pc                  pd                                                               pd                  pc
       c (d ¯g , pc , pd )      F c (0, pc , pd )
     =                     - 2+
             pc                       pc
         (d¯ , p , p )           
         c g c d
              pd               F     z ( pz )  pz     c (0, pc , pd )
     +   (0, p            - 2+    µz                -
          c      c , pd )               pz  pc             pc
                          pd
                  ¯g , pc , pd )1-  - 2 + F qc (0, pc , pd )1- 
                                      1                                         1
           = qc (d
                                                      
                         F          d p (d¯g , pc , pd )                                      z ( pz )  pz
                                                                               1- 1
           +     2+             -                             qc (0, pc , pd )  - µz
                                     d p (0, pc , pd )                                            pz  pc
                                          1
                                                                        
                                                                      1
                qc (d ¯g , pc , pd )1-                            1-
                                                 qc (0, pc , pd )  
           =                                 -                             d p (d ¯g , pc , pd )
                   d p (d ¯g , pc , pd )            d p (0, pc , pd )

                            F       d p (d¯g , pc , pd )        z ( pz )  pz
           -           2+       -                            µz
                                    d p (0, pc , pd )               pz  pc
                                F       d p (d ¯g , pc , pd )      z ( pz )  pz
           >-           2+          -                           µz
                                         d p (0, pc , pd )            pz  pc
           > 0.

 The second equality follows from the implicit function pd ( pc ), the third equality
from the envelope theorem, and the fourth equality simply rearranges terms. The
                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                qc (d¯g , pc , pd )1- 
first inequality follows from the fact that we have shown above that                                               d p (d¯g , pc , pd )   >
                1- 1
qc (0, pc , pd )                                                                                     z ( pz )  pz
   d p (0, pc , pd )
                       . The last inequality follows from the fact that                               pz  pc        < 0 and that,
from (35), we have that when  > 1 + ( - 1), the function d p (d           ¯g , pc , pd ) is weakly
                                   ¯
decreasing in d¯g . As such, d p (dg , pc , pd )  1 and the inequality holds.
                                                d p (0, pc , pd )
   Finally, since when  > 1 + ( - 1) the LHS is increasing in pc , Bolzano's
theorem implies that a necessary and sufficient condition for pc to exist and be
unique is that the LHS evaluated at the smallest (largest) pc is negative (positive).
The last two equations in the theorem state these conditions.




                                                                    A.20
Appendix A.2                     Proof of Theorem 1
We first show the comparative statics of  and nc with respect to changes in d¯g . We
then provide intuition for the result.

Part 1. Rate of Innovation Totally differentiating the free-entry conditions, we
obtain
                                                      g (d¯g , p g )        g (d¯g , p g )  p g         c (d¯g , pc , pd )
  pc                                                   d  ¯g           +      pg           d¯g     +       d  ¯g

 d¯g = -                                ¯g , pc , pd )                                                                 ¯g , pc , pd ) 
                                                                                                                                       -1                         -1
                        F         d p (d                      z ( pz )  pz              ¯g , pc , pd )            qc (d                          qc (0, pc , pd ) 
           -       2+        -     d p (0, pc , pd )
                                                         µz    pz  pc           + d p (d                             d p (d ¯g , pc , pd )   -      d p (0, pc , pd )

  pd        z ( pz )  pz                    -1                                     1          pc
  ¯  = - µz              - qc (0, pc , pd )                                                   ¯g .
 d g         pz  pc                                                        d p (0, pc , pd ) d
                                                                                                                                                      p
 We have shown in the proof of Proposition 1 that the denominator in d¯c is pos-
                                                                              g
itive. The numerator is positive as well since p g (d¯g ) is increasing in d¯g . Taken
together, they imply that
                                                   pz       pd       pc
                                                   ¯g > 0,  ¯g < 0,  ¯g < 0.
                                                  d        d        d
And, finally, using the expressions for  = (r - )/ = (µz z ( pz ( pc )) - )/ , we
get that
                                      
                                      d ¯g > 0.

Part 2. Direction of Innovation From the market clearing conditions in the com-
mercial goods market we have
           1 - a pz              Yc   ~c
                                      N       1                          -1      Ng        1                       -1
                             =      =                 q (0, pc , pd )  +                        q (d¯g , pc , pd ) 
                                                  -1 c                                        -1 c
             a pc                Yz   Nz q ( p )                                 Nz q ( p ) 
                                          z z                                          z z
                                                           -1                         -1
                                      Nc qc (0, pc , pd )              ¯
                                                               + qc (d g , pc , pd )  
                                    =                               -1
                                                                                         .
                                      Nz                  qz ( pz ) 
Thus,
                                                          -1
        1 - a pz                             qz ( pz )    
nc =                                         -1                                -1
          a pc       qc (0, pc , pd )  + qc (d    ¯g , pc , pd )               

                            -1  z ( p z )     
       1-a     1 - a pz                   1+  (  -1)                                                   1
  =                                                                            ¯g , pc , pd )                        
        a          a    pc             c (0, pc , pd )                     c (d                                             -1
                                                                                                                     (d¯g ) 
                                                                                                1+  (  -1)
                                                                                                                    -1              -1
                                                                                                             (d¯g )  +(1-)(d   ¯p ) 
                                                                   1+                               c (0, pc , pd )




                                                                           A.21
                                  -1
       1-a      1 - a pz                1        1                                                                                    1
   =                                                                                                                  ¯g , pc , pd )                                                           ,
        a         a pc                  µ z 1 +  (  - 1) 1 + (2 + F )                                          c (d                                              1
                                                                                                            ¯                    ¯
                                                                                                       g ( d g , p g )+ c ( d g , pc , pd )
                                                                                                                                                                          -1
                                                                                                                                                                   (d¯g ) 
                                                                                                                                              1+  (  -1)          -1              -1
                                                                                                                                                           (d¯g )  +(1-)(d   ¯p ) 

                                                                                                                          -1
                                                                                                                                 1+  (  -1)
 where the second line uses that z ( pz ) = pz qz ( pz )                                                                  
                                                                                                                                            ,         c (0, pc , pd ) =
                                                                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                                 (d¯g ) 
                                                                                                                              1+  (  -1)        -1              -1
                    -1                                                                                                     -1              ¯g )  +(1-)(d   ¯p ) 
                                                                                                                                         (d
pc qc (0, pc , pd )  1
                       , and c (d¯g , pc , pd ) = pc qc (d¯g , pc , pd )                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                             
The last line follows from the free-entry conditions.
    Then, differentiating
                                                                       ¯g , pc , pd )                                         F)
                                                               c (d                                                       (2+ 
                                                         g (d¯g , p g )+c (d      ¯g , pc , pd )                                    -1
                                                                                                                             (d¯g ) 
                                      pz                                                           1+  (  -1)                                                                 c (d    ¯g , pc , pd )
dlog(nc )           dlog              pc                                                                             (d
                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                       ¯g )  +(1-)(d
                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                       ¯p ) 
                                                                                                                                                             dlog       g (d¯g , p g )+c (d      ¯g , pc , pd )
      ¯    > ( - 1)        ¯g ) -                                          ¯g , pc , pd )                                         F)                                               ¯g )                           ,
dlog(d g )           dlog(d                                        c (d                                                       (2+                                            dlog(d
                                  1+                         g (d¯g , p g )+c (d      ¯g , pc , pd )                                    -1
                                                                                                                                 (d¯g ) 
                                                                                                        1+  (  -1)              -1              -1
                                                                                                                         (d¯g )  +(1-)(d   ¯p ) 

                                                                                                                                                                                                -1
                                                                                                                                                                                  (d¯g )        
where the inequality follows from the fact that we have shown before that                                                                                                      -1              -1
                                                                                                                                                                     (d¯g )     +(1-  )( d¯p ) 
increases with d¯g when  > (1 + ( - 1), which is one of the conditions we im-
posed for the BGP to exist and be unique.
                                     dlog( p )    dlog( p )
   We have also shown before that dlog(d¯z ) > 0, dlog(d¯c ) < 0. We thus have two
                                            g            g
cases.
                               c (d    ¯g , pc , p )
                dlog                               d
                         g (d¯g , p g )+c (d      ¯g , pc , p )
                                                             d
    First, if                  dlog(d¯g )                           > 0, then we can directly see from the expression
                                                                                               dlog(nc )
above that         1 is a sufficient condition for                                             dlog(d¯g )           > 0.
                                       c (d    ¯g , pc , p )
                       dlog                                d
                                 g (d¯g , p g )+c (d      ¯g , pc , p )
                                                                     d                                                                                      +  (  -1)
    Second, if                       dlog(d¯g )                               < 0, we next show that                                                       1+  (  -1)
                                                                                                                                                                               is a
                                       dlog(nc )                                          +  (  -1)
sufficient condition           > 0. Since, 1+ (-1) > 1, this condition is sufficient
                                  for dlog(d¯ )
                                               g
in the first case as well.
                               dlog( p )       dlog( p )
    Since the term multiplying dlog(d¯z ) > 0, dlog(d¯c ) is less than 1, we have that
                                                                          g                               g

                                        p                                                      c (d    ¯g , pc , pd )
             dlog(nc )            dlog pz c
                                                dlog                                     g (d¯g , p g )+c (d      ¯g , pc , pd )
                   ¯g ) > ( - 1 )        ¯g ) -                                                      ¯g )
             dlog(d                dlog(d                                                      dlog(d
                                                              pz
                                                 dlog         pc               dlog g (d¯g , p g ) dlog(c (d¯g , pc , pd ))
                              > ( - 1)                  ¯g ) +                          ¯         -            ¯g )                                             ,
                                                  dlog(d                          dlog(d g )            dlog(d
                                                                                                                               g (d ¯g , p g )
where the last inequality follows from the fact that                                                                     ¯
                                                                                                                     g (d g , p g )+c (d     ¯g , pc , pd )     < 1.


                                                                                A.22
  Moreover, combining the market clearing conditions in the markets for govern-
ment goods (32) and data (34), we obtain p g (d¯g ) and then
                                                                                
                                    dlog( g (d¯g , p g (d¯g ))              (1- )(-1)
                                                                                                 +  (  - 1)
                                                 ¯             =                                              .
                                         dlog(d g )                                    1 +  (  - 1)

Furthermore, we have that
                                                                                         -1
dlog(c (d¯g , pc , pd ))               -1                     (d ¯g ) 
            ¯            =                             -1                                   -1
     dlog(d g )            -1             (d      ¯g )  + (1 - )(d p (d     ¯g , pc , pd )) 
                                                  -1
                           pc qc (d¯g , pc , pd )  dlogpc      pd d p (d¯g , pc , pd ) dlogp
                                                                                              d
                         +          ¯g , pc , pd ) dlogd  ¯g -         ¯g , pc , pd ) dlogd  ¯g
                              c (d                              c (d
                                                                                         -1
                                          -1                       (d¯g )                       dlogpd
                            =                             -1                               -1
                                                                                              +       ¯g
                              -1             (d      ¯g )  + (1 - )(d p (d ¯g , pc , pd ))      dlogd
                                                     -1
                              pc qc (d¯g , pc , pd )       dlogpc                      - 1 dlogpd
                            +          ¯                           - 1 - (1 -  )                   ¯g
                                 c (d g , pc , pd )        dlogd g                            dlogd
                                                                                         -1
                                  -1            (d¯g )                         dlogpd
                            =             -1                              -1
                                                                             +      ¯g
                              -1   (d¯g )  + (1 - )(d p (d¯g , pc , pd ))      dlogd
                                                                                                           dlogpc              -1                  dlogpd
                            +
                                                                       ¯g
                                                                              -1
                                                                                                           dlogd¯g - 1 - (1 - )                    dlogd¯g        ,
                                                                     (d     ) 
                                1 +  (  - 1)                   -1                                     -1
                                                     (d¯g )     +(1-  )(d          ¯
                                                                              p ( d g , pc , pd ))
                                                                                                      


where the first line uses the envelope theorem, the second line uses that c (d                       ¯g , pc , pd ) =
                       -1
pc qc (d¯g , pc , pd )  - pd d p (d¯g , pc , pd ) -  x (d¯g , pc , pd ) and that  x (d¯g , pc , pd ) = (1 -
                                   -1
 ) - 1      ¯
    pc qc (d g , pc , pd )
                                        , and the last line uses that
                                                                                        -1
                                                                                 (d¯g ) 
                                                    1+  (  -1)          -1                          -1
                                               -1                  ¯g )  +(1-)(d p (d¯g , pc , p )) 
                                                                 (d
c (d¯g , pc , pd ) = pc qc (d¯g , pc , pd )                   .                                 d
                                                                              
     Also, from the free entry condition c (0, pc , pd ) = µz z ( pz ), we have that
                                 dlog( pd )   1 dlog( pc )   1    1      dlog( pz )
                                       ¯    =         ¯    -                   ¯g ) .                                                         (39)
                                 dlog(d g )    dlog(d g )     1 + ( - 1) dlog(d

Replacing, we obtain

                                                                         -1      dlog( pc )     1 dlog( pz / pc )
                                          -1   ¯                                       ¯g ) +  dlog(d
         ¯g , pc , pd ))              
dlog(c (d                             -1    ( d g )                              dlog(d                    ¯g )
            ¯            =        -1                              -1
                                                                     +                                      -1
     dlog(d g )            (d¯g )  + (1 - )(d p (d¯g , pc , pd ))                                   (d ¯g ) 
                                                                       1 +  (  - 1)          -1                                                              -1
                                                                                                                  (d¯g )      +(1-)(d p (d¯g , pc , pd ))    

                              dlog( pc ) ( - 1)           1      1 dlog( pz / pc )
                            +       ¯               -                       ¯g )
                              dlog(d g ) 1 + ( - 1) 1 + ( - 1)  dlog(d
                                       -1        ( - 1) 1 dlog( pz / pc )
                            <                +                     ¯g ) ,
                              -1               1 + ( - 1)  dlog(d



                                                                     A.23
                                                                     -1
                                                           (d¯g )                   dlog( pc )
where the inequality uses that           -1                             -1 < 1 and dlog ( d¯g ) < 0.
                                   ¯
                                 (d g )                       ¯
                                            +(1-)(d p (d g , pc , pd )) 

                                     dlog(c (d ¯g , pc , pd ))                          dlog( g (d  ¯g , p g (d¯g ))
   Finally, using the inequality on              ¯
                                           dlog(d g )
                                                                and the  expression for                ¯
                                                                                                dlog(d g )
                                                                                                                     ,

                            pz
dlog(nc )            dlog pc            dlog g (d¯g , p g ) dlog(c (d¯g , pc , pd ))
      ¯g ) > ( - 1 )        ¯g ) +               ¯g )      -            ¯g )
dlog(d                dlog(d               dlog(d                dlog(d
                            pz               
                     dlog   pc           (1- )(-1)
                                                     +  (  - 1)               -1      ( - 1) dlog( pz / pc )
          > ( - 1)         ¯g )    +                                 -           -                    ¯g )
                     dlog(d                    1 +  (  - 1)               -1       1 + ( - 1) dlog(d
                                                pz           
                   +  (  - 1)          dlog     pc       (1- )(-1)
                                                                      +  (  - 1)           -1
          =     -                             ¯g )   +                             -      
                  1 +  (  - 1)          dlog(d              1 +  (  - 1)               -1  
                                                pz           
                   +  (  - 1)          dlog     pc       (1- )(-1)
                                                                      +  (  - 1)       1 +  (  - 1)  - 1
          >     -                             ¯g )   +                             -               
                  1 +  (  - 1)          dlog(d              1 +  (  - 1)                  (  - 1)    
                                                pz
                   +  (  - 1)          dlog     pc        1         (1 - )( - 1)
          =     -                             ¯    +              +              ,
                  1 +  (  - 1)          dlog(d g )   (1 - )( - 1)        

where the last inequality follows from the fact that  > 1 + ( - 1) is a condi-
                                                                                                     pz
                                                                                              dlog   pc
tion for the BGP to exist and be unique. Then, to conclude, since                              dlog(d¯g )   > 0, a
                                 dlog(nc )                           +  (  -1)
sufficient condition for         dlog(d¯g )   > 0 is that           1+  (  -1)
                                                                               .

Intuition To understand the theorem, it helps to consider the construction of a
BGP equilibrium given an exogenous increase in d      ¯g and p g (instead of just d  ¯g ).
The exogenous increase directly results in higher profits for those software firms
obtaining government contracts through two channels. First, through higher rev-
enues from government software production, due to both higher p g and produc-
tivity when d ¯g is higher. Second, through higher revenues from private software
production, due to higher productivity when government data is used.
    The higher profitability results in more R&D spending in innovation. In a BGP
with free entry of innovators, the opportunity cost of investment (r) has to increase
until innovators are again ex-ante indifferent between introducing a new variety or
not. Furthermore, the increase in r is necessary to give the signal to households to
invest more of their resources, which is ultimately consistent with the BGP increase
in R&D spending and, as such, in the rate of innovation  .
    However, note that the above logic holds for given prices pz , pc , pd . Yet, at the
new higher opportunity cost r, private software only and non-software innovators
would not want to introduce new varieties at the old prices. Thus, in a BGP where

                                                         A.24
all three types of firms are present, it has to be that prices change such that prof-
its increase for these other firms not directly affected by the increase in d  ¯g and p g .
For non-software innovators, this requires that pz increases -- which then implies
that pc has to fall so that the final goods representative firm makes zero profits
(equation (4)). For private software only innovators, this requires that pd falls to
compensate for both the fall in pc and the increase in r. Finally, under the sufficient
conditions for existence and uniqueness of a BGP equilibrium,  increases because
the direct effect from the increase in d  ¯g dominates the second round, general equi-
librium effects of the changes in prices.
     Note that the above construction determines pc , pz , pd , r and  as implicit func-
tions of d¯g , p g purely from the free-entry conditions of firms and the Euler equation
for households. Next, we turn to the market clearing conditions to understand the
change in the direction of private innovation nc . From the definition of nc together
with equations (30) and (31), we obtained before:
                                                                         -1
                             1 - a pz                       qz ( pz )    
                      nc =                                   -1                            -1
                                                                                                .   (40)
                               a pc      qc (0, pc , pd )         + qc (d¯g , pc , pd )    

                                 Yc
                                =Yz
 Thus, there are two countervailing effects on the direction of private innovation
from the increase in d      ¯g , p g . First, the increase in pz and decrease in pc result in
                                                                      Yc
an increase in the relative demand for private software Y              z
                                                                         . This demand effect
biases the direction of innovation more towards private software (increases nc ).
Second, the combined increase in d            ¯g and changes in pc , pd may potentially result
in an increase in the relative output of private software per firm (the second term
decreases). This decreases nc . The theorem shows that, if demand is sufficiently
                +  (  -1)
elastic (  1+ (-1) ) and the conditions for a BGP to exist and be unique are
satisfied, then the demand effect dominates and nc increases.
    To conclude the intuition for the theorem, consider the market clearing condi-
tion for government data (34). When d              ¯g is higher, more government data needs
to be supplied to those firms obtaining government contracts. Yet, at the old p g ,
the increase in government software production and thus government data as a
                                   1
by-product  g q g (d ¯g , p g )1-  is insufficient to match the required demand. This is
because there are decreasing returns to d           ¯g and thus the supply increases less than
                                                                                                 1
proportionally. Thus, it has to be that p g increases as well so that q g (d        ¯g , p g )1- 
further increases to match the required increased in d           ¯g .


                                                A.25
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL (NOT FOR
         PUBLICATION)




              S.1
Figure S.1: Example of AI firm record from Tianyancha (excerpt).




                              S.2
Figure S.2: Example of AI firm record from Pitchbook (excerpt).




                             S.3
Figure S.3: Example of a procurement contract record; source: Chinese Government
                              Procurement Database.



                                      S.4
                                   (a) Customers




                                    (b) Function
Figure S.4: Probability density plots of software categorizations based on Recurrent
   Neural Network with Long Short-Term Memory algorithm. Top panel shows
   categorization by customers; bottom panel shows categorization by function.




                                        S.5
Figure S.5: Cumulative number of public security and non-public security contracts (left
       panel), and the flow of new contracts signed in each month (right panel).




Figure S.6: Number of new public surveillance cameras in China since 2013, as measured
    by government procurement contracts for cameras. Source: Chinese Government
                               Procurement Database.




                                          S.6
Figure S.7: Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT) ranking of top facial recognition
  algorithms, 2018. Source: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).




                                       S.7
 Table S.1: Top predicted words from LSTM model -- non-binary categorization of
                                    software
Panel A: Customer type
                   Government                                   Commercial                                    General
Chinese                  English       Freq. (%)   Chinese         English         Freq. (%)   Chinese        English         Freq. (%)
   (1)                     (2)            (3)        (4)             (5)              (6)        (7)            (8)              (9)
                      Traffic            .603                   Mobile Phone         .821                       Vision          .474
                    Prestige             .382      APP               App             .645                     Learning          .378
                    Haikang              .369      IOS               IOS             .438                      Tencent          .340
                      Safety             .351      iOS               iOS             .430                        3D             .312
                     Hisense             .318                     Enterprise         .331                Recognition System     .301
                       City              .311                      Kingdee           .327                    Algorithm          .270
                     Finance             .296                    Electronics         .307                   Computing           .252
                      Safety             .281                       Health           .212                       Depth           .225
                    Numbers              .272                     Self-Help          .209                       Drone           .212
                     Center              .269                   Mobile Game          .201                     Real-time         .209
                 Public Transport        .216                    Assistance          .196                   Certification       .207
                   Community             .207                        Pay             .191                    Processing         .196
                   Scheduling            .200                     Backstage          .189                      Engine           .194
                 Central Control         .191                   Access Control       .176                    Technique          .187
                     Portrait            .163                         AI             .174                   Distributed         .183
                   Command               .161                       Vehicle          .174                    Simulation         .179
                    Auxilary             .159                  Smart Appliance       .169                      Netease          .173
                     Camera              .158                      Industry          .169                  Tool Software        .172
                     Wanda               .148      DHC               DHC             .168                     Program           .170
                    Highway              .148                    Marketing           .161                    Interactive        .166
Panel B: Function type
                   AI-Common                                 Data-Complementary                              AI-Video
Chinese                  English       Freq. (%)   Chinese         English         Freq. (%)   Chinese        English         Freq. (%)
   (1)                     (2)            (3)        (4)             (5)              (6)        (7)            (8)              (9)
                   Fingerprint           .342                      Storage           .206                       Face           1.104
                    Training             .203                   Visualization        .167                      Depth            .321
                  Housekeeper            .201                    Integration         .164                    Snapshot           .310
                       Text              .151                    Distributed         .162                   SenseTime           .287
                    Highway              .150                    Simulation          .157                   Attendance         .258
                       Iris              .147                 Medical Imaging        .148                    Kedacom           .258
                       Car               .143                      General           .144                      Track            .249
                      Haier              .137                    Integrated          .141                   Panoramic          .224
WPS                    WPS               .134                 Data Management        .136                   Broadcastt         .209
                    Translate            .126                       UTV              .136                Target/Objective       .189
                  Recommend              .124                      Manage            .126                  License Plate        .189
                      Image              .119                    High Speed          .126                     Feature           .184
                       Test              .116                  Media/Medium          .125                    Platinum           .175
                      Credit             .111                  Phone Software        .125                    Warning            .166
             Fingerprint Recognition     .106                      Design            .117                American Express       .163
                   Operation             .106                     Interface          .117                   Command             .158
                     WeChat              .105                   Development          .116                    Statistics         .149
                   Assessment            .105                      Server            .116                      Safety          .146
                     AIcloud             .102                Processing Software     .113       SDK             SDK             .141
                  Living Body            .098                   Transmission         .111                  Deploymentt         .141




                                                                S.8
Supplementary Material B                                                              Quantitative analysis
Supplementary Material B.1                                                   p g G /Y and Dg /Y as a function of d¯g
We now show that both government spending p g G /Y and data Dg /Y increase in
a BGP whenever d¯g increases.
   We have that
             G   1 NG         d¯g
               =                  1 p
             Y    g NZ q ( p )1-   ( az )
                        z z
                                                                              1- 1
                                 pc -
                    1           1- a
                                                        (0, pc , pd ( pc ))
                                                -  p qc d p (0, pc , p ( pc ))                          d¯g
                                                                         d
                =                                                                                 ¯g , pc , pd ( pc ))
                    g        ¯g , pc , pd ( pc   1- 1                              1- 1     d p (d
                        qc (d                  ))              qc (0, pc , pd ( pc )) 
                           d p (d ¯g , pc , pd ( pc ))    -       d p (0, pc , pd ( pc ))
                    1 1-                -1              1                                                                    d¯g              1
                =                           (1 - a )           ( p c )1- -  p                                          ¯g , pc , pd ( pc ))
                                                                                                                                                  ,
                    g                                pd ( pc )                                                   d p (d


 where the second equality follows from the solution to Ng / Nz in Theorem 1 and
the last equality uses the expressions in (36).
   Differentiating,
                                -1
           dlog( G /Y )            (1 - a )
                                                                        1
                                                                     pd ( pc )
                                                                               ( p c )1-                          dlog( pc )   dlog( pd )
                   ¯g ) = -  -
                                                                                                       ( - 1)           ¯g ) + dlog(d¯g )
            dlog(d             1
                                  (1 - a )
                                        
                                                                   1
                                                                pd ( pc )
                                                                           ( p c )1- -  p                         dlog(d
                            1                    dlogd p (d¯g , pc , pd ( pc ))
                          +             1-                       ¯g )
                                                        dlog(d
                                                         dlog( pc )   dlog( pd )                       1 dlogd p (d¯g , pc , pd ( pc ))
                           > - ( - 1)                          ¯g ) + dlog(d¯g )                   -                     ¯g )           ,
                                                         dlog(d                                                 dlog(d
                                                                                                        -1               1            1-
                                                                                                          (1- a ) p d ( p c ) ( p c )
where the inequality follows from follows from                                                        -1            1               1-            > 1.
                                                                                                        (1- a ) p d ( p c ) ( p c )    - p
    Moreover, differentiating equation (35), we obtain
                                                          -1                                                -1
1 dlog(d p (d¯g , pc , pd ))       (d  ¯g )  + (1 - )(d p (d  ¯g , pc , pd ))                                                          dlog( pc )   dlog( pd )
       dlog(d g )¯           =        -1
                                 ¯g )  +        
                                                                                     -1
                                                                     ¯g , pc , pd ))                                        1 + ( - 1) dlog(d¯g ) - dlog(d¯g )
                               (d           1+  (  -1)
                                                       (1 - )(d p (d
                                                                                                                           -1
                               1                                                                                 (d¯g )    
                             -                          -1                                   -1                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                                            .
                                           1 +  (  - 1)                        (d¯g )              +       
                                                                                                                  (1 - )(d p (d¯g , pc , pd ))         
                                                                                                       1+  (  -1)
                                                                                                  dlog( pd )
Replacing above and using the expression for                                                      dlog(d¯g )   in (39), we obtain

dlog( G /Y )                     1 -  dlog( pc )    1    1      dlog( pz )
 dlog(d ¯g ) > -        ( +
                                   
                                     )
                                       dlog(d¯g ) -  1 + ( - 1) dlog(d¯g )




                                                                               S.9
                                         -1                                              -1               dlog( pz )            dlog( pc )
                    1    (d  ¯g )  + (1 - )(d p (d¯g , pc , pd ))           1                             dlog(d¯g )   - (1 - ) dlog (d¯ ) g
                  -         -1                                           -1
                     (d¯g )  +      
                                         (1 - )(d p (d   ¯g , pc , pd ))                                          1 +  (  - 1)
                                             1+  (  -1)
                                1 -  dlog( pc )    1      1        dlog( pz )
                  >-        ( +     )       ¯    -                       ¯g )
                                      dlog(d g )     1 +  (  - 1 ) dlog(d
                                          z   dlog( p )       c            dlog( p )
                         1       1 dlog(d¯g ) - (1 - ) dlog(d¯g )
                  -
                    1 +  (  - 1)           1 +  (  - 1)
                            1-                     1              dlog( pc )   1    1        ( - 1) dlog( pz )
                  =-     +          1-                    2             ¯    +                              ¯g )
                                          (1 + ( - 1))            dlog(d g )    1 + ( - 1) 1 + ( - 1) dlog(d
                  > 0,
 where the second line follows from  > 1 + ( - 1), and the last line collects
                                   dlog( p )       dlog( p )
terms and comes from the fact that dlog(d¯c ) < 0, dlog(d¯z ) > 0.
                                                                               g                     g
      Finally, since Dg /Y =  g G /Y and we have shown before that p g increases with
d¯g , the above then implies that Dg /Y and p g G /Y increase with d¯g .


Supplementary Material B.2                                               Equilibrium conditions
Letting i = c, g, z,  = 1 if i = g or i = z, and d¯g = 1 if i = z, the profit maximization
problem can be generically written as
                                                                                                        -1
                                   -1              -1                                               -1                             -1
i = max                  pi (d g )  + (1 - )(d p )                                                              ( x ) (1-  )            -  x - pd d p .
         d p ,x       -1
First order conditions are:
                                                                                                     -1
                                                         -1                             -1       -1                         -1
                                        pi     (d g )           + (1 - )(d p )                              ( x ) (1-  )         (1 -  ) =  x
                                                                -1                                                           -1
                       -1                          -1       -1  
                                                                               (1-  )  - 1               (1 - )(d p )        
    pi      (d g )          + (1 - )(d p )                               (x)                              -1                         -1
                                                                                                                                          = pd d p .
                                                                                                (d g )         + (1 - )(d p )        


This implies
                                                                         -1
                              -1                           -1        -1                         -1  1
   i = pi           (d g )         + (1 - )(d p )                                  ( x ) (1-  )         ×···
                                                                                                    - 1
                                                                          -1
                                                                                               
                                                                (d g )    
                       1 +  (  - 1)                                                           
                                                           -1                           -1
                                                 (d g )         + (1 - )(d p )          
                                                                            -1
                                                                                                               1
                            -1                        -1         -1             -1
                                                                      1- (1-  )            1-                      -1
                                                                                                         1- (1-  ) 
    x=            (d g )         + (1 - )(d p )                                         pi
                                                                                            
                                                                                                                -1                                 -1
                                                                                                                                            (1-  ) 
                                        1                                                                                -1
    1        (1 -  )                        -1
                                  1- (1-  ) 
                                                               -1                             -1     -1             -1
                                                                                                          1- (1-  )               1-                 -1
                                                                                                                                           1- (1-  ) 
(d p ) =
                     ( pi )                        (d g )             + (1 - )(d p )                                                                      ,
                pd                                                                                                                 




                                                                           S.10
which then gives
                                                                                                          -1                           -1
                                                                                                                                (1-  ) 
                             1
                                 -1
                       1- (1-  ) 
                                                      -1                               -1      -1             -1
                                                                                                    1- (1-  )      1-                    -1
                                                                                                                               1- (1-  )          1
         i = ( pi )                       (d g )            + (1 - )(d p )                                                                           ×···
                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                 -1
                                                                                                     
                                                                       (d g )    
                          1 +  (  - 1)                                                               
                                                                  -1                            -1
                                                     (d g )            + (1 - )(d p )           
                                                                                            -1                                 -1
                                                                                                                        (1-  ) 
          -1                             -1                              -1      -1             -1
                                                                                      1- (1-  )               1-                 -1
                                                                                                                       1- (1-  ) 
( qi )         =               (d g )         + (1 - )(d p )                                             pi
                   -1                                                                                          
                                                             -1
               -1   (1 - )(d p )        pi        -1
         dp =        -1              -1
                                           ( qi )  .
                (d )  + (1 - )(d )  pd
                  g               p

So, normalizing  = (1 - ), we obtain:
                                                                   (  -1)
                    ¯g , p g ) = p g
                                              
                                                            ¯g                 1 +  (  - 1)
                g (d                      1+  (  -1)       d     1+  (  -1)
                                                                                  -1
                                 g (d¯g , p g )      
                         Yg = Ng
                                    pg          1 +  (  - 1)
                        Dg = Ng d¯g
                                                                                                                                 (  -1)

             ¯g , pc , pd ) = ( pc ) 1+(-1)
                                                  
                                                             ¯g )
                                                                        -1
                                                                                            ¯g , pc , pd ))
                                                                                                                    -1      -1 1+  (  -1)   1
         c (d                                              (d                + (1 - )(d p (d                                                   ×···
                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                 (d¯g )     
                                              1 +  (  - 1)                                                                            
                                                                                   -1                                           -1
                                                                         (d¯g )         + (1 - )(d p (d¯g , pc , pd ))          

                                                                                                                                              (  -1)
                           1      (1 -  )                                          -1                                           -1       -1 1+  (  -1) -1
  (d p (d¯g , pc , pd ))  =               ( p c ) 1+  (  -1)             (d¯g )             + (1 - )(d p (d¯g , pc , pd ))                                     
                                     pd
                                                                                                       (  -1)
                                                                         
                                                                                                     1+  (  -1)   1
          c (0, pc , pd ) = ( pc ) 1+(-1) (1 - ) -1 d p (0, pc , pd )
                                                                                                                  -1
                                              1                                    
                                                                                         (  -1) 1+  (  -1)
           d p (0, pc , pd ) =                             ( p c )  ( 1 -  )  -1                  
                                  ( p d )1+  (  -1)
                                                                                                                                 (  -1)
                                                                                                                                                     (1- )(-1)
                                                  1-                                                                -1      -1 1+  (  -1)
                         Yc =       Nc +             Ng                          (1 - )(d p (0, pc , pd ))                                  ( pc )    1+  (  -1)
                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                             (  -1)
                                                          -1                                  -1                        -1 1+  (  -1)            (1- )(-1)
                                                     ¯g )  + (1 - )(d p (d  ¯g , pc , pd ))                                                       1+  (  -1)
                              + Ng               (d                                                                                     ( pc )
                                     -1
                                             1-                                      ¯g , pc , pd )
                        D p = Nc +                  Ng d p (0, pc , pd ) + Ng d p (d
                                                
                                                   1 +  (  - 1)
                    z ( p z ) = ( p z ) 1+  (  -1)
                                                         -1
                                     z ( pz )            
                         Yz = Nz                               .
                                         p z 1 +  (  - 1)

   Furthermore, from the profit maximization of the final goods seller together
with goods market clearing, we obtain:
                                                                                                              pz   -
                                                                                                 Yz =                  Y
                                                                                                              a


                                                                                S.11
                                                              -1
                                                 1-a     Yc                pc
                                                                       =
                                                  a      Yz                pz
                                                               1
                                                              1-
                          (1 - a ) ( p c )1- + a ( p z )1-             = 1.

And the remaining market clearing conditions are
                                               G = Yg
                                              Dg =  g G
                                              D p =  p Y.
And the free entry conditions are
                            0 =  g (d¯g , p g ) + c (d¯g , pc , pd ) - (2 + F )µz z ( pz )
                                                                            
               c (0, pc , pd ) = µz z ( pz )
                 µz z ( pz ) =  +  = r,
 where the last equality follows from the Euler equation of the representative
household in a BGP.

Supplementary Material B.3                       Calibration
We externally calibrate  = 2,  = 0.03,  = 6, which are standard parameters
in the literature. As for the elasticity of substitution between software and non-
software intermediates, we set = 1 so that the aggregate production function is
Cobb-Douglas. We set a, µz , F,  g ,  p such that the initial BGP equilibrium is sym-
                                                  Nc               ~            Ng
metric: the direction of innovation is unbiased ( Nz
                                                     =                          Nz   = 1) and all sectors have
                               pc Yc     pg G
an identical output share    ( pz =
                                  Yz     = 1). We assume a growth rate of 6%, which
                                         pz Yz
matches the annual per-capita GDP growth rate in China in recent years.
    The parameters left to set are those associated with data as an input in inno-
vation: the share of data in production , the elasticity of substitution between
government and private data , and the productivity of government data in pri-
vate software innovation . Admittedly, we have a large degree of uncertainty
about  and . Our empirical evidence on the responses of government and com-
mercial software following the receipt of data-rich government contracts at most
show that  > 0 and  < . So, for our baseline calibration, we will simply set
them to  = 0.8 and  = 1 + ( - 1) + 0.1 which ensure that a symmetric BGP
equilibrium exist.
    However, given , , we next show how to pin down the parameter governing
economies of scope  from our empirical evidence. Fixing prices and differentiat-
ing the optimal levels of software production for those firms obtaining contracts
with respect to d¯g , we obtain the partial equilibrium responses:

                                                         ¯g )
                        log(q g ) =                 log(d
                                       1 + (  - 1) 



                                                  S.12
                                                                ¯g ),
                      log(qc ) =                           log(d
                                   1 + (  - 1)  +  (1 -  )
where
                                               
                                                             -1
                                                                  .
                                            d (d¯ ,p ,p )    
                                    + (1 - ) p gd¯ c d
                                                   g

 These responses are the model equivalent to those that we have estimated for high
capacity contracts in Appendix Table A.6, columns (1) and (2). Then, when setting
the government and private data in software production in the symmetric BGP to
be identical (d¯g = d p (d¯g , pc , pd )), we obtain that  =  and therefore:
                                            log(qc )
                                            log(q g )
                          =                                           .
                                                        log(qc )
                              1-     1+ (-1)+
                                                   1-   log(q g )


    We use the coefficients in Appendix Table A.6, 6 Semiyears after × High-capacity,
columns (1) and (2). They imply an elasticity of private to government software
  log(q )
( log(q c ) ) of about 2/3. Given our parameterization, this results in  = 0.82.
      g




                                           S.13
