                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        PAYMENTS CRISES AND CONSEQUENCES

                                           Qian Chen
                                        Christoffer Koch
                                         Padma Sharma
                                        Gary Richardson

                                       Working Paper 27733
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27733


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




For comments and suggestions, we thank seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Banks of
Cleveland, Dallas, and Kansas City, and at the University of California at San Diego and at
Irvine. Kaspar Wuthrich, Johannes Wieland, James Hamilton, Valerie Ramey, Titan Alon, Martin
Stuermer, and Pavel Kapinos provided particularly helpful comments. The views expressed in
this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, Federal Reserve, nor do they necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Qian Chen, Christoffer Koch, Padma Sharma, and Gary Richardson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Payments Crises and Consequences
Qian Chen, Christoffer Koch, Padma Sharma, and Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 27733
August 2020
JEL No. C01,C11,E02,E32,E44,E58,G01,G2,G21,G28

                                           ABSTRACT

Banking-system shutdowns during contractions scar economies. Four times in the last forty years,
governors suspended payments from state-insured depository institutions. Suspensions of
payments in Nebraska (1983), Ohio (1985), and Maryland (1985), which were short and occurred
during expansions, had little measurable impact on macroeconomic aggregates. Rhode Island's
payments crisis (1991), which was prolonged and occurred during a recession, lengthened and
deepened the downturn. Unemployment increased. Output declined, possibly permanently
relative to what might have been. We document these effects using a novel Bayesian method for
synthetic control that characterizes the principal types of uncertainty in this form of analysis. Our
findings suggest policies that ensure banks continue to process payments during contractions ­
including the bailouts of financial institutions in 2008 and the unprecedented support of the
financial system during the COVID crisis ­ have substantial value.

Qian Chen                                         Padma Sharma
Beijing Technology and                            Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Business University                               1 Memorial Drive
33 Fucheng Road Haidian District                  Kansas City, MO
Beijing 100048                                    Padma.Sharma@kc.frb.org
China
chenqiannku@163.com                               Gary Richardson
                                                  Department of Economics
Christoffer Koch                                  University of California, Irvine
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas                    3155 Social Sciences Plaza
2200 North Pearl Street                           Irvine, CA 92697-5100
Dallas, TX 75201                                  and NBER
Christoffer.Koch@dal.frb.org                      garyr@uci.edu
1     Introduction
Policymakers strive to ensure commercial banks process payments on a business-as-usual ba-
sis at all times. An imperative for the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan writes, is "to ward
off financial paralysis ­ a chaotic state in which businesses and banks stop making the pay-
ments they owe each other and the economy grinds to a halt (Greenspan, 2008, pp. 105-6)."
"Banks are like the economy's circulatory system," Timothy Geithner writes, "as vital to its
everyday functioning as the power grid (Geithner, 2014, p. 3)." Even modest disruptions of
banks' payment operations "cause horrific pain (Geithner, 2014, p. 14)." During the financial
crisis of 2007-2009, Ben Bernanke writes, the Fed's extraordinary actions were necessary to pre-
vent a catastrophe like the contractions caused by widespread banking panics and payment
suspensions during the nineteenth century and Great Depression (Bernanke, 2013). Similar
concerns appear to underlie the Federal Reserve's extraordinary actions to support depository
institutions during the current COVID-19 crisis.
        The validity of policymakers' fears and the value of policies based upon them is diffi-
cult to determine.1 A venerable literature describes banking panics of the Gilded Age and
Great Depression, which often deepened and occasionally triggered downturns (Sprague,
1910; Wicker, 2000; Chabot, 2011; Richardson and Sablik, 2015; Davison and Ramirez, 2014;
Jalil, 2015; Gorton and Tallman, 2016). This literature, however, struggles to differentiate the
consequences of payment and credit disruptions. Given the institutions at the time and the
data extant today, credibly disentangling the two may be impossible, and given the evolution of
economies over the last century, the relevance of those estimates to modern policy makers may
be questioned. A theoretical literature exists in which scholars calibrate models and calculate
benefits from reducing payment frictions Rocheteau and Wright (2005), Bethune, Rocheteau,
and Rupert (2015), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2009), and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017). These
models indicate that suddenly preventing agents from making payments with a substantial
share of their liquid assets could have a large negative impact on the economy. Direct empiri-
cal work on the impact of suspensions of payments on modern developed economies, however,
is limited.
        The limiting factor is lack of data. Since the Great Depression, policymakers for the
worlds' leading economies have ensured that commercial banks processed payments in all
states of the world, even during the worst crises, even shocks that forced equity markets to
close, like the 9/11 terrorist attacks. To accomplish this feat, policymakers strengthened cen-
tral banks and regulatory agencies and bailed out systemically-important commercial banks
when they seemed on shaky ground. Are expenditures like this ­ particularly the bailouts ­
    1 Thepublic appears to share these concerns. The Federal Reserve (www.federalreservehistory.org) and Fed-
eral Deposit Insurance Corporation's (www.fdic.gov) web sites explain that their organizations exist to prevent
recurrences of our nation's historical experience with commercial-banking crises and suspensions of payments.


                                                      1
worthwhile? If policymakers had allowed a substantial share of commercial banks to suspend
operations in 2008, after the failure of Lehman Brothers, what would have happened? A sub-
stantial share might be the same as in the Great Depression of the 1930s, when banks holding
about 12% of all deposits involuntarily suspended operations between the stock-market crash
of 1929 and the banking holiday in 1933. We know of no direct answer to this question.
       Our essay fills this lacuna in the literature by examining a series of state-level shocks
originally elucidated by William English (1993). These are the suspensions of payments in
Nebraska in 1983, Ohio in 1985, Maryland in 1985, and Rhode Island in 1991. In each
of these states, governors suspended payments from all financial institutions insured by a
state-chartered deposit-insurance program when mismanagement or defalcation at an insured
member resulted in losses that threatened the program's stability and triggered runs at healthy
intermediaries. These suspensions varied in length, magnitude, and relationship to the busi-
ness cycle. In the largest, Rhode Island and Maryland, the share of deposits trapped in sus-
pended banks exceeded the share trapped in suspensions during the Great Depression.2 These
are the only statewide suspensions of payments by depository institutions since the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation began operations 85 years ago.
       Our analysis asks whether these payment-systems shocks, which temporarily reduced
the liquidity of households' and firms' portfolios, impacted macroeconomic aggregates, such
as unemployment, labor force participation, and gross state product, and whether the impact
depended upon the magnitude of the shock or its correlation with the business cycle. Our
methods are shaped by the structure of this historical experiment. We examine data aggre-
gated at the state level. We observe four suspensions, which we often refer to as treatments,
to conform to the lexicon common in the literature. Each treatment affected a single state at a
single point in time. The correct control group is unclear. Which states had experiences most
similar to the treated state prior to treatment?
       In these circumstances, the method of synthetic control provides a data-driven pro-
cedure to determine an appropriate baseline against which to compare the outcome for the
treated state. A synthetic control is constructed from a convex combination of comparison
units. This weighted average approximates the characteristics of the state exposed to the
shock. A synthetic control provides a better comparison for the state exposed to the interven-
tion than any single comparison state alone. This method facilitates causal inference when an-
   2 Rhode  Island's experience, which is a focus of our analysis, probably influenced U.S. policymakers' expec-
tations of what would have occurred in 2008 if the government had not taken extraordinary actions to protect the
banking and payment system following Lehman Brothers' bankruptcy. Articles about Rhode Island's crisis and
the simultaneous credit crunch in New England had been written by several members of the FOMC, including
the Chair and the President of FRB Boston, and also by several senior Fed staffers (e.g. Bernanke and Lown,
1991; English, 1993; Pulkkinen and Rosengren, 1993). Other members of these groups experienced these events
firsthand at a formative stage in their career, because they lived at the time in New England or worked on the
Fed's teams responding to these events.


                                                       2
alyzing comparative case studies with aggregate data (Abadie and Gardeazabal, 2003; Abadie,
Diamond, and Hainmueller, 2010; Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller, 2015; Born, Müller,
Schularick, and Sedlácek, 2019; Born, Müller, Schularick, and Sedlácek, 2020). Synthetic con-
trol allows us to clearly compare macroeconomic aggregates from states whose governors
suspended payments of deposits to a comparable set of states whose governors who did not.
       Inference in synthetic control is an active area of research (Li, 2019; Chernozhukov,
Wuthrich, and Zhu, 2018; Chernozhukov, Wuthrich, and Zhu, 2019; Ben-Michael, Feller, and
Rothstein, 2018; Ben-Michael, Feller, and Rothstein, 2019; Arkhangelsky, Athey, Hirshberg,
Imbens, and Wager, 2019). We recast the standard synthetic control as a Bayesian estimation
problem. We estimate distributions of weights for comparison units, which in turn, yield dis-
tributions for the synthetic control, average treatment effect, and cumulative treatment effect.
These distributions elucidate the impact of the treatment and precision of the estimate. They
also yield information about the probability of particularly bad (or good) outcomes.
       Inference using our method has appealing intuition. The principal uncertainty under-
lying synthetic control is the composition of the control unit. We quantify this uncertainty and
show how it can be magnified by post-treatment trajectories of untreated units. That insight
enhances our understanding of the exercise. Our results for Rhode Island's banking crisis
provide an example. The synthetic control is a weighted average of states whose economic
aggregates resembled Rhode Island's before the crisis. Unemployment rates for that group
continued to evolve in tandem after Rhode Island's banks shut down. Their similarity after
the treatment date means little uncertainty exists about the synthetic control.3
       The situation is different for gross state product (GSP). The GSPs of states whose
economies resembled Rhode Island's in the decade before treatment (i.e. the 1980s) diverged
in the decade after the crisis (i.e. the 1990s). GSP rose in all states, but it rose much more in
states which benefited from the 1990s booms in information technology and financial services.
In this case, varying weights across comparison states substantially changes our estimate of
the average treatment effect. The more weight placed on states that grew more, the larger the
estimate. The less weight placed on those states, the smaller the estimate. The post-treatment
divergence of the untreated units results, in other words, is a wide and widening interval of
uncertainty around the synthetic control. The tail of this diverging distribution contains very
bad outcomes. Its width suggests payments crises could result in large declines of output
relative to potential. In our example, this result arises for a clear reason. Rhode Island's pay-
ments crisis occurred at the start of a decade with booms in increasing-returns industries. The
network and agglomeration externalities in these industries meant that they tended to concen-
   3 Consider, for example, a situation where the unit of interest has value Z before treatment and Z-A after
treatment. The untreated comparison units have the constant value Z before and after treatment. The synthetic
control, which is a weighted average across the comparison units, will equal Z regardless of the weights. The
treatment effect equals -A. There is no uncertainty.


                                                     3
trate in a few places, like Silicon Valley in California, the Route 128 region in Massachusetts,
and the New York metropolitan area. The finance and high-tech ships picked up steam in
the early 1990s. Rhode Island missed those boats. It might have missed them because of its
payments crisis, which occurred just as the internet became the "new new thing" and hi-tech
firms chose cities in which to set up shop. That possibility is reflected in the wide probabil-
ity interval for aggregate output, which indicates payments crises could result in large and
prolonged reductions in output versus what might have been.4
        Overall, we find that impact of suspensions of payments depends upon the phase of the
business cycle. Suspensions of payments in Nebraska, Ohio, and Maryland ­ which occurred
during economic expansions ­ had no systematic impact on economic aggregates. The crisis
in Rhode Island ­ which occurred near the trough of a business cycle ­ had a substantial
aggregate impact. Unemployment rose relative to the control group and remained elevated
throughout the next business-cycle expansion. The unemployment rate converged to that of
comparable states only during the next economic contraction, following the dot-com crash
in 2001. The convergence occurred during that contraction because substantial numbers of
men and women left Rhode Island's labor force, either because they ceased seeking work for
a substantial period, or retired, or left the state. Relative to control states, many of Rhode
Island's macroeconomic aggregates declined permanently. The decline in employment, for
example, peaks a decade after treatment and remains substantial until our analysis ends in
2001.
        The share of deposits trapped in Rhode Island's banks exceeded the share of deposits
trapped in suspended banks throughout the United States during the Great Depression (Richard-
son, 2007). So, we use distributions derived from Rhode Island's experience from 1991 through
2006 to ask the question: what might have happened if U.S. policymakers had not bailed out
the banking system following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, a counterfactual which
policymakers asserted might have led to a financial catastrophe like the 1930s. This exercise
helps to address our broader question: do the costs of keeping deposits liquid in all states of
the world justify the benefits?



2     Historical Background
This section discusses issues important for understanding our analysis and conclusions. One
is why governments expend resources to ensure that payment intermediaries, particularly
    4 Consider a case where the unit of interest has value Z before treatment and Z-A after treatment. Before
treatment all of the comparison units have the constant value Z. After treatment, half of the comparison states
retain the value Z and half change to value 10*Z. As weights vary across the untreated units, the synthetic control
varies from Z to 10Z, and the treatment effect ranges from -A to -A-9Z.



                                                        4
commercial banks, operate routinely regardless of the state of the economy. Two is how much
governments expend on this task. Three is why governors of four states suspended payments
from depository institutions between 1983 and 1991 and how these suspensions impacted
firms' and households' balance sheets. This information elucidates the importance of the
issues that we examine and indicates that the methods we use yield accurate conclusions.


2.1       Why Societies Fear Suspensions of Payments

Fear of payments crises stems from historical experience and modern understanding of the
importance of payment systems. Most payments for goods and services begin, end, and
often also transit through deposit accounts at financial institutions. Today, these transfers are
typically electronic.5 From the 1880s through the 1980s, the preponderance of payments by
value were checks. Most checking deposits were held at commercial banks, and most check
processing was done by commercial and central banks.
          Banks typically make payments when depositors' ask them to do so, but the law does
not require banks to make payment at that time. The pace of payments is at banks' and
regulators' discretion. Contracts and laws allow banks and regulators to delay payments
for short periods at will and for longer periods with cause. At their own discretion, for
example, banks can require depositors to provide thirty days notice prior to withdrawing
savings deposits. Banks can refuse to redeem certificates of deposit until maturity. Banks can
also delay payment on demand deposits (i.e. checking accounts) for several days (five was
common, although the number varies across jurisdictions and over time). Banks can delay
paying checks for longer periods during emergencies if they promise to pay in full when the
emergency passes and demonstrate to regulators that they have the ability to do so. Regulators
can order individual banks or the banking system as a whole to postpone payments if they
believe it is in the interest of an institution's depositors or the general public. These rules
protect banks from sudden drains of deposits, like bank runs, that could trigger fire sales and
   5 In  the U.S. in 2015, for example, 72 percent of all payments by value were transfers of this type with 19
percent by check, 18 percent by debit, and 35 percent by other electronic transfer methods, such as payments
via ACH. Credit amounted to 16% of all payments by value. Only 9 percent of payments by value were made
with cash. In the 1980s, transfers on the books of financial institutions amounted to similar fraction of all pay-
ments by value, although a much smaller share were electronic, and a much larger share were check. When
a customer pays for groceries with a debit card, their swipe at a cash register transfers funds from their bank
account to their grocer's. While households use currency and coin for small payments and credit cards for other
purchases, the ultimate source and destination for almost all of these transfers are individuals' and firms' ac-
counts at depository institutions. Households typically obtain cash by withdrawing funds from their deposit
accounts (often via automated teller machines). Firms that receive cash payments typically deposit those funds
in their accounts shortly after receipt. For additional information on this topic, see the Federal Reserve Payments
Study at https://www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/fr-payments-study.htm, the Diary of Consumer Pay-
ment Choice at https://www.frbatlanta.org/banking-and-payments/consumer-payments/diary-of-consumer-
payment-choice?panel=1, and the Survey of Consumer Payment Choice at https://www.frbatlanta.org/banking-
and-payments/consumer-payments/survey-of-consumer-payment-choice/2019-survey?panel=1


                                                        5
destabilize an individual bank or the entire the financial system. These rules, however, mean
that payment flows through the banking system can suddenly freeze. These freezes have been
traditionally called suspensions of payments, or in modern times, payments crises.
      Suspensions of payments occurred intermittently in the past, usually but not always
during recessions, when banks ceased paying checks or honoring requests to withdraw cash
over their counters. Widespread suspensions of payments occurred in 1837, 1857, 1873, 1884,
1893, 1901, 1907, 1929, and repeatedly between 1930 to 1933 (Wicker, 2000; Richardson, 2007;
Richardson and Troost, 2009; Carlson, Mitchener, and Richardson, 2011; Davison and Ramirez,
2014; Jalil, 2015). Smaller, local suspensions occurred sporadically between these dates (Davi-
son and Ramirez, 2014; Jalil, 2015). The larger episodes deepened or triggered economic
downturns (Sprague, 1910; Cohen, Hachem, and Richardson., 2020).
      Congress tried to solve the problem of suspension on several occasions.           In 1863,
Congress passed the National Banking Act, to create a network of nationally supervised insti-
tutions with safer assets, more liquidity, and less susceptibility to suspension than the state-
chartered institutions that existed before. In 1913, Congress established the Federal Reserve
System, to stabilize interest rates, prevent panics, and prevents shutdowns of the banking
system like the Panic of 1907. The collapse of the banking system during the contraction of
the 1930s, however, demonstrated the reforms had not solved the problem. During the New
Deal, the federal government responded by establishing a nationwide deposit insurance sys-
tem. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC, established 1933) insured deposits
of all nationally-chartered commercial banks and any state-chartered commercial bank that
voluntarily joined the organization. The Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FS-
LIC, established 1934, dissolved 1989) insured deposits at all nationally-chartered savings and
loans (S&Ls) and any state-chartered thrifts (i.e. S&Ls and similar state-chartered institutions)
that voluntarily joined the organization. The federal government also tightened regulations re-
garding the operation of commercial banks, restructured the banking industry, and increased
resources devoted to the supervision of banks (Komai and Richardson, 2011).
      In addition to historical experience, economic theory suggests the payment system has
important functions. Increasing payment frictions (such as suspending payments on deposit
accounts) can reduce output, employment, and firm entry, while increasing unemployment
and bankruptcies. These models stem from the foundation of Lagos and Wright (2005) and
Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). Recent models in this literature include firm entry and
exit, unemployment, payments, and credit. Examples include Rocheteau and Wright (2005),
Bethune, Rocheteau, and Rupert (2015), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2009), Guerrieri and Loren-
zoni (2017), Wasmer and Weil (2004), Beaudry, Galizia, and Portier (2017), and Beaudry, Gal-
izia, and Portier (2020). In these models, some households have access to credit. Others pay
for products with liquid assets (i.e. money or deposits) that they accumulate. Credit lim-


                                               6
its are endogenous, and credit frictions impact the level and persistence of unemployment.
Multiple equilibria exist, and changes in the supply of money and credit generate volatility
and co-movements across producers. An exogenous reduction in households' cash holdings
will lead to an economic contraction. The impact of the shock may depend upon the state of
the economy. During booms, when credit limits are high and more households have access to
credit, shocks to households' cash holdings or increasing frictions in the cash payment system,
should have a smaller impact than similar shocks during recessions, when credit is constrained
and firms and households may respond more substantially to payment shocks and bad news.


2.2   Governments Spend Substantial Resources to Prevent Payments' Crises

Financial regulation is costly, and its benefits are nebulous. Uncertainty about both spans
several orders of magnitude (Cochrane, 2014). The direct costs of financial regulation are
large at the federal level. In 2019, the FDIC's expenditures totaled $1.8 billion, the OCC
amounted to $1.3 billion, and the Federal Reserve System's totaled $5.2 billion. Employment
at the FDIC exceeded 5,600, at the OCC exceeded 3,900, and at the Federal Reserve exceeded
22,800. The indirect costs of bank regulation may be much larger. Scholars estimate the
Dodd-Frank Act alone imposed on banks $50 billion in paperwork and $108 billion in legal
fees (Batkins and Brannon, 2013). Scholars provide a wide range of estimates for the cost of
regulating bank capital. Some estimate the impact on interest rates and lending to be "modest"
(Kashyap, Stein, and Hanson, 2010; Kisin and Manela, 2016). Others conclude it is substantial
(Garcia, 2019). The true costs of financial regulation may be of orders of magnitude larger,
because financial regulations impact innovation, competition, allocations of credit, and the
functioning of our economic and political systems, but the "important costs and benefits are
nearly impossible to objectively quantify" (Cochrane, 2014).
      When financial regulation fails and financial crises occur, modern governments typi-
cally bail out their banking systems. Examples in the U.S. include interventions to preserve
Continental-Illinois in the 1980s, open-bank assistance provided to struggling banks and thrifts
by the FDIC and FSLIC in the 1980s, and the bailout of commercial-bank counterparties of AIG
following the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008. Scholars provide a wide range of estimates
for the cost of the latter. The lower bound is zero, because U.S. taxpayers eventually profited
from their governments' actions. The upper bound is trillions of dollars (or more than the
total value added to GDP by the financial sector from 1998 through 2008), which was the gov-
ernments total outlay to purchase troubled assets and backstop struggling institutions from
2008 to 2012. Recent estimates place the total direct cost of crisis related bailouts in the United
States at nearly $500 billion or 3.5% of GDP in 2009 (Lucas, 2019). This figure is the value
that U.S. financial institutions would have paid ex-ante for the transfers of resources that they


                                                7
received during the crisis.
       The 3.5% figure represents a transfer of wealth. It does not indicate real expenditures,
such as resources consumed during and personnel working on bailout programs rather than
producing goods and services for consumers. It also does not indicate production that would
have been foregone if the banking system had not been bailed out, which might have lowered
aggregate demand, by altering consumers' willingness and ability to purchase products, or
aggregate supply, by raising costs of production or limiting firms' ability to hire workers or
purchase inputs. A counterfactual estimate of this kind is what our paper provides.


2.3    Why Governors Suspended Payments During the 1980s and 1990s

Between 1956 and 1981, twenty-nine states established systems insuring deposits at state-
chartered banks, thrifts, and/or credit unions (English, 1993; Todd, 1994).6 Rising inflation
made insuring deposits at the state level profitable, because state-insured institutions were
unconstrained by federal regulations imposing maximum rates of interest on deposits and
loans, which were imposed on all federally insured institutions (McKelvey, 1978). Most of
these state insurance systems operated without incident, but between 1983 and 1991, four
failed: Nebraska in 1983, Ohio and Maryland in 1985, and Rhode Island in 1991.7
       These failures had common features (English, 1993; Calomiris, 1993; Todd, 1994). All
occurred suddenly. The failed systems collected premia too low to cover the failure of multiple
large institutions. Regulation of insured institutions was lax. Regulators had limited powers,
collected insufficient information, and lacked the ability and incentive to preempt or punish
fraudulent activity. Lax regulation allowed state-chartered financial institutions to take large
risks, to be taken advantage of by financiers with more experience, and in some cases, to trans-
fer funds to their friends or themselves. The situation was exacerbated by the deregulatory
ethos of the time. Deregulation allowed financial institutions to enter lines of business which
had potentially higher profits but also increased risks and in which they had little experience.
Deregulation may have encouraged growing connections between bankers and politicians and
induced regulators to look the other way when problems arose in hopes that market forces
would correct the situation. In each of the four states, mismanagement or defalcation at a large
insured institution resulted in losses that threatened the insurance fund's stability. The revela-
   6 States had established and discontinued such systems in the past, when economic conditions warranted.
Since the early nineteenth century, state governments have chartered and regulated banks. States have also
established deposit insurance systems. One group of insurance schemes operated before the Civil War. Another
group operated in the early twentieth century. The insurance systems established in these waves of regulation
eventually ceased operations. Given that history, the rapid spread of state-level insurance systems should not be
surprising.
    7 Note that Mississippi's deposit insurance system failed in 1976. We do not analyze this incident because

most of the data series that we analyze do not span that period.



                                                       8
tion of the problem surprised regulators and the public. Unexpected bad news triggered runs
at healthy members of the state insurance fund. Fears that the crisis would spread and that
taxpayers would foot the bill to clean up the mess induced governors to suspend payments
from all state-insured institutions until the situation could be sorted out (additional details of
these events appear in Appendix B).
          The suspensions varied in magnitude, length, and relationship to the business cycle.
Details appear in Table 1. The suspensions in Rhode Island and Maryland involved substantial
shares of deposits in those states. In Rhode Island, over 18% of all deposits in the state
(including federally insured) were initially held in suspended institutions. These institutions
held accounts for more than a third of all state residents. This percentage exceeded the fraction
of commercial bank deposits trapped in suspended banks during the Great Depression (12.6%)
with the exception of the banking holiday in the week of March 6, 1933. The trapped funds
were a sizeable share of households' liquid wealth. Deposits in suspended institutions per
household approached 14% of median annual household income. In Maryland, deposits in
suspended institutions per household exceeded 19% of median annual household income. The
suspensions in Nebraska and Ohio involved a smaller share.
          The first three crises occurred during expansions and were resolved quickly.8 The sus-
pension of payments by institutions insured by the Rhode Island Share and Deposit Indemnity
Corporation (RISDIC) occurred near the trough of a contraction. The pace of reopening was
slow. On January 1, 1991, Rhode Island's governor froze all accounts in all 45 RISDIC insured
institutions. Initially, depositors had no access to funds at closed institutions. At the end of
the week, institutions holding 19% of RSDIC-insured deposits reopened with federal insur-
ance. From then until April, the remaining funds (including deposits from nearly 20% of the
state's residents) remained frozen (House of Representatives, 1991a; House of Representatives,
1991b). In May 1991, partial payouts from RSDIC's successor DEPCO (which was set up to
   8 In  Nebraska, three insolvent institutions shut their doors to depositors, but elsewhere, demand deposits
remained accessible. Time and share deposits lost liquidity, because they could not be withdrawn early, but
retained full value and could be withdrawn in full upon maturity. In Ohio, several insolvent institutions shut
their doors permanently and most state-chartered S&Ls closed their doors for two weeks. After that, depositors
could withdraw $750 per month from each account in each institutions that remained closed. This generous limit
meant most families were not forced to cut consumption. Most closed institutions reopened fully within a month
after attaining federal insurance. The FSLIC accelerated this process by rushing hundreds of examiners to the
state (many borrowed from the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies) to quickly audit institutions, de-
termine which qualified for FSLIC insurance, and expedite reopening. In Maryland, the state government acted
to prevent bank runs by slowing withdrawals from state-insured institutions, but never suspended operations of
solvent thrifts. The state imposed a withdrawal limit of $1,000 per month per account until institutions qualified
for federal insurance.Federal agencies expedited the transition to federal insurance by assigning additional em-
ployees to the task. The withdrawal cap approached 25% of the average household deposit and 5% of median
household income. It also included exceptions for prescheduled payments (e.g. school tuition), debt payments
(e.g. mortgages, car loans, and credit card bills), and obligations to governments (e.g. taxes). The withdrawal
limit also included exceptions for businesses paying expenses, such as invoices and payroll. So, the payment
crisis forced few families and firms to cut expenditures.



                                                        9
clean up the mess) amounted to 7% of trapped deposits. In June 1991, DEPCO paid another
23% of trapped deposits. The next substantial payouts occurred nearly a year later, in May
1992, when federally insured institutions acquired and reopened institutions holding 20% of
trapped deposits, and in June 1992, when DEPCO paid off another 26% of trapped deposits.
The remainder ( 5% of the original frozen amount) were repaid in the next year (Pulkkinen
and Rosengren, 1993; Todd, 1994).
      Payoffs were delayed in Rhode Island principally for political reasons. Rhode Island
could have paid and eventually did pay depositors in full. The crisis began during an election.
Democrats ousted Republicans. The new Democratic governor shut down the financial system
on his first day in office. Democrats blamed Republicans for the mess and used the debacle
to advance their pre-crisis political program. Democrats cancelled a small cut in the state
sales tax, which Republicans had passed the previous summer over Democratic opposition,
asserting that the state needed the funds to cover RISDIC losses and to maintain the social
safety net. Rhode Island's governor repeatedly lobbied the federal government for funds
to repay depositors in full and appears to have delayed resolution to bolster its case that
citizens would suffer unless the federal government covered the tab, which the state asserted
would run roughly from $100 million to $400 million (or $100 to $400 per resident of the
state). Congress repeatedly rebuffed Rhode Island's requests. Rhode Island also pursued
legal restitution. It sued executives at failed financial institutions and the firm that audited
RISDIC's accounts. The state recovered few funds from the executives but the auditing firm,
Ernst & Young, settled the suit for $103 million. We have not been able to determine the
eventual cost born by the state, which some documents indicate was near $100 million, but
given the rise in real estate prices in Rhode Island from 1995 to 2005, a strategy must have
existed for the state to resolve the situation without loss.
      While depositors' funds remained trapped in Rhode Island for a prolonged period,
other aspects of the banking and payment systems remained in operation. Electronic pay-
ment networks such as credit card processors remained operated without interruption. The
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston ensured sufficient cash remained available in all communi-
ties. The Reserve Bank expedited loans and rushed cashed to member banks in Rhode Island
and southeastern Massachusetts. It also acted to ensure that local nodes in automated teller
networks remained in operation. FRB Boston's payment's experts rerouted all Automated
Clearing House (ACH) payments ­ including Social Security checks and similar federal and
state payments ­ heading towards accounts at closed institutions to alternative accounts at
federally-insured institutions in nearby communities that remained in operation.
      Differences among these crises should not overshadow common characteristics (English,
1993; Todd, 1994). All of the suspensions were sudden and unanticipated. The preponderance
of depositors did not known their funds were at risk or that they were ensured by state-


                                                10
chartered entities, rather than a national program backed by the full faith and credit of the
federal government (Congress:1991). Depositors did not prepare for the suspensions before
they occurred. None of the crises spread to neighboring states or triggered suspensions of
depositories which were federally-insured. Spillovers were limited because regulators strove
to limit contagion, and in the case of Rhode Island, because it was small relative to neighboring
states. These common characteristics suit these events for synthetic-control analysis.



3    A First Look at the Data
Key targets for central banks include inflation, employment, and output. Measures of em-
ployment, unemployment, labor-force participation, and gross domestic product (but neither
inflation nor prices) exist for U.S. states from the 1970s until today. These series' lengths and
consistent measurement suit them for synthetic-control methods, which require extended runs
of pre-treatment data to determine appropriate weights for comparison units.
      We initially examine these series using standard methods of synthetic control for the
crisis in Rhode Island and then for the other states. We construct a synthetic control for unem-
ployment in Rhode Island using the method of (Abadie and Gardeazabal, 2003). This method
determines the weighted average of monthly unemployment rates for the other 49 states that
best fits Rhode Island's experience prior to the RISDIC crisis in January 1991 (see Section 4 for
estimation details). This convex combination is 64.1% Massachusetts, 20.2% Delaware, 13.6%
Michigan, and 2.1% New Hampshire. This group seems reasonable. Massachusetts borders
Rhode Island. New Hampshire is the next state to the north. Their occupational structures
resemble Rhode Island's. So does Delaware's. Like Rhode Island, Massachusetts, New Hamp-
shire, and Delaware experienced credit-fueled expansions in the early 1980s and experienced
a sharp contraction at the end of the decade. The control group excludes Rhode Island's west-
ern neighbor, Connecticut, whose employment patterns in the 1980s moved with its neighbor
New York.
      The comparison of unemployment rates between Rhode Island and the synthetic control
appears in Figure 1a. The vertical line marks the month of Rhode Island's crisis, January 1991.
Before that date, the unemployment rate in Rhode Island moved in lockstep with the control.
Unemployment fell steadily from 1985 through 1988, but then rose rapidly in 1989 and 1990.
Rhode Island's crisis occurs near the trough of the contraction. Three months later, when
unemployment peaked in the control and began to decline, unemployment in Rhode Island
continued to rise, peaking after another year and a half. By 1993, unemployment was declining
in both Rhode Island and the controls. Recovery in the two groups progressed at same rate.
This parallel path meant that unemployment in Rhode Island remained elevated relative to the
controls until the next recession in 2001. After that recession, Rhode Island's unemployment

                                               11
rate converged with unemployment in its control.
       The magnitude of the impact on unemployment was sizeable. During the six years after
the shock in Rhode Island, unemployment averaged 0.86 percentage points higher each month
than in states with comparable patterns of unemployment before treatment. This steady differ-
ence meant that over these 72 months, the working men and women of Rhode Island suffered
245,749 months of unemployment more than they would have if their state's unemployment
rate evolved like rates of comparable states that did not suspend payments. If these losses
had been imposed equally across the labor force, each worker would have lost approximately
two-and-a-half weeks of work or just over five percent of a year's income.
       The remaining panels of Figure 1 compare Rhode Island's experience to synthetic con-
trols for three additional macroeconomic aggregates. Figure 1b examines labor force partic-
ipation. The participation rate declined over 3 percentage points in Rhode Island relative to
controls. The decline occurred gradually. The impact peaked nearly 4 years after the RIS-
DIC crisis. Recovery was also gradual. The labor force participation remained 1 percentage
point below controls for more than a decade. Figure 1c examines employment. The level of
employment declines steadily and substantially relative to controls. The number of lost jobs
approaches 40,000 four years after the crisis. This decline appears to have been prolonged and
possibly permanent. These losses reflect additional unemployment, reduced labor force par-
ticipation, and a declining population. Figure 1d shows that aggregate output also declined
substantially in Rhode Island relative to controls.
       Figure 2 compares Rhode Island's post-RISDIC crisis to the post-suspension crises in
Maryland, Nebraska, and Ohio. In Figure 2a, each line indicates the unemployment rate
in a treated state minus its synthetic control. For Rhode Island, this is the vertical distance
between the two curves in Figure 2a. In Rhode Island, unemployment rose rapidly relative to
control and remained elevated for nearly 10 years. In Nebraska, unemployment fell relative
to controls. This decline continued, with gyrations, for ten years. In Ohio, unemployment
initially rose relative to synthetic control. The increase was temporary and small. A few years
after onset, Ohio's unemployment was lower than the control and remained below for the
rest of the decade. In Maryland, the unemployment rate initially fell relative to controls and
fluctuated after that.
       The remaining panels examine additional macroeconomic aggregates. After the pay-
ments crises in Maryland, Ohio, and Nebraska, Figure 2b shows that labor force participation
changed little or rose slightly. Figure 2c shows that employment rose substantially in Ohio
and slightly in Nebraska and Maryland. In the latter, employment eventually declined. This
decline, however, coincided with declines in Federal government expenditures after the Re-
publicans took control of Congress at the end of 1992, which impacted Maryland substantially,
because the federal government was one of the state's largest employers. Figure 2d shows

                                               12
gross state product initially rose in Ohio and Maryland and eventually fluctuated in all states
except Rhode Island, where it steadily declined.
          Our initial examination of the evidence illuminates clear patterns. The RISDIC crisis in
Rhode Island preceded adverse movements in macroeconomic aggregates. The crises in other
states did not.



4    Synthetic Control and Bayesian Inference
The causal impact of an event is the difference between reality, the outcome that occurred, and
counterfactual, the outcome that would have occurred in the absence of the treatment. The
counterfactual is unobserved but estimable. Our previous section estimates counterfactual
values using the synthetic control method developed by Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003). The
method of Abadie and Gardeazabal constructs a control from a convex combination of un-
treated units that best approximates the characteristics of the treated unit in the pre-treatment
period. The method was developed to estimate treatment effects resulting from interventions
that were enacted at an aggregate level, such as states or counties, rather than for individu-
als or firms who might have been randomly selected or chosen by criteria. Synthetic control
methods are suited to settings where there are a small number of treated units, a larger num-
ber of untreated units, and where no single untreated unit serves as a suitable control. These
characteristics clearly resemble our scenario, with four states out of fifty receiving treatments
at different dates during a decade.
          For the classic synthetic control, we consider Y1 , a T × 1 vector of the outcome of interest
such as unemployment from the treated unit, say, Rhode Island, observed over T periods and
Y0 , a T × J matrix of outcomes pertaining to J untreated units, which in our case constitute
the remaining 49 U.S. states and DC. We denote the intervention period by T0 and introduce
 N and Y I to represent the potential outcome for unit j without and with intervention re-
Yjt     jt
                                                                                           I
spectively over the post-treatment period t = T0 + 1, . . . , T . Accordingly, we observe Y1 [ T +1: T ]
                                                                                                  0
and Y0[T0 +1:T] N , namely, outcomes under intervention and no intervention for the treated and
untreated units respectively. The objective of this exercise is to estimate counterfactual out-
comes Y^N            for the treated unit, which in the illustrative case depicts economic outcomes
        1[ T +1: T ]
              0
for Rhode Island had there been no suspension of payments in January 1991. In the follow-
ing discussion, time subscripts are suppressed except when they are required to be explicitly
stated.
      The counterfactual Y^ N is constructed by assigning weights W = (w , w , . . . , w ) to
                           1                                               1  2          J
                                        ^ N                                         ^  N
each of the J untreated units to obtain Y1 = Y0 W . The difference between Y1 and Y1 over
the course of the post-treatment period is an estimate of the treatment effect. The optimal


                                                   13
weights W are obtained by minimizing the following squared loss function,

                           min X1[1:T0 ] - X0[1:T0 ] W       V X1[1:T0 ] - X0[1:T0 ] W                         (1)
                           w W

subject to w1 + w2 + . . . + w J = 1, w j  0 for all j = 1, 2, . . . , J . X1 is a set of K × 1 predictors
for outcome Y1 averaged over the pre-treatment period and X0 is a K × J matrix of the same
K averaged predictors based on the J untreated units. The matrix V assigns weights to each
of the K predictors and determines their relative importance in the prediction of the outcome
of interest. We follow the recommendation of Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and use their
algorithm to select an optimal V by minimizing the squared differences between treated and
synthetic control outcomes in the pre-treatment period, i.e.,

                  V = min Y1[1:T0 ] - Y0[1:T0 ] W (V )         V Y1[1:T0 ] - Y0[1:T0 ] W (V ) .
                           V


        We extend the standard synthetic control using a Bayesian method which we introduce
in this essay. Inference in synthetic control is an active area of research. A Bayesian approach
has advantages. It facilitates inference in finite sample settings on all objects of interest includ-
ing weights for control units, the treatment effect at any point in time, and transformations of
the treatment effect such as the average or cumulative. It works, in other words, for small sam-
ples. It directly addresses the key uncertainty in synthetic control methods, the appropriate
sample weights. It provides the distribution of the treatment effect and mathematical trans-
formations of that distribution. It also yields insights into the sources of uncertainty when
conducting counterfactual analysis that may not be as apparent when using other methods.
We elaborate on this issue below. Finally, it provides information useful to policymakers. An
example is a probability distribution around the average treatment effect which can tell you
the probability of and the reason for a very large effect, which is the type of tail event that
policymakers must plan for.9
        Bayesian estimation and inference requires the specification of a likelihood-based data
generating process for the outcome, Y1 , and prior distributions for the parameters in the like-
lihood. We model the outcome for the treated sample Y1 as being centered around the convex
combination of untreated units, Y0 W , with Gaussian errors characterized by variance 2 ,

                            Y1 = Y0 W + ,           where            N 0,  2 I T .                             (2)

The Bayesian counterpart of the synthetic control estimate arises from minimizing the poste-
rior expectation of the quadratic loss function L under the constraints K
                                                                        j=1 w j = 1 and w j  0,

    9 Note: The method used in this essay could be modified to better estimate the tails of the treatment distribu-

tion or quantile treatment effects by using a different loss function.


                                                        14
where,

                     L=     (Y1 - Y0 W ) (Y1 - Y0 W ) f (W , 2 | Y1 )dW d2 .

The posterior mean of W and 2 represent the Bayes estimate as the loss function being min-
imized is quadratic (Poirier, 1995). The posterior mean is computed from G draws from the
posterior distribution of W and 2 . We develop a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) al-
gorithm to generate the draws from the posterior distribution. Since the enforcement of the
non-negativity and sum-to-one constraints on weights can result in computational complexi-
ties in sampling from the posterior, we introduce unconstrained parameters  that are trans-
formations of the vector of weights W and are therefore computationally less burdensome to
estimate than the latter, where,

                                                    ej
                                        wj =             .                                  (3)
                                               K=1 e

We specify multivariate Gaussian priors f N (0 , S0 ) for the vector of parameters  and a
Gamma prior, f G (, d) for the error variance 2 . The rationale for the prior distribution of
the transformed parameter  arises from literature on distributional specifications for com-
positional data in a simplex such as the weights in our study. Aitchison (1982) noted the
shortcomings of the Dirichlet distribution in describing the variability of compositions and
recommended transformed normal distributions as suitable alternatives.
      Following the specification of the likelihood and priors, the posterior density of , 2
can now be represented as follows,

                     f , 2 |Y1  f Y1 |, 2 f N (|0 , S0 ) f G 2 |, d                         (4)

In designing an MCMC sampler to sample from the above posterior, we are precluded from
constructing a Gibbs sampler that iteratively samples from the conditional distributions of the
parameters as the latter do not belong to well-known parametric families. We therefore use
a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm with an independence proposal and estimate the parameter
vector  =    ,  2   in one block. We use the proposal density q( | Y1 )  f T  |  , aH , a
multivariate T distribution with  degrees of freedom where  =  MLE , H is an identity matrix
and a is a tuning parameter.
      The estimation algorithm is summarized follows.

  1. Start with current draw  c from the prior f ( )

  2. Draw the proposed value  p from the proposal density q( |Y1 ) = f T ( |^, aH )


                                               15
  3. Accept  p with probability  MH ( ,  p ),

                                                                f (Y1 | p ) f ( p )q( c |Y1 )
                              MH ( ,  p ) = min 1,
                                                                f (Y1 | c ) f ( c )q( p |Y1 )

otherwise repeat the current value  c .
       In implementing this algorithm we specify prior hyperparameters so that the mean of
each element of  is 0 with a standard deviation of 5. Similarly, we specify non-informative
priors for 2 with a mean of 90 and a standard deviation of 22. The vector of tuning parameter
a consists of values 0.1 corresponding to the variances of  and 0.01 corresponding to the
variances of 2 .
       On generating G draws from the posterior density of  and 2 , we recover the posterior
draws of weights W from the marginal posterior density f (W | Y1 ) using the transformation
                                                                                     ^ N ,b =
in Equation (3). Subsequently, we evaluate the vector of synthetic control outcomes, Y1
Y0 W b where W b is the Bayes estimate of the weights, namely the posterior mean resulting
from the G samples. The posterior draws of the weights W ( g) also generate a full posterior
                                                    ^ N ,( g) = Y0 W ( g) , g = 1, 2, ..., G, at each
sample of G draws of the synthetic control outcome, Y                     1
time period t = 1, 2, . . . , T . This posterior sample allows inference on the treatment effects,
       ^ N at each t within the post-treatment period.
Y1,t - Y
       1,t
       A straightforward evaluation of the distribution of the average treatment effect (ATE) is
as follows,

                                              T
                                    1
                                             
                                                                    N ,( g )
                      ATE( g) =                                ^
                                                        Y1,t - Y 1,t           , g = 1, 2, . . . , G.   (5)
                                  T - T0   t= T0 +1


The mean ATE is obtained by averaging across all draws from the posterior of W , i.e.,

                                                       T
                                         1
                     Mean ATE =
                                       T - T0                          ^ N |  f ( | Y1 ) d ,
                                                                Y1,t - Y1,t
                                                  t= T0 +1
                                                       G        T
                                           1
                                                                              ^    N ,( g )
                                                                       Y1,t - Y 1,t           .
                                     G ( T - T0 )     g=1 t= T0 +1


We can flexibly extend measurements of treatment effects to incorporate cumulative treatment
effects by evaluating cumulative sums of the treatment effect until each period t in the post-
treatment period, t  { T0 + 1, ..., T }. Inference on this quantity of interest is not possible in
classical methods.
       A key inferential quantity of interest that sheds light on the statistical importance of the
treatment effect is the probability of the outcome from the synthetic control sample taking val-
ues above or below the treated outcome. The Bayesian framework provides a straightforward

                                                           16
way to evaluate this quantity. The posterior probability of interest is,

                                                       Y1,t
                               ^ N < Y1,t | Y1 ) =
                            Pr(Y                                     ^ N | Y1 )dY
                                                                  f (Y          ^N.            (6)
                                1,t                                   1,t        1,t
                                                       -

This probability can be evaluated by using the posterior samples as follows,

                                                        G
                              ^ N < Y1,t | Y1 )  1
                           Pr(Y                         1 (Y
                                                           ^          N ,( g )
                                                                                 < Y1,t ),     (7)
                               1,t                           1,t
                                                 G     g =1


           ^ N ,( g) g = 1, 2..., G is a draw from the posterior density f (Y
where each Y                                                                ^ N | Y1 ).
            1,t                                                              1,t
       When interpreting the variation in the distribution of the synthetic control outcome,
^ N , it is vital to recognize that the variation stems from two sources. One is the dispersion in
Y1,t
the posterior draws of weights, W . This dispersion arises due to uncertainty about the correct
composition of the synthetic control. The uncertainty is over how one should weight the
untreated units. Which of those units' experiences most closely resembles the experience of
the treated unit? This uncertainty arises from the pre-treatment period, when one determines
the basis for the counterfactual case study. Our method directly estimates this uncertainty,
which allows us to distinguish it from the second source of uncertainty. The second source
is the post-treatment dispersion in the outcomes for the untreated units. The more these
outcomes differ and diverge, the greater the uncertainty about the impact of the treatment.
      To illuminate these issues, it is useful to consider the variance of the synthetic control
outcome, Y^ N , and two examples.
            1,t

                                   ^ N | Y1 ) = Var (Y0,t W | Y1 )
                              Var (Y1,t
                                                              J
                                              = Var (  Y0,t, j w j | Y1 ).
                                                         j =1

                                 ¯ for each j = 1, 2 . . . J viz., or in other words, when the
Consider the case when Y0,t, j = Y
post-treatment outcomes across all j untreated units at time t are equal. In this case, there is
                                                                        ¯ . The posterior vari-
no uncertainty. Regardless of the weights, the synthetic control equals Y
        ^ N reduces to 0 on account of the sum-to-one restrictions applicable to the estimated
ance of Y1,t




                                                  17
parameter vector W as seen below.

                                                          J
                                    ^ N | Y1 ) = Var (  Yw
                               Var (Y                   ¯ j | Y1 )
                                     1,t
                                                         j =1
                                                                J
                                                      ¯  w j | Y1 )
                                               = Var (Y
                                                              j =1
                                                      ¯ | Y1 ) = 0.
                                               = Var (Y

Another way of stating this is that the synthetic control lies in the set spanned by the historical
experience of the untreated units. If all untreated units had the same experience, they span a
set with a single element. So, the synthetic control is known with certainty. Regardless of the
weights, it is that element.
       Now, consider the case when post-treatment outcomes for untreated units 1, 2, . . . , J0
                                                  ¨ . Let  J0 w j = w
    ¯ and for untreated units J0 + 1, . . . J are Y
are Y                                                                                             ^N
                                                                    ¯ . The posterior variance of Y
                                                           j =1                                    1,t
can now be expressed as,

                                                   J0                  J
                          ^ N | Y1
                      Var Y1,t          = Var       Yw
                                                    ¯ j+                       ¨ j | Y1
                                                                               Yw
                                                  j =1              j= J0 +1
                                              ¯w
                                        = Var Y    ¨ (1 - w
                                                ¯ +Y       ¯ ) | Y1
                                           ¯ -Y  2
                                               ¨ Var (w
                                        = Y            ¯ | Y1 ) .

The variance of Y ^ N is clearly an increasing function of the difference between Y
                                                                                  ¯ and Y
                                                                                        ¨ and also
                   1,t
               ¯ is the maximum among untreated units. Y
     ¯ | Y1 ). Y
Var (w                                                         ¨ is the minimum among untreated
units. The set spanned by the historical experience of the untreated units (i.e. the set of all
                                                                    ¯ and Y
convex combinations of the untreated units) is the interval between Y      ¨ . As the breadth
of historical experience expands (i.e. as the width of the interval increases), the variance of
our estimate also increases. This relationship extends to the case when the J untreated units
have unique values. In general, the dispersion of the counterfactual Y^ N around its posterior
                                                                                          1,t
mean is jointly determined by the dispersion of posterior draws of W around their posterior
means as well as variation in the post-intervention experience of untreated units.
       We initially apply our method to Rhode Island's RISDIC crisis. Figure 3 illustrates
the weights that we estimate for unemployment and compares them to the weights derived
from the classic synthetic control method. The figure plots the marginal posterior density
f (W | Y1 ) for weights assigned to three states. Massachusetts, whose unemployment rate
mirrored Rhode Islands in the ten years before treatment, receives substantial weight. Ap-
proximately 96% of the probability mass lies in between .45 and .95. The expected value of
the distribution, which is our point estimate, is 0.688 (dashed vertical line). This is close to


                                                 18
the original methods' estimate for Massachusetts of 0.641 (dotted vertical line). Michigan is
an intermediate case. South Carolina receives little (almost no) weight, because the level and
movements in its unemployment rate had little resemblance to those of Rhode Island. For the
other 46 states, our point estimates resemble those from the original synthetic control. This
resemblance often occurs in our application, but it need not occur. Our objective function
and estimation method differ from those of (Abadie and Gardeazabal, 2003). A key differ-
ence is V , which allows a differential weighting of the contribution of different variables and
observations to the estimation of the weights. Another difference is that the original method
minimizes the sum of squares of errors, while the Bayesian method numerically integrates
over the surface of the parameter space.
       We plot the results for unemployment in Figure 4. The top panel depicts Rhode Island's
actual unemployment rate, the synthetic control (i.e. our counterfactual estimate of what
Rhode Island might have been in absence of treatment), and the posterior probability interval
around the synthetic control. The panel illustrates several salient patterns. Unemployment in
Rhode Island peaked 18 months into the RISDIC crisis, in the summer of 1992. At that time,
the state repaid a substantial share of the deposits that had been frozen since January 1991.
Rhode Island's unemployment remained elevated relative to control for the rest of the decade.
Rhode Island's unemployment rose outside the 90% probability interval around the synthetic
control in October 1991, ten months after RISDIC's closure, and remained outside the the 99%
probability interval for the next decade. Overall,Rhode Island's payments purgatory raised its
unemployment rate about 0.8% relative to the synthetic control.
       The narrowing of the probability interval in 1995 and 1996 reveals how the different
sources of variation influence synthetic-control estimates. The posterior density of the weights,
depicted in Figure 3, indicates the synthetic control sample loads principally on three states:
Massachusetts, Delaware, and Michigan. The level and trend of unemployment rates in these
states converged during 1995 and 1996. This convergence limits uncertainty about the syn-
thetic control at that time.
       The bottom panel depicts our estimate of the average treatment effect. The treatment's
impact arises with a lag. The lag is expected for unemployment, which typically peaks twelve
to eighteen months after an adverse shock to the macroeconomy. The probability interval
around the average treatment effect initially expands and latter contracts. This reflects a di-
vergence of unemployment rates among untreated states in the early 1990s, when the length
and severity of contractions differed across states, and a convergence of unemployment rates
in the mid 1990s, as the national economy reached full employment during the decade long
economic expansion.
       Together, the two panels illuminate why the RISDIC crisis' impact on unemployment
persisted for a decade. The dynamic impact of the crisis was as expected. Unemployment

                                               19
increased with a lag, peaked, and then returned toward equilibrium. Relative to other controls,
however, the impact appears persistent, because Rhode Island's unemployment rate recovered
at the same rate as the control states.
        Results for labor force participation appear in Figure 5. Our estimate suggests Rhode
Island's RISDIC crisis lowered labor force participation substantially and permanently. By
1993, the probability that RISDIC reduced the labor force participation rate (LFPR) exceeds
99.9%. The reduction was substantial. The mean estimate of the average treatment effect for
the period 1991 through 1995 (and onward) is about -2%. The peak effect for some months
in 1994 and 1995 is lower than -3%. The labor force participation rate only rebounds towards
the synthetic control at the end of the decade. The rebound was driven by a decline in the
denominator, the size of the labor force, as workers left Rhode Island, which was one of the
few states in the nation and the only one the Eastern seaboard to lose population during the
1990s. Tracking the initial decline is difficult, due to revisions in labor force participation data
in 1992, when the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) revised the series to conform to census
industrial classifications introduced in 1990, and again in 1994, when the BLS redesigned the
Current Population Survey, from which the LFPR is derived.                   10   In addition, in 1991, Rhode
Island established an employment workshare program. It began operations at the end of
the year. It allowed pairs of workers to reduce their hours by 50% and receive unemployment
compensation sufficient to provide them with 90% of normal income. These workers remained
listed as in the labor force. In 1992, the program averted 2,173 layoffs, which accounts for 0.4
percentage points of the increase.11
        Results for gross state product (i.e. GDP per state) appear in Figure 6. The results
indicate the probability that the RISDIC crisis reduced Rhode Island's gross domestic product
relative to potential is high, about 80% after 5 years and about 90% after ten years. The decline
relative to controls occurred gradually and appears to have been permanent. This results
seem sensible, given that Rhode Island's population declined in absolute terms during the
1990s, as did the size of its labor force and total employment. There is substantial uncertainty
about this estimate. Initially (i.e. in 1991), the probability interval is wide. Its width reflects
uncertainty over weights for control states and the dispersion of gross output across states. The
interval widens as time passes. The width almost doubles in ten years. This expansion reflects
increasing differences in output across states. Some state economies grew more slowly in the
1990s. Others grew quicker. The states which grew most rapidly participated in the technology
  10 These   revisions resulted in a temporary increase in the national LFPR from 1992 to 1994 by 0.7 percentage
points. The revision bump for Rhode Island was larger, 1.7 percentage points. We are not sure why. The
literature on the revision advises readers to interpret patterns in the linking period (1992 to 1994) with caution,
since patterns exhibited in those years may be statistical artifacts that do not reflect economic reality (Cohany,
Polivka, and Rothgeb, 1994; Green, 1994; Polivka, 1996).
    11 In September 1991, when the program began operations, Rhode Island's labor force was 515,229. Senate

Finance Committee, Fogarty (2011) Testimony.


                                                        20
and finance booms at the end of the millennia. These booms were concentrated in a few
states (Uhlenkott, 2014). These concentrated booms, which caused states' aggregate outputs
to diverge, complicate efforts to determine how Rhode Island's economy would have evolved
in the absence of the RISDIC crisis. Small changes in synthetic control weights can change the
counterfactual substantially. Our baseline synthetic control places substantial weight on states,
like Maine, that did not participate in the tech and finance booms, and place little weight on
states, like California and Massachusetts, that did. For this reason, there is a high likelihood
that the RISDIC crisis reduced Rhode Island's GDP by a small amount, because if the RISDIC
crisis had not occurred, Rhode Island's economy would probably have performed like a state
that missed the tech and finance booms. There is a low probability that the RISDIC crisis
reduced Rhode Island's GDP substantially, because in the absence of the RISDIC crisis, Rhode
Island's economy might have taken off. This possibility seems plausible. The RISDIC crisis
hit in early 1990s, just when the booms in tech and finance began. Rhode Island's highly
educated labor force might have been an attractive place for tech firms to locate. Rhode Island
has great universities. It is near New York and Boston, but has lower real estate prices than
those urban hubs to the north and south along interstate 95. High tech firms, however, did
not locate in Rhode Island, whose economies is one of the least tech intensive in the US today.
Our estimates say it's possible that the RISDIC crisis caused it to miss out on this opportunity,
which is why the probability interval is wide, and why the crisis could have had a large effect
reducing output relative to what might have been if the crisis had not induced entrepreneurs
who might have set up shop in Rhode Island to set up shop elsewhere.
      Results for ten series that we analyze for Rhode Island are summarized in Table 2. For
each series, the table indicates the average treatment effect (ATE) and the probability of an
adverse outcome relative to controls at two and five years after RISDIC's failure in Rhode
Island. The formula for the average treatment effect is Equation (5). The formula for the
probability is Equation (7). Our measure of an adverse shock is an average treatment effect for
five years after the crisis consistent with deteriorating economic conditions. Examples include
an increase in unemployment in the treated state relative to controls, or a decline in output in
the treated state relative to controls. The first row of the table indicates that from January 1991
to January 1993, unemployment in Rhode Island was on average 0.63 percentage points higher
than in controls. The probability that unemployment increased (i.e. ATE > 0) rounds to 100.0%
at one decimal place (i.e. prob > 99.95%). From January 1991 to January 1996, unemployment
in Rhode Island was on average 0.94 percentage points higher than in controls. The probability
that unemployment increased in that span also rounds to 100.0% at one decimal place. For
most series after five years, the probability of an adverse shock exceeds 99%. The exceptions
are gross state product, per capita personal income, employment, and population. For all of
those series, the probability of an adverse shock exceeds 75%.


                                                21
      Our estimates do not directly yield the probability that all of the data series that we
examine exhibit an adverse shock after the financial crisis. After specifying an assumption
on the dependence structure across economic aggregates, however, our methods yield a lower
and an upper bound for the simultaneous occurrence of adverse shocks. These appear in the
bottom rows of Table 2. The assumption is that the adverse shocks across economic aggregates
for a state are not negatively dependent. The assumption is, in other words, that an adverse
shock increasing unemployment (which would be bad) does not increase the probability of
a positive shock to output (which would be good). Given that assumption, the lower bound
is the product of the probabilities of an adverse treatment effect at a point in time for all
of the series for a state. The lower bound corresponds to a scenario when adverse shocks
are independent across series. The upper bound is the lowest probability of an adverse shock
across economic series for each state. The upper bound corresponds to a dependence structure
in which an adverse shock striking the outcome least likely to be afflicted entails that all other
series are impacted with certainty. The higher the probability that an adverse shock to one
series would coincide with adverse shocks to the other series, the closer reality would lie to the
upper bound. Our calculation indicates that there is a substantial probability the RISDIC crisis
in Rhode Island triggered an adverse shock in all of the series that we examine. If one loosens
the criteria for the calculation to determine the probability that the RISDIC shock triggered
adverse shocks in all but one or two series, the probability rapidly approaches 100%.
      Table 3 summarizes the same information for Maryland, Ohio, and Nebraska after their
payments crises. The results appear consistent with our initial observation that payments
crises did not appear to harm the economies in those states. The preponderance of the ATEs
that we measure are small. The majority are consistent with economic expansion, rather than
contraction. Probabilities of adverse outcomes are usually below 40% and often near 0%. At
most time horizons, the probability that the payments crises simultaneously triggered adverse
shocks to all of the series we examine rounds to zero at the third to fifteenth decimal place.
If one loosens the criteria for the calculation to determine whether the probability that the
payments crises in those states triggered adverse shocks in all but one or two data series, the
probability remains near zero. If one calculated the probability of a simultaneous salutary
shock to these series, the probability is also near zero. The conclusion is clear. No systematic
relationship between macroeconomic aggregates and the payments crises in Maryland, Ohio,
and Nebraska exists.
      Table 4 examines changes in sectoral GDP in the four states following their payments
shocks. In Rhode Island after five years, the probability that the most strongly cyclical compo-
nents of GDP - manufacturing, wholesale trade, and retail trade - declined relative to controls
ranged from 99% to 100%. FIRE (finance, insurance, and real estate) and services (broadly
defined) also move procyclically, but typically less than manufacturing and trade. The proba-


                                               22
bility that they declined due to the RISDIC crisis was 97% and 86% respectively. The proba-
bility that all of these sectors simultaneously experienced adverse shocks is from 82% to 86%.
The magnitudes of these declines (as exhibited by the average treatment effect) was large. The
construction sector did not decline, but this should be expected, because the Federal Reserve's
response to Rhode Island's crisis substantially expanded mortgage credit available in the state,
by encouraging federally-regulated financial institutions to expand lending for residential and
commercial real estate (we discuss this more in the next section). The acyclical components of
GDP changed little. Their average treatment effects and the probability of adverse outcomes
were small. These patterns, according to Stock and Watson (1999, p. 39), resemble correla-
tions typical of downturns driven by declines to aggregate demand. Our findings show that
the lower quantiles of the counterfactuals for GSP in Figure 6b become pertinent. The larger
decline relative to potential GSP arises from Rhode Island missing out on the finance boom.
The findings in Table 4 show that this was a likely outcome of the payments crisis.
      In Maryland, Nebraska, and Ohio, the ATEs and probabilities of adverse shocks for
components of GDP that typically vary with the business cycle were lower. For many vari-
ables, the ATEs were inconsistent with those expected of adverse shocks to the aggregate
economy. The probability that these series exhibit simultaneous adverse shocks is low, usually
close to zero. These results indicate the payments crises in these states had little impact on
macroeconomic aggregates.



5   Robustness
When we consider the robustness of our estimates, we need to consider threats to inference
of several types. The first is whether our estimates for Rhode Island really detect a macroeco-
nomic impulse that simultaneously impacts all macroeconomic time series, and if so, whether
we can measure that common shock and its reflection in a common weighting across untreated
units. The second is whether alternative explanations exist for the patterns that we observe in
the data. Could something other than the RISDIC crisis, for example, explain the divergence
of Rhode Island's macroeconomics aggregates from comparable states in the early 1990s? The
third involves assumptions underlying estimates presented in the paper and our synthetic-
control methods. Do our estimates depend upon particular assumptions? Would our results
change if we altered the method for synthetic control weights? Examples include altering the
length of the pre-treatment comparison period, from say five to ten years, or changing the
variables that we use to generate weights. This issue, we will show, encompasses the topic of
pretrends. The fourth is whether the patterns that we detect in aggregate data also appear in
information at lower levels of aggregation.
      The robustness checks that we present focus on Rhode Island. These checks corroborate

                                              23
the conclusion that Rhode Island's payments crisis adversely affected the state's economy. We
present few checks for the other states, since their payments crises do not appear to have had
substantial effects on their aggregate economies.


5.1   Common Shock

To determine whether a macroeconomic shock coincided with the payments crises in the four
states, we calculate the first principal component of the macroeconomic aggregates for each
state before the date of their crisis and also the first principal component for all other states
up to that point in time. The first principal component is a weighted average of the series
that explains the maximum variance among them. Across the board, we find these first prin-
cipal components were positively related to employment, labor force participation, and gross
state product, and negatively related to unemployment. When the first principal component
increased, in other words, a state's economy was doing better. When the first principal com-
ponent declined, a state's economy was doing worse.
      For each payments crisis, we construct a synthetic control from the first principal com-
ponents of the untreated states. Figure 7 reveals the results of the exercises. Each panel plots
the first principal component for a state versus its synthetic control. The panels provide a clear
message. After the payments crisis in Rhode Island, the macroeconomic conditions deterio-
rated immediately, substantially, and persistently in absolute terms and relative to its control.
The payment's crisis, in other words, harmed Rhode Island's economy. In contrast, after the
payments crises in Maryland, Nebraska, and Ohio, macroeconomic conditions did not decline
in absolute terms. In Maryland, macroeconomic conditions improved relative to control. In
Nebraska, macroeconomic conditions moved in tandem the control for eight years and then
rose. In Ohio, macroeconomic conditions moved along with the control for three years and
then shifted downwards slightly.
      The common shock's impact on the original series can calculated by substituting the
distributions of weights from our principal components analysis into the formulas used to
calculate Table 2 and Table 3. This substitution replaces the weights estimated individually for
each series with weights for the common shock. For Rhode Island, the weights for the common
shock emphasize New Hampshire (posterior mean = 52.4%), Vermont (10.0%), Indiana (24.0%),
and Michigan (13.6%). The substitution does not alter our conclusions. For Rhode Island, for
example, the ATE for unemployment at five years rises to 1.98 percentage points and the
probability of an adverse ATE rounds to 100%. The ATE for labor force participation at five
years falls to -4.2 percentage points and the probability of an adverse ATE rounds to 100%.
These ATE's are more adverse than in our series-by-series estimates, but the overall pattern
remains the same. When we do this exercise for Maryland, Ohio, and Nebraska, average


                                               24
treatment effects and probabilities of adverse impact change little, usually shifting slightly
towards zero. For unemployment after five years, for example, the ATEs for Maryland, Ohio,
and Nebraska become -0.01, -0.38, and -2.06. The probability that the ATE exceeded zero (i.e.
the probability of an adverse event) fell to 4.6% and 0.0% in the latter states.


5.2   Alternative Explanations

Our argument rests, in part, on our assertion that the payments crisis was the only event
in early 1991 that affected Rhode Island's macroeconomy relative to control states. Could
something else explain the patterns that we see in the data? Perhaps due to an unobserved
difference between labor-market institutions in Rhode Island and other states, unemployment
in Rhode Island always recovers slower than in other states. Figure 8 addresses this issue.
It uses the synthetic control method underlying Figure 1a to calculate similar statistics with
the treatment dates set to July 1981 and November 1982, the two previous NBER business-
cycle troughs, and August 1980 and September 1982, the two previous months of maximum
unemployment in Rhode Island. After these four placebo treatment dates, unemployment in
Rhode Island recovers more quickly than in the synthetic controls. This pattern also emerges
when you compare Rhode Island to raw or population-weighted averages of all states, of states
with occupational structures similar to Rhode Island, or of states in New England. During the
two recessions prior to RSDIC's failure, for example, unemployment in Rhode Island recovered
more rapidly than unemployment in all other states in New England. The post-RSDIC pattern
in Rhode Island, in other words, differed from the pattern observed during all other recessions
observable in unemployment data aggregated at the state-month level. After RSDIC, Rhode
Island recovered slower than other states. After all other contractions, Rhode Island recovered
quicker. From this, we conclude the patterns that we observe in 1991 were not due to some
persistent feature of Rhode Island. Rhode Island's post-RISDIC experience was a unique.
      Another possible explanation for Rhode Island's deepening contraction in 1992 is the
credit crunch afflicting New England at that time (Bernanke and Lown, 1991). Perhaps the
credit crunch continued in Rhode Island while easing in other states? Table 5 addresses this
possibility. In 1990, Rhode Island's decline in total lending was about average for New Eng-
land. In 1991, lending continued to decline in northeastern states, but after the RISDIC crisis
in Rhode Island, total lending rose. The largest increases came in real estate (i.e. mortgage)
lending. The expansion was the result of the federal response to the crisis. The Federal Re-
serve, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Comptroller of Currency knew that the
lenders closed during the RISDIC crisis emphasized real-estate lending. The preponderance of
their portfolios (over 90%) consisted of residential and commercial mortgage loans. To offset
the closure of these institutions, the federal agencies encouraged intermediaries under their


                                                25
jurisdiction to expand real-estate lending in Rhode Island and lifted regulatory constraints on
lending of this type. Federally-insured institutions responded by filling the gap. Lending on
real estate expanded.
      Consumer lending, however, shrank substantially. The decline was not due to a contrac-
tion in loan supply, since the institutions caught up in the RISDIC crisis did little consumer
lending, and alternative suppliers of consumer loans, such as issuers of credit cards and auto
loans, were large, healthy, competitive, and encouraged by regulators to extend loans in Rhode
Island. This includes federally-insured institutions in the state, which continued operations
uninterrupted, and out-of-state organizations, including those that operated nationwide.
      While Rhode Island's unemployment increase after RISDIC's failure in 1991 seems con-
sistent with unemployment's response to an aggregate impulse (such as a decline in demand
due to consumers losing access to a substantial share of their liquid assets), we still need to
ask if the increase could have been caused by other policy changes in Rhode Island at that
time. The synthetic-control method itself cannot distinguish between competing explanations
for a divergence detected at a point in time. We have examined historical sources ­ including
Rhode Island's state budget, its Governors' speeches and policy pronouncements, and records
of the state legislature ­ to determine other potential candidates. One possibility is apparent.
Four months after the start of the RISDIC crisis, Rhode Island raised its minimum wage on
April 1, 1991, to $4.45 from $4.25 per hour.
      Could this increase in the minimum wage explain the patterns that we observe? It is
unlikely for several reasons. First, in April 1991, when Rhode Island raised its minimum wage
by $0.20 per hour, its minimum wage rate fell $0.25 relative to most other states, including
Massachusetts and New Hampshire, because the federal government raised the minimum
wage by $0.45 per hour at that time. So, if the minimum wage had the same impact on un-
employment in all states, it should have lowered Rhode Island's unemployment rate relative
to other states, rather than increased it, as we observe. Second, there is a debate about the
impact of minimum wages. Recent articles find no relationship between small increases in
minimum wages and state-level employment and unemployment (Dube, Lester, and Reich,
2010). The largest recent estimates of minimum wages' marginal impact on employment indi-
cate that Rhode Island's small minimum-wage hike could not explain the large and persistent
increase in unemployment after RISDIC's failure and cannot explain the sectoral distribution
that we describe later in the paper (Neumark and Wascher, 2000). Third, we find substan-
tial post-RISDIC changes relative to controls in a broad range of macroeconomic aggregates
for Rhode Island, including bankruptcies, construction, industrial production, and mortgage
delinquencies. There is no evidence to suggest and no reason to believe that small increases in
minimum wages would have such effects. Fourth, a series of placebo tests indicate that after
increases in minimum wages in absolute terms, relative to Massachusetts, and relative to the


                                               26
rest of the United States, unemployment in Rhode Island typically changed little or declined.
For these reasons, it seems unlikely that Rhode Island's minimum wage policies triggered the
increase in unemployment observed in Rhode Island in 1991 and afterwards.


5.3   Assumptions and Pretrends

Our synthetic control estimates, like all others, depend upon assumptions that shape estima-
tion of control weights for comparison units. These assumptions include the length of the
pre-treatment period, the variables used to compare treated to untreated units in the pre-
treatment period, the set of untreated units considered for comparison, and the method used
to make the comparison. Altering these assumptions might change our estimates or their
interpretation.
      On each of these dimensions, we have checked the range of reasonable assumptions, and
believe that altering our assumptions over this range does not effect our analysis. Section 2, our
first look at the data, eludes to one check. We have used several different methods of inference
in synthetic controls and recovered similar results (Li, 2019; Chernozhukov, Wuthrich, and
Zhu, 2019). The robustness exercise above ­ where we examine common macro shocks ­ eludes
to another range of checks, where we derive weights using a broader set of pre-treatment
variables. We find this does not change our results.
      The results on another dimension of checks deserves emphasis. Varying the length of
the pre-treatment period has little impact on ATEs estimated for Rhode Island, but it does
alter the weights assigned to untreated states. Shortening the pre-treatment period in all cases
increases weights assigned to states in New England and reduces weights assigned to other
states. Our analysis of unemployment is an example. When we shorten the pre-treatment
interval to 36 months, weights increase on Massachusetts and New Hampshire and diminish
on all other states. The posterior mean for Massachusetts becomes 92.9%. The posterior mean
for New Hampshire becomes 7.1%. All other posterior means approach zero. Weights con-
verge on Massachusetts and New Hampshire because Rhode Island shared a regional boom
and bust with them in the later 1980s, and the regional pattern at this time differed from the
regional distribution of shocks during the previous business cycle in the early 1980s.
      The results of this exercise for unemployment appear in Figure 9. The figure reveals two
important points. First, in some specifications presented earlier in the paper, unemployment
appears to rise in Rhode Island relative to controls prior to the RISDIC crisis. This apparent
pre-treatment trend arose when the infamous credit crunch in New England took hold, and
the recession deepened in Rhode Island relative to states outside New England. By limiting
the pre-treatment window, we emphasize Rhode Island's comparison to New England states,
and the apparent foreshock disappears. Rhode Island's unemployment rate parallels or con-


                                               27
verges on the synthetic control as the treatment approaches. Rhode Island's unemployment
rate diverges from control nine months into the crisis. This pattern is consistent with the con-
ventional view of unemployment's response to aggregate demand shocks. The impact should
be lagged. It should peak eighteen to twenty-four months into a contraction. We also see that
narrowing the pre-treatment window increases the estimated ATE for unemployment. These
patterns hold for most of the variables that we examine.


5.4   County-Level Comparisons: Border Discontinuity and Synthetic Con-
      trols

Since shortening the pre-treatment window emphasizes the comparison between Rhode Island
and its neighbors, it is reasonable to ask: what would result from a direct comparison between
Rhode Island and its neighbors in New England? We can do this with data on county business
pattern. This data set indicates total employment and number of establishments on March 12
of each year. Figure 10 displays data for Providence, Rhode Island, and neighboring counties in
Connecticut, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island. Among counties in Rhode Island, Providence
was the hardest hit in terms of the number of frozen institutions, dollars in frozen deposits,
frozen deposits per capita, and length of time that deposits remained frozen. In the counties
of Bristol and Kent, only a handful of institutions shut down and those reopened within a few
weeks.
      The impact of the RISDIC crisis varied across these counties and their neighbors in
adjacent states. From 1989 to 1991, all of these counties experience sharp contractions in
employment and establishments. In all of these counties except Providence, recovery began in
1991 and is visible by 1992. In Providence, however, recovery was delayed, and Providence's
recovery lagged far behind neighboring counties throughout the 1990s.
      Figure 11 displays a similar result that arises from synthetic-control analysis conducted
on county-level data. We present results for employment and the number of establishments.
This exercise uses the same methods as our state-level analysis, but for computational reasons,
we limit the analysis to 50 counties whose occupational and industrial structures most closely
matched Rhode Island's. For Providence, the county most effected by the RISDIC crisis, we
find the probability of an adverse ATE after five years to be over 95%. For Rhode Island coun-
ties unaffected by the RISDIC crisis, we recover ATEs near zero. From this, we conclude that
county-level synthetic control analysis and county-level border-discontinuity analyses corrob-
orate our result for state-level aggregates.




                                               28
6    An Application to the 2008 Financial Crisis
Our essay began with quotes from central bankers who argue that in the fall of 2008, the
Fed had to take extraordinary actions because the financial tsunami threatened to engulf the
commercial banking system, which could have devastated the aggregate economy, as like the
bank suspensions during the 1930s. Rhode Island's governor faced a choice, bail out the banks
immediately to ensure households and firms retained access to deposit balances, or close the
banking system, until courts and politicians resolved debates about who would pay the price
to clean up the mess. Rhode Island chose the latter course. In 2008, the Fed's leaders chose
the former. What if they made the other choice?
      Rhode Island serves as a unique analogy which can help to answer that question. The
magnitude and length of Rhode Island's banking suspension in 1991 resembled those during
the Great Depression. Its recession, like the contractions of 1929-1933 and 2007-2009, was born
in a lending boom and exacerbated by a credit crunch. So, Rhode Island's experience can help
us address the question: what would have happened to the U.S. economy in the years after the
financial crisis of 2008 if the federal government refused to bail out AIG and the commercial
banks dependent on it, forcing some or all of them to suspend payments on deposits for a few
weeks or months, just like banks did during the Great Depression of the 1930s?
      The answer appears in Table 6. The table examines seven data series which we observe
at the state and national level from 1980 to 2013. The first column indicates the actual value of
the national series in December 2010. In that month, for example, the national unemployment
rate was 9.3%. The next four columns indicate potential impacts of a commercial-banking cri-
sis derived from probability distributions that we for Rhode Island's RISDIC crisis. Columns
(2) to (5) and (7) to (10), labelled "Counterfactual Value at Probability Threshold", indicate that
the adverse outcome equaled or exceeded the indicated value with the probability indicated
at the top of the column. The second column indicates, for example, that after a nation-wide
commercial banking crisis comparable to RISDIC, the unemployment rate would reach 10.2%
or higher with probability 75%. The first four rows display rates: unemployment, mortgages
past due, bankruptcies (per thousand persons), and labor force participation. Our estimates of
counterfactual rates indicate the recession would have been deeper, but the economy would
recover. By 2013, five years after the crisis, bankruptcies, mortgages past due, and unemploy-
ment would be falling towards pre-recession levels. Labor force participation, however, might
not have recovered. The probability that the LFPR fell below 60% exceeded 75%. With so many
workers leaving the labor force, it should be no surprise that our estimates indicate that there
was the risk of substantial declines employment and output, both in the short (2-year) and
medium (5-year) runs, and perhaps permanently, if a commercial banking shutdown rivalling
those of the Great Depression struck the United States during the Global Financial Crisis in


                                                29
2008 and 2009.
      Is this analogy plausible? It depends, of course, on whether the factors effecting Rhode
Island in the 1990s and the sources of uncertainty in our estimates had analogs at the national
level in 2008 and the decade after. The decline in employment in Rhode Island was driven by
a reduction in the labor force participation rate, which did occur nationally during the Great
Recession, and a decline in working age population, which appears to be less plausible. Rhode
Island shed population because workers and retirees moved to other states and fewer men and
women moved in to replace them. At the national level, it seems unlikely that workers and
retirees would have departed from the United States, but given events during recent years and
American history, it seems possible that immigration restrictions could have been imposed in
the wake of the crisis, which would have reduced inflows of workers, leading to a decline in
employment on aggregate. This has happened in the past. In the 1870s, 1880s, and 1920s,
waves of anti-immigration agitation and immigration restrictions followed years of recession
and deflation. The decline in output relative to what might have been in Rhode Island was
a product of the hi-tech and finance booms of the 1990s. Rhode Island missed these booms,
while these increasing-returns industries became increasingly important economic sectors in
neighboring states. It seems possible that this could have happened to the United States after
2008, if a prolonged shutdown of money-center banks encouraged financial institutions to
shift activity from New York to London or Tokyo, and if political uncertainty, erratic economic
policies, and immigration restrictions deterred investment and induced hi-tech firms to shift
operations towards Europe and Asia.



7    Discussion
This paper studies modern episodes of suspension of payments to ascertain how shutting
down the commercial banking system influences aggregate economic activity. The suspension
in Rhode Island, which coincided with an economic contraction, increased unemployment and
reduced output. The suspensions triggered reductions in output in sectors typically impacted
by declines in aggregate demand. The effects persisted for at least ten years. Some may
be permanent. The suspensions in Maryland, Ohio, and Nebraska, which occurred during
economic expansions, appear to have had no systematic impact on the macroeconomy. These
results suggest that suspensions of payments ­ particularly those like Rhode Island's which
freeze a substantial fraction of liquid assets for a long period of time ­ can trigger reductions
in spending on goods and services that have lasting economic effect.
      Our findings have implications for the broader debate on financial regulation and bank
bailouts. Advocates of the current approach assert that it is vital to keep commercial banks in
operation in all states of the world. As evidence, they point to our economy's experience with

                                               30
suspensions of payments a century ago and to developing economies experience with banking
crises in recent decades. Critiques question the relevance of this evidence to the United States
economy today. We provide new information. We show that the old problem ­ suspensions
of commercial bank operations during contractions ­ can occur in U.S. today, and when it
does, is likely to have a substantial adverse impact on our economy. These findings help to
validate the use of the costly measures by the Federal Reserve and the Treasury to safeguard
commercial banks following the closure of Lehman Brothers in the fall of 2008 and during the
COVID-19 contraction in the spring of 2020.



References
Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010). "Synthetic Control Methods for Compar-
   ative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Control Program". Journal
   of the American Statistical Association 105.490, pp. 493­505.
-- (2015). "Comparative Politics and the Synthetic Control Method". American Journal of Polit-
   ical Science 59.2, pp. 495­510.
Abadie, A. and J. Gardeazabal (2003). "The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of the
   Basque Country". American Economic Review 93.1, pp. 113­132.
Aitchison, J. (1982). "The statistical analysis of compositional data". Journal of the Royal Statis-
   tical Society: Series B (Methodological) 44.2, pp. 139­160.
Arkhangelsky, D., S. Athey, D. A. Hirshberg, G. W. Imbens, and S. Wager (2019). Synthetic
   Difference In Differences. Working Paper 25532. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Batkins, S. and I. Brannon (2013). "The unknown costs of Dodd-Frank". Regulation 36, p. 4.
Beaudry, P., D. Galizia, and F. Portier (Mar. 2017). "Reconciling Hayek's and Keynes' Views of
   Recessions". The Review of Economic Studies 85.1, pp. 119­156.
-- (2020). "Putting the Cycle Back into Business Cycle Analysis". American Economic Review
   110.1, pp. 1­47.
Ben-Michael, E., A. Feller, and J. Rothstein (2018). The Augmented Synthetic Control Method.
-- (2019). Synthetic Controls and Weighted Event Studies with Staggered Adoption.
Bernanke, B. and C. S. Lown (1991). "The Credit Crunch". Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
   22.2, pp. 205­248.
Bernanke, B. S. (2013). The Federal Reserve and the Financial Crisis. Princeton University Press.
Bethune, Z., G. Rocheteau, and P. Rupert (2015). "Aggregate unemployment and household
   unsecured debt". Review of Economic Dynamics 18.1. Money, Credit, and Financial Frictions,
   pp. 77 ­100.
Born, B., G. J. Müller, M. Schularick, and P. Sedlá   cek (May 2019). "The Costs of Economic Na-
   tionalism: Evidence from the Brexit Experiment*". The Economic Journal 129.623, pp. 2722­
   2744.


                                                31
Born, B., G. J. Müller, M. Schularick, and P. Sedlá     cek (2020). "Stable Genius? The Macroeco-
   nomic Impact of Trump". Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
Calomiris, C. W. (1993). "The decline of private deposit insurance in the United States: A
   comment". Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 38, pp. 129 ­142.
Carlson, M., K. J. Mitchener, and G. Richardson (2011). "Arresting banking panics: Federal
   Reserve liquidity provision and the forgotten panic of 1929". Journal of Political Economy
   119.5, pp. 889­924.
Chabot, B. R. (2011). "The Cost of Banking Panics in an Age before "Too Big to Fail"". Federal
   Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper.
Chernozhukov, V., K. Wuthrich, and Y. Zhu (2018). "An exact and robust conformal inference
   method for counterfactual and synthetic controls". arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.09089.
-- (2019). "Practical and Robust t-test based inference for synthetic controls and related meth-
   ods".
Cochrane, J. H. (2014). "Challenges for Cost-Benefit Analysis of Financial Regulation". The
   Journal of Legal Studies 43.S2, S63­S105.
Cohany, S. R., A. E. Polivka, and J. M. Rothgeb (1994). "Revisions in the current population
   survey effective January 1994". Emp. & Earnings 41, p. 13.
Cohen, J., K. Hachem, and G. Richardson. (2020). "Relationship Lending and the Great De-
   pression". Review of Economics and Statistics.
Davison, L. K. and C. D. Ramirez (2014). "Local banking panics of the 1920s: Identification
   and determinants". Journal of Monetary Economics 66, pp. 164­177.
Dube, A., T. W. Lester, and M. Reich (2010). "Minimum Wage Effects Across State Borders:
   Estimates Using Contiguous Counties". The Review of Economics and Statistics 92.4, pp. 945­
   964.
English, W. B. (1993). "The decline of private deposit insurance in the United States". Carnegie-
   Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 38, pp. 57 ­128.
Fogarty, C. J. (2011). Testimony before the Senate Finance Committee on the Success of the Rhode Island
   WorkShare Short-Term Compensation Program, November 10, 2011. Washington: U.S. GPO.
Garcia, P. (2019). "The Macroeconomic Consequences of Bank Capital Requirements". Annals
   of Economics and Statistics 135, pp. 157­187.
Geithner, T. F. (2014). Stress Test: Reflections on Financial Crises. Broadway Books.
Gorton, G. and E. W. Tallman (2016). How Did Pre-Fed Banking Panics End? Tech. rep. National
   Bureau of Economic Research.
Green, G. P. (1994). "Revisions in the Presentation of Data in Employment and Earnings". Emp.
   & Earnings 41, p. 8.
Greenspan, A. (2008). The Age of Turbulence: Adventures in a New World. Penguin.
Guerrieri, V. and G. Lorenzoni (2009). "Liquidity and Trading Dynamics". Econometrica 77.6,
   pp. 1751­1790.



                                                  32
Guerrieri, V. and G. Lorenzoni (Mar. 2017). "Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the
    Liquidity Trap*". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132.3, pp. 1427­1467.
House of Representatives (1991a). Closure of 45 privately insured financial institutions in Rhode
    Island: hearing before the Subcommittee on General Oversight and Investigations of the Committee
    on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred Second Congress,
    first session, April 17, 1991. Washington: U.S. GPO.
-- (1991b). Rhode Island banking crisis: field hearing before the Committee on Banking, Finance and
    Urban Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred Second Congress, first session, May 24 and
    25, 1991. Washington: U.S. GPO.
Jalil, A. J. (2015). "A New History of Banking Panics in the United States, 1825-1929: Construc-
    tion and Implications". American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7.3, pp. 295­330.
Kashyap, A., J. C. Stein, and S. G. Hanson (2010). "An Analysis of the Impact of `Substantially
    Heightened' Capital Requirements on Large Financial Institutions". Mimeo.
Kisin, R. and A. Manela (2016). "The Shadow Cost of Bank Capital Requirements". The Review
    of Financial Studies 29.7, pp. 1780­1820.
Komai, A. and G. Richardson (2011). A Brief History of Regulations Regarding Financial Mar-
    kets in the United States: 1789 to 2009. Working Paper 17443. National Bureau of Economic
    Research.
Lagos, R. and R. Wright (2005). "A Unified Framework for Monetary Theory and Policy Anal-
    ysis". Journal of Political Economy 113.3, pp. 463­484.
Li, K. T. (2019). "Statistical Inference for Average Treatment Effects Estimated by Synthetic
    Control Methods". Journal of the American Statistical Association 0.0, pp. 1­16.
Lucas, D. (2019). "Measuring the Cost of Bailouts". Annual Review of Financial Economics 11.1,
    pp. 85­108.
McKelvey, E. F. (1978). "Interest Rate Ceilings and Disintermediation". Board of Governors Staff
    Economic Studies.
Mortensen, D. T. and C. A. Pissarides (1994). "Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory
    of Unemployment". The Review of Economic Studies 61.3, pp. 397­415.
Neumark, D. and W. Wascher (2000). "Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of
    the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Comment". The American Economic
    Review 90.5, pp. 1362­1396.
Poirier, D. J. (1995). Intermediate Statistics and Econometrics: A Comparative Approach. MIT Press.
Polivka, A. E. (1996). "Data watch: The redesigned current population survey". Journal of Eco-
    nomic Perspectives 10.3, pp. 169­180.
Pulkkinen, T. E. and E. S. Rosengren (1993). "Lessons from the Rhode Island banking crisis".
    New England Economic Review May, pp. 3­12.
Richardson, G. (2007). "Quarterly data on the categories and causes of bank distress during the
    Great Depression, 1929­1933". Ed. by A. J. Field, G. Clark, and W. A. Sundstrom. Vol. 25.
    Research in Economic History. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, pp. 69­147.


                                                33
Richardson, G. and T. Sablik (2015). "Banking Panics of the Gilded Age". Federal Reserve History
   (December).
Richardson, G. and W. Troost (2009). "Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking Panics during
   the Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from a Federal Reserve District Border,
   1929­1933". Journal of Political Economy 117.6, pp. 1031­1073.
Rocheteau, G. and R. Wright (2005). "Money in Search Equilibrium, in Competitive Equilib-
   rium, and in Competitive Search Equilibrium". Econometrica 73.1, pp. 175­202.
Sprague, O. M. (1910). "History of Crises under the National Banking System, National Mon-
   etary Commission". 61st Congress, 2nd Session, Senate document. 538.
Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (1999). "Forecasting Inflation". Journal of Monetary Economics
   44.2, pp. 293 ­335.
Todd, W. F. (1994). Similarities and dissimilarities in the collapses of three state-chartered private
   deposit insurance funds. 9411. Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Research Department.
Uhlenkott, B. (2014). "High-Tech Industries in the U.S. Economy". Workforce Information Council
   High-Tech Study Group, pp. 1­27.
Wasmer, E. and P. Weil (2004). "The Macroeconomics of Labor and Credit Market Imperfec-
   tions". American Economic Review 94.4, pp. 944­963.
Wicker, E. (2000). Banking Panics of the Gilded Age. Cambridge University Press.




                                                 34
     Figures

                               Figure 1: RISDIC Crisis in Rhode Island
               (a) Unemployment Rate                         (b) Labor Force Participation Rate




35
                  (c) Employment                                  (d) Gross State Product
                     Figure 2: Suspension Crises in Four States
   (a) Unemployment Rate                           (b) Labor Force Participation Rate




       (c) Employment                                   (d) Gross State Product




 Figure 3: Bayes Weights Distribution in Unemployment Synthetic Control
(a) Massachussetts                  (b) Michigan                  (c) South Carolina




                                        36
                        Figure 4: Bayesian Inference ­ Unemployment
(a) Counterfactuals and Probability Intervals   (b) Probability Interval for Average Treatment Effect




               Figure 5: Bayesian Inference ­ Labor Force Participation Ratio
(a) Counterfactuals and Probability Intervals   (b) Probability Interval for Average Treatment Effect




                     Figure 6: Bayesian Inference ­ Gross State Product
(a) Counterfactuals and Probability Intervals   (b) Probability Interval for Average Treatment Effect




                                                37
     Figure 7: Synthetic control on first principal component of macroeconomic series
       (a) Rhode Island                                              (b) Maryland




        (c) Nebraska                                                   (d) Ohio




38
                             Figure 8: Different Business Cycles




                        Figure 9: Robustness ­ 3 Year Pre-Treatment
(a) Counterfactuals 3 Year Pre-Treatment Match        (b) Difference Treatment-Counterfactual




                                                 39
  Figure 10: County-level Border Comparison
                (a) Establishments




                 (b) Employment




Figure 11: County-level Synthetic Control Results




                       40
     Tables

                                                     Table 1: Failures of Deposit Insurance Systems, 1983 to 1991
                                                     % Growth in       Insured          Population      Persons         Insured            Deposits Per    Withdrawal        Withdrawal         Percent
                                                     per capita        Deposits         (thousands)     With            Deposits           Household       Maximum           Maximum            Deposits
                                                     personal          at Failure                       Frozen          Per                as % Median     as % of           as % of            in
          State     Insured        Date of Failure   income            ($ mil)                          Accounts        Capita             Annual          Average           Median             state-
                                                                                                        (% of           ($)                Household       Household         Household          insured
                                                                                                        Pop.)                              Income          Deposit           Income             institutions

                  Who     #        Year   Month      Avg. 4 quarters

      Maryland  SL        102      1985 May                     0.02            7,200           4,413               4              1,695            19.1          24.3                    4.6              40.0
      Nebraska  T, CU,     60      1983 Nov.                    2.14              343           1,548                                222             5.7 Maturity      Maturity                             7.0
                SL
      Ohio      SL            70   1985 March                   1.11            4,200          10,730               8                391             3.1                73                2.9              24.4
      Rhode Is- B, CU,        45   1991 Jan.                   -1.85            1,162           1,003              35              1,677            13.9                 0                  0              18.1
      land      SL



     Note: The column "insured #" equals the number of insured institutions in the state at the date of failure. The column "insured




41
     who" indicates type of institution insured. B indicates banks. T indicates trust companies. CU indicates credit unions and
     cooperative credit corporations. SL indicates savings and loans similar thrifts including building and loans, mutual savings
     banks, and industrial loan and investment companies. Withdrawal maxima discussed in text. "Maturity" indicates that 100% of
     share deposits could be withdrawn at maturity. Other withdrawals unrestricted.


     Sources: For data on OH, MD, RI, see (Todd, 1994, pp. 3-10) and House of Representatives (1991, p. 5). For Nebraska, see Wood
     (1992) and Nebraska (1984). Population data from U.S. Census (various dates).
                           Table 2: Probability of adverse outcome relative to synthetic control in Rhode Island

                                                                                                 2 year                  5 year
                                                                        Adverse Change
                                                                                           ATE         Prob.       ATE       Prob.

         Monthly variables
         Unemployment rate (%)                                          Rise                   0.63    100.0%         0.94   100.0%
         Labor force participation rate (%)                             Decline               -0.68     94.5%        -1.81    99.8%

         Quarterly variables
         Per capita personal income ($)                                 Decline                -662     76.3%         -630    75.0%
         Bankruptcy filings (per thousand people)                       Rise                   0.08     99.9%         0.05    99.8%
         All mortgages past due (% of all mortgages)                    Rise                   1.21    100.0%         0.91   100.0%
         CredAbility consumer distress index (<70 = distress)           Decline               -0.77     99.9%        -1.56   100.0%




42
         Population (thousands)                                         Decline                 -22     69.8%          -44    85.0%

         Annual variables
         Employment (number)                                            Decline            -37,512      89.1%      -49,602    94.1%
         Gross state product (mil. $)                                   Decline              -2134      73.2%        -2834    78.5%

         Summary of Results
         Number of ATEs consistent with adverse outcome (out of 9)                                        9                       9
         Probability of joint occurrence
         Upper bound                                                                                    69.8%                 75.0%
         Lower bound                                                                                    32.7%                 46.7%


     Note: ATE is the average treatment effect. Prob indicates the probability of an adverse change.
                                        Table 3: Impact of Suspension of Payments in Maryland, Ohio, and Nebraska.

                                                                                      Maryland                            Nebraska                                Ohio
                                                             Adverse         2 year              5 year          2 year              5 year          2 year                5 year
                                                             Change    ATE      Prob.       ATE      Prob.    ATE     Prob.    ATE       Prob.    ATE     Prob.      ATE         Prob.

      Monthly variables
      Unemployment rate (%)                                  Rise      -0.21      6.1%       -0.03   43.6%    -0.11    1.0%     -0.26     0.0%     0.19   79.8%           0.01   50.0%
      Labor force participation rate (%)                     Decline    0.23     28.1%        0.61    5.7%     0.13   29.4%      0.14    26.5%     0.43   23.3%          -0.03   54.9%

      Quarterly variables
      Per capita personal income ($)                         Decline     395      6.6%         245   20.9%      702    8.6%     1203      1.8%     -160   69.5%           -288   81.1%
      Bankruptcy filings (per thousand people)               Rise      -0.05     16.2%        0.03   78.6%     0.03   98.1%     -0.01    21.0%    -0.15    0.4%          -0.19    0.4%
      All mortgages past due (% of all mortgages)            Rise      -0.09     33.2%       -0.40    2.7%    -0.87    0.7%     -1.57     0.0%    -0.32    6.7%          -0.41    0.2%
      CredAbility consumer distress index (<70 = distress)   Decline   -1.01    100.0%       -0.89   99.2%     1.13    6.0%      1.96     0.1%     0.09   42.2%           1.48    0.6%
      Population (thousand)                                  Decline      84     38.7%         168   33.1%      -21   57.1%       -40    64.7%       32   47.2%             37   45.9%

      Annual variables
      Employment (number)                                    Decline   65738     30.3%      89426    25.6%    16713   23.3%     14180    26.4%    71010   31.6%      111671      20.4%
      Gross state product ($ million)                        Decline    1201     38.8%       2386    31.9%    -1210   64.3%     -1819    70.5%     1808   32.5%        -976      58.9%

      Summary of Results
      Number of adverse changes                                                       1                   2               3                   2               2                     4




43
      Probability of joint occurrence
      Upper bound                                                                 0.0%                0.0%             0.7%               0.0%             0.0%                   0.0%
      Lower bound                                                                 0.0%                0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                   0.0%



     Note: ATE is the average treatment effect. Prob indicates the probability of an adverse change. Number of adverse changes is
     the number of ATEs consistent with adverse outcome out of 9.
                            Table 4: Payments Crises and Sectoral GDP

                                                Rhode Island                 Maryland              Nebraska             Ohio
 Components of GDP ($ millions)                 ATE         Prob.           ATE     Prob.      ATE     Prob.       ATE     Prob.

 Cyclical
 FIRE                                            -297  91.8%                 681    29.9%      -454    81.1%       -1154   81.5%
 Services                                        -353  86.6%                1127    14.4%       -25    56.8%        -729   54.6%
 Manufacturing                                  -4686 100.0%                -365    54.1%      -198    64.0%        3209    1.8%
 Retail Trade                                    -225  96.5%                 487    20.8%       -78    64.6%        -178   76.5%
 Wholesale Trade                                 -262  99.9%                -160    62.7%      -487    81.8%        -171   52.0%
 Construction                                     112   5.0%                 623    15.7%       -52    90.6%        -496   77.6%

 Acyclical
 Transport/Communication/Public Utilities            156      1.7%           177    23.3%      -303 81.0%           -945 90.2%
 Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries                    -14     62.9%           147     0.4%       170 17.7%             11 41.1%

 Probability of joint occurrence of cyclical components excluding construction
 Upper bound                                         86.6%            14.4%                            56.8%                1.8%
 Lower bound                                         76.6%             0.3%                            15.6%                0.3%



Note: ATE is average treatment effect after 5 years. Prob is probability of an adverse change.


                       Table 5: Bank Credit in New England: 1990 and 1991

                                                                              Type of Lending
                                      Total                Real Estate               C&I               Consumer
                                   1990    1991            1990     1991           1990     1991       1990     1991

            Rhode Island           -7.07      0.72         -8.05    20.45          6.13   -14.77      -19.63   -26.30

            Connecticut           -10.54 -13.20            -7.38  -8.18        -16.30 -29.43          -22.76   -23.61
            Maine                  -5.62 -7.49             -5.07  -5.03         -5.05 -21.80           -8.65    -1.97
            Massachusetts         -13.22 -13.33            -9.93 -11.03        -16.33 -14.73          -23.01   -18.52
            New Hampshire         -11.46 -11.08            -7.41 -11.37        -20.51 -25.82          -16.44    -0.82
            Vermont                -0.13 -4.07              4.53 -0.38         -14.60 -10.83           -2.48   -14.99



Note: Year-over-year percent growth for lending in each category on December 31 of each
year.
Source: Call reports of federally insured financial institutions from https://www.chicagofed.
org/banking/financial-institution-reports/commercial-bank-data




                                                             44
     Table 6: Counterfactual Consequences of Shutdown of Commercial Banking System in the U.S. During the 2008 Financial Crisis

                                                                 2 years (Dec 2010)                            5 years (Dec 2013)
                                                                    Counterfactual Value                          Counterfactual Value
                                                                  at Probability Threshold                      at Probability Threshold
                                                     Actual     75%      50%      25%         5%     Actual   75%      50%      25%         5%
                                                         (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)     (7)      (8)        (9)    (10)
         Monthly variables
         Unemployment Rate                              9.3     10.2     10.3     10.5       10.8       6.7    7.5      7.6      7.6        7.6
         Labor force participation rate                64.3     63.6     63.4     63.1       62.7      62.9   59.7     59.5     59.2       58.8

         Quarterly variables
         Per capita personal income ($,000)             42.8     43.0     42.2     41.3       39.8     44.4    43.8     42.9     42.0       40.3
           Change in above as % of Dec 2007 value     -1.5%    -1.0%    -2.9%    -4.9%      -8.6%     2.2%    0.7%    -1.3%    -3.4%      -7.2%
         Bankruptcy filings (per thousand persons)      1.19     1.25     1.26     1.27       1.28     0.75    0.82     0.84     0.85       0.88
         Mortgages past due (% of all)                   9.0      9.4     10.1     10.1       10.1      6.7     6.8      7.1      7.1        7.1

         Annual variables




45
         Employment (millions)                         139.3  129.1  121.9  114.6  100.9              144.8  126.7  118.8  110.8   96.0
           Change in above as % of Dec 2007 value     -4.8% -11.7% -16.7% -21.6% -31.0%              -1.0% -13.4% -18.8% -24.3% -34.4%
         Gross domestic product ($ trillion)            15.0   14.9   13.5   12.0    8.8               16.8   15.7   14.1   12.1    8.2
           Change in above as % of Dec 2007 value      3.7%   2.9%  -6.4% -17.1% -38.8%              16.1%   8.9% -2.7% -16.1% -43.2%


     Note: Columns (2) to (5) and (7) to (10), labelled "Counterfactual Value at Probability Threshold", indicate that the adverse
     outcome equaled or exceeded the indicated value with the probability indicated at the top of the column.
Appendix
Our paper contains two appendices intended for online distribution. Appendix A describes
the data that we analyze. Appendix B provides additional historical background.



A      Data
For online distribution only.
      The subsequent variable source table displays the data mnemonics, data description,
and data source for the time-series used in this paper.

                              Table: Variable Sources and Data Mnemonics

 Haver Mnemonic        Description                                                   Source

                                                U.S. National Level Data

 LR@USECON             Unemployment Rate (SA, %)                                     Bureau of Labor Statistics
 LP@USECON             Labor Force Participation Rate (SA, %)                        Bureau of Labor Statistics
 ES0TZ0@CEW            Establishments (Number)                                       Bureau of Labor Statistics
 USL14@MBAMTG          All Mortgages Past Due (NSA, %)                               Mortgage Bankers Association
 USABQ@BANKRUPT        Bankruptcy Filings, U.S. (Units)                              Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts
 USBBQ@BANKRUPT        Business Bankruptcy Filings, U.S. (Units)                     Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts
 USNBQ@BANKRUPT        Nonbusiness Bankruptcy Filings, U.S. (Units)                  Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts
 USTO@GSP              Gross Domestic Product                                        Bureau of Economic Analysis

                                                  U.S. State Level Data

 ??LA@EMPLR            Unemployment Rate (SA, %)                                    Bureau of Labor Statistics
 ??RA@EMPLR            Labor Force Participation Rate (SA, %)                       Bureau of Labor Statistics
 ??YPPQ@PIQR           Per capita personal income ($)                               Bureau of Economic Analysis
 ??L14@MBAMTG          All mortgages past due (%)                                   Mortgage Bankers Association
 ??ABPQ@BANKRUPT       Bankruptcy filings per capita (per thous people)             Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts
 ??BBPQ@BANKRUPT       Business bankruptcy filings per capita (per thous people)    Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts
 ??NBPQ@BANKRUPT       Nonbusiness bankruptcy filings per capita (per thous people) Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts
 ??POPQ@PIQR           Population (thous)                                           Bureau of Economic Analysis
 ??L14@MBAMTG          All Mortgages Past Due (NSA, %)                              Mortgage Bankers Association
 ??CDI@REGIONAL        CredAbility Consumer Distress Index                          CredAbility
 ??@CEWR               Employment                                                   Bureau of Labor Statistics
 ??TSZ0@CEWR           Establishments                                               Bureau of Labor Statistics
 ??TO@GSP              Gross State Product                                          Bureau of Economic Analysis

                                                 U.S. County Level Data

 ??!!!S0@CEWC          Establishments                                                United States Census Bureau
 ??!!!E0@CEWC          Employment                                                    United States Census Bureau


Notes: In the table, in the state and county level panels ?? stands in for the two letter U.S. state post code, i.e. AL
AK AZ AR CA CO CT DC DE FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NH NJ
NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY. In the county level panel !!! stands
in for three letter county abbreviations. Note that the county level data is downloaded from Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) as Haver Analytics carries only recent data.




                                                           46
B       History of the Four State Insurance Systems
For online distribution only.
       In Nebraska, the Nebraska Depository Institution Guaranty Corporation (NDIGC) was
chartered in 1976 and began operations two years later (Wood 1992). It insured deposits at
state-chartered industrial savings companies and cooperative credit corporations. The insur-
ance fund and its members were supervised by the Nebraska Department of Banking and
Finance. On December 31, 1983, NDIGC insured 33 industrial loan and investment compa-
nies (including savings banks) with $309 million in deposits, 24 cooperative credit associations
with $32 million in deposits, two credit unions with $1 million in deposits, and one trust com-
pany with $2 million in deposits. In total, NDICG insured 60 institutions with $343 million in
deposits (Nebraska 1984, pp. 148-58).
       On November 1, 1983, the department closed the NDIGC's largest member, the Com-
monwealth Savings Company. The action triggered runs at other NDICG-insured institutions.
In response, the department publicly ordered all industrial loan and investment companies to
refuse to allow depositors to withdraw funds until the depositors' certificates of indebtedness
had matured. Depositors could continue to access funds in checking accounts (English 1993,
p. 67; Wood 1992). When the investment certificates came due, the fund's second- and third-
largest industrial savings companies also failed, in July 1984 and January 1985, respectively.
All other NDIGC members switched to federal deposit insurance, by taking out bank or credit
union charters and joining the FDIC or NCUA respectively.
      Ohio established the Ohio Deposit Guaranty Fund (ODGF) to insure state-chartered
S&Ls in 1956. Ohio's Building and Loan Commissioner supervised the OGDF and its mem-
bers. At the beginning of 1985, OGDF insured 70 institutions with $4,200 million in total
deposits.12
       In March 1985, OGDF's largest member was Home State, which accounted for 19% of
the total deposits insured by the fund. Home State had borrowed $535 million from ESM Gov-
ernment Securities, a Florida securities dealer, using repurchase agreements which required
Home State to provide collateral worth $680 million. "When ESM failed [on March 4], Home
State lost $145 million due to the `overcollateralization' of its loan. This loss was slightly larger
than the sum of Home State's net worth and the value of the assets of the ODGF (English
1993, p. 69)." Runs on Home State began immediately. In four days, depositors withdrew
$150 million. On Saturday March 9, Home State did not open, and Ohio appointed a con-
servator. The next week, runs began on other ODGF-insured institutions. Ohio tried to stem
the runs by announcing the establishment of a new insurance fund to insure S&Ls other than
Home State, but the runs continued, and on Friday March 15, Ohio's Governor announced
    12 At
        that time, credit unions in Ohio were insured by a different corporation, the National Deposit Guarantee
Corporation (NDGC), which was chartered by Ohio in 1974, expanded across state lines to ensure credit unions in
three states (OH, IL, WV) by the early 1980s, and which continues to operate today as American Share Insurance.


                                                      47
a banking holiday and closed all OGDF institutions. Five days later, the state passed a law
requiring all state-chartered S&Ls to apply for federal insurance and allowed those deemed
likely to get FSLIC insurance to reopen. Others were allowed to reopen, permitting customers
to withdraw up to $750 per month (Todd, 1994). To expedite the reopenings, "about 160 bank
examiners from the Federal Reserve System help[ed] those from the FSLIC and the Federal
Home Loan System evaluate ODGF members" and Ohio's legislature provided $125 million
to cover ODGF losses (English 1993, p. 116)." Ultimately, 35 of 70 ODGF institutions obtained
FSLIC insurance, 10 obtained FDIC insurance, 24 (including Home State) merged with or were
acquired by health institutions with federal insurance (either FSLIC or FDIC), and 1 liquidated
(English, 1993, p. 68-70).
       In 1962, Maryland established the Maryland Savings Share Insurance Corporation (MSSIC)
in 1962. MSSIC insured deposits at stated-chartered S&Ls. The Maryland Division of Savings
and Loans supervised MSSIC and its members. At the beginning of 1985, MSSIC insured 102
institutions with deposits totaling $7,200 million.13
        Maryland's S&Ls experienced increasing difficulties in the spring of 1985. Problems
arose in part because of widespread discussion of problems faced by the S&L industry and
in part because of the failure of ODGF in Ohio. This bad news impeded S&L's efforts to
attract deposits and triggered declines in deposits at many institutions. Problems also arose
because of inadvisable or illegal activity at several S&Ls. On Friday May 9, an article in the
Baltimore Sun reported regulatory violations and risky investments at and triggered rapid
runs on Old Court S&L, the second largest member of the MSSIC, and another Merritt Com-
mercial S&L. On Tuesday May 13, Old Court entered conservatorship, as did Merritt one day
later. On Wednesday May 14, Maryland's governor imposed a $1,000-a-month limit on with-
drawals from MSSIC institutions (later amended to permit payments of mortgages, payrolls,
and similar needs). On May 18, the state established a new corporation, the Maryland Deposit
Insurance Fund (MDIF) and endowed it with $100 million to protect depositors while MSSIC
institutions applied for FSLIC membership. The state required all S&Ls to join the FSLIC
within four years. By mid July, 60 thrifts were operating without constraints under MDIF in-
surance. 14 were operating without constraint under FSLIC insurance. 26 MSSIC institutions
still operated under the restricted withdrawal regime. Two institutions were in liquidation
(Old Court and First Maryland). A third S&L, Community, entered liquidation in August. De-
positors at all three eventually received their deposits in full in quarterly installments through
1989 (without accruing interest after the institutions entered receivership).
       Rhode Island established the Rhode Island Share and Deposit Indemnity Corporation
(RSDIC), a state-chartered privately-operated insurance fund in 1969. RSDIC insured deposits
at stated-chartered savings banks, loan and investment companies, and credit unions. Rhode
Island's banking superintendent insured RSDIC and its members. In December 1990, RSDIC
  13 LikeOhio, Maryland established a separate insurance fund for state-chartered credit unions, the Maryland
Credit Union Insurance Corporation. In late 1983, it insured 27 credit unions with deposits totaling $439 million.


                                                       48
insured 45 financial institutions with over 357,000 individual accounts. This amounted to one
account for every three of Rhode Island's one-million residents, forty-six accounts for every
one-hundred Rhode Island residents over the age of 18, or roughly one account per household
in the state (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1993)
       In 1990, RISDIC's members found themselves under pressure from the business cycle
downturn which was particularly severe in New England at that time (Pulkkinen and Rosen-
gren, 1993; Todd, 1994). Real estate loan and investment losses accumulated at many institu-
tions. Two RISDIC members encountered severe problems. In February, regulators revealed
that Jefferson Loan and Investment Bank borrowed its capital from another financial institu-
tion in violation of state regulations, recorded equipment lease income improperly, and paid
exorbitant management fees to its parent holding company. RISDIC took control of Jefferson
and reserved $3.9 million to cover Jefferson's losses.
        In the fall of 1990, regulators discovered defalcations so large that they threatened the
solvency of Heritage Loan and Investment Company. Heritage had loaned $13 million of its
$25 million in assets to 128 individuals and organizations who neither applied for nor received
the funds, which instead went in to the pocket of the bank's president, Joseph Mollicone Jr.,
who was also on RISDIC's board of directors. News of the illegitimate loans induced substan-
tial withdrawals from Heritage. In October and November, RISDIC injected $17.5 million into
Heritage and assessed other RISDIC members $5.5 million to maintain RISDIC's reserve level.
On November 8, 1990, Joseph Mollicone disappeared.14 News of his disappearance triggered
a run on Heritage. On November 16, after the withdrawal of most of its deposits (which were
paid with funds from RISDIC), Heritage closed. Runs on other institutions accelerated. The
Rhode Island Central Credit Union, which had assets over $270 million, was particularly hard
hit. To cover withdrawals in the first two weeks of December, it borrowed $20 million from
the Rhode Island Credit Union League-Corporate Central Union (RICUL-CCU). At the end of
the month, RICUL-CCU refused to extend additional credit to Rhode Island Central, and to
secure outstanding loans, took over Rhode Island Central's assets and premises (Todd, 1994).
RISDIC was unable to help. Its funds were depleted and reputation tarnished. On December
31, its board decided against a second assessment of members and asked the state to appoint
a conservator to resolve its affairs. The announcement seemed certain to accelerate the runs
on financial institutions underway throughout the state.
       So, on January 1, 1991, a few hours after taking office, Rhode Island's governor froze all
accounts in RISDIC insured institutions (Pulkkinen and Rosengren, 1993; Todd, 1994, p. 10).
About two-thirds of all RISDIC-insured deposits were frozen for the greater part of the year.
The full amount of deposits at five RISDIC-insured institutions was not returned for nearly 3
years.
      Rhode Island replaced RISDIC with a new organization, the Depositors Economic Pro-
  14 Two   years later, he was arrested, tried, convicted, and imprisoned.


                                                         49
tection Corporation (DEPCO). The state issued $150 million to assist in providing 100 percent
coverage for all deposits up to $100,000 and partial insurance for deposits over that amount in
the 14 closed institutions. The bonds were to be repaid from liquidating the failed institutions'
assets and from a 0.5 percent increase in the state sales tax. On February 9, 1991, the governor
of Rhode Island promised that payments to depositors would be made within 60 days, but
by January of 1992, depositors had received only about 10 percent of their deposits. Nine
institutions remained closed despite state efforts to sell them. By June 1992, 18 months after
the closings, all but 38,000 depositors had received their deposits and those depositors had
received 90 percent of their money. Costs to the state of Rhode Island reached $471 million as
of June 1992.




                                               50
