                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     GLOBAL BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL CYCLES:
                     A TALE OF TWO CAPITAL ACCOUNT REGIMES

                                         Julien Acalin
                                      Alessandro Rebucci

                                      Working Paper 27739
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27739


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




Paper prepared for the 2019 Seoul Journal of Economics International Symposium. We thank the
editor, Soyoung Kim, and conference participants for helpful comments and suggestions. We are
also grateful to M. Hashem Pesaran, Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi, and Andrew Rose for discussions
and comments. The remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Julien Acalin and Alessandro Rebucci. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Business and Financial Cycles: A Tale of Two Capital Account Regimes
Julien Acalin and Alessandro Rebucci
NBER Working Paper No. 27739
August 2020
JEL No. C38,E42,F44,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

Using a new equity price-based measure of the global financial cycle, this paper evaluates the relative
importance of global financial shocks for quarterly equity returns and output growths in a large sample
of advanced and emerging economies, as well as in South Korea and China--two countries on different
sides of the trilemma triangle of international finance. We document that global financial shocks in
both China and South Korea explain a substantial share of equity return variability (20 and 50 percent
of the total variance, respectively), but a much smaller portion of real output fluctuations (less than
10 percent in Korea and negligible in the case of China). We also find that the combination of a closer
capital account and a more rigid exchange rate regime, as in China, is associated with some costs in
terms of diversification opportunities quantified by very large exposures to domestic financial and
real shocks, dwarfing the contribution of any other shock in the model. More surprisingly, the combination
of a relatively open capital account and a flexible exchange rate, as in South Korea, not only is associated
with higher exposure to the global financial cycle than in China but also with a significant incidence
of domestic financial shocks on output fluctuations.


Julien Acalin
Johns Hopkins University
3100 Wyman Park Drive
Baltimore, MD 21211
jacalin1@jhu.edu

Alessandro Rebucci
Johns Hopkins Carey Business School
100 International Drive
Baltimore, MD 21202
and NBER
arebucci@jhu.edu
    Rey (2013): There is a global financial cycle in capital flows (GFC), asset prices, and in credit

growth. The cycle co-moves with the VIX Index, a measure of uncertainty and risk aversion of the

markets. [...] Analysis suggests that one of the determinants of the GFC is monetary policy in the

center country. [...] Whenever capital is freely mobile, the global financial cycle constrains national

monetary policies regardless of the exchange rate regime.

    Cerutti et al. (2017): Our evidence seems mostly inconsistent with a significant and conspicuous

GFC for capital flows. [...] Succinctly, most variation in capital flows does not seem to be the result

of common shocks nor stem from observables in a central country like the United States.



1    Introduction

In a celebrated speech in Jackson Hole, Rey (2013) argued that there is a global financial cycle

(GFC) in capital flows and asset prices, mainly driven by fluctuations in risk aversion and monetary

conditions in the center economies. Rey (2013) further observed that the GFC transforms the

Mundell-Fleming trilemma of international finance into a dilemma, calling for macro-prudential

policies and capital controls to manage the impact of the GFC on small open economies. Cerutti,

Claessens, and Rose (2017), in sharp contrast, maintained that there is no evidence of a conspicuous

GFC driving capital flows in most countries and most of the time.

    Neither proponents nor opponents of the GFC hypothesis, however, as well as most the ensued

literature, has evaluated the importance of the GFC for final macroeconomic outcomes­such as

output, investment, and consumption­that ultimately matter to evaluate economic performance.

Moreover, while capital controls and macro-prudential policies are well understood theoretically,

empirical evaluation of their insulating properties suffers from limitations arising from the difficulty

to identify their causal macroeconomic effects and the limited external validity of studies based on

microeconomic data at the household and firm level.1

    This paper's contribution is twofold. First, we evaluate the GFC hypothesis for both equity

prices and real macroeconomic outcomes in a theoretically coherent framework for a large sample of

advanced and emerging economies. Second, by comparing two specific countries on different sides of

the trilemma triangle, South Korea and China, we can assess the insulating properties of a closed
  1
    For recent surveys of the literature on capital controls and macroprudential policies, see Engel (2016), Erten,
Korinek, and Ocampo (forthcoming), Rebucci and Ma (2020).




                                                        1
capital account regime compared to an open one operating under exchange rate flexibility.

       We document that global financial shocks in both China and South Korea explain a substantial

share of equity return variability (20 and 50 percent of total variance, respectively), but a much

smaller portion of real output fluctuations (less than 10 percent in Korea and negligible in the case

of China). We also find that a closer capital account with a more rigid exchange rate regime, as in

China, is associated with some costs in terms of lost diversification opportunities quantified by very

large exposures to domestic financial and real shocks dwarfing the contribution of any other shock in

the model. More surprisingly, a more open capital account with a flexible exchange rate, as in South

Korea, not only is associated with a higher exposure to the global financial cycle but also with an

important incidence of domestic financial shocks on output fluctuations.

       While the GFC hypothesis applies to a wide range of assets and to capital flows, this paper

focuses on international co-movement in country equity returns and output growth rates at the

quarterly frequency. To model the interaction between the business and financial cycles, we take a

common factor approach in the context of the factor-augmented Panel VAR (PVAR) econometric

model proposed by Cesa-Bianchi, Pesaran, and Rebucci (2019)­henceforth, CPR. Hence, we assume

that business and financial cycles are driven by two common shocks and two idiosyncratic shocks for

each country in the sample in a complete multi-country model of the world economy.

       Identification of the two common shocks exploits different patterns of cross-country correlations

of quarterly equity market returns and GDP growth rates, consistent with the stylized facts of the

data that we document in the paper and standard arbitrage asset pricing theory as for instance in

Ross (1976), Chamberlain and Rothschild (1982) and Sentana (2002), where it is assumed that the

idiosyncratic risk component of asset returns is weakly correlated across section and not priced in

the returns.2

       From a theoretical perspective, one can assume that country-specific output growth is the divi-

dend or endowment growth process of a Lucas (1978) tree economy. In a heterogeneous multi-country

version of the Lucas (1978) model, CPR show that country-specific equity returns are driven by at

least one more risk factor than the world growth risk factor shared by country endowments. Fur-

thermore, assuming that no country is a dominant unit, in the sense that it cannot influence world

aggregates, and that the endowment growth innovations are weakly correlated across countries, CPR
   2
    In the paper, a panel time series is defined as weakly correlated if the maximum eigenvalue of its covariance matrix
is bounded as the size of the cross section increases.



                                                           2
show that the average output growth in the sample is the only common factor in the cross section

of country-specific output growths. As a consequence, by combining all common shocks to equity

returns other than the world growth factor in a second composite common shock, it is possible to

capture the cross-country correlation of the equity return series unexplained by the first factor in a

single second common financial risk factor.

   Consistent with this theoretical framework, we specify a multi-country econometric model in

output growths and equity returns with two common shocks and two country-specific shocks. To

identify the two common shocks, we assume that the first one, which we refer to as the world

or international business cycle shock, is common to both GDP growths and equity returns in all

countries, while the second that we refer to as the global financial cycle shock, is only shared among

the return series after controlling for international business cycle innovations. To identify the two

country-specific shocks, instead, we exploit the empirical properties of the estimated multi-country

covariance matrix combined with alternative auxiliary assumptions typically used in the literature.

Note, however, that the identification of the two common shocks does not require any restrictions

on the within-country correlation of country-specific returns and output growth shocks.

   These moment restrictions not only are consistent with the consumption-based asset pricing the-

ory embedded in our econometric model, but they also fit well the stylized facts of the data. Specif-

ically, we will show that equity returns and output growths are closely correlated (unconditionally)

across countries, but this cross-country correlation is much stronger for returns than for growth. Sec-

ond, conditional on the estimated common factor shocks, the estimated country-specific innovations

display cross-country correlations that are consistent with the identification assumptions made and

their interpretation as sources of idiosyncratic risk that can be diversified internationally. Finally, we

will also illustrate that the estimated multi-country covariance matrix of the country-specific shocks

is near diagonal, suggesting that the two common shocks capture most of the contemporaneous

correlation among them.

   The empirical analysis yields a rich set of results. First, we provide a new estimate of the global

financial cycle that tracks very well the updated GFC measure of Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020)

(henceforth, MAR), even though it is based on a single asset class. Our parsimonious estimate of the

GFC correlates closely with the U.S. Federal Fund rate and the ECB Eonia rate. It also characterizes

global financial booms and busts more markedly than the MAR measure, including particularly



                                                    3
during the 2010-12 European crisis and subsequent recovery supported by unconventional monetary

policies in advanced economies.

   Second, consistent with the GFC hypothesis, we find that global financial shocks are a major

driver of individual country equity markets, explaining more than 50 percent of the variance in the

average economy in the sample as well as in South Korea. In contrast, in the case of China, global

financial shocks have a much lower impact. Yet, they still account for more than 20 percent of the

variance in domestic equity returns.

   Third, not necessarily consistent with the the implications of the GFC hypothesis and more in

line with the evidence of Cerutti et al. (2017), we show that global financial shocks have a much

more limited impact on countries' business cycles. Global financial shocks explain about 10 percent

of the forecast error variance of output growth in the average economy as well as in Korea, and have

virtually no impact on China's output fluctuations.

   Fourth, and quite surprisingly, we find that country-specific financial shocks, which can be in-

terpreted as representing idiosyncratic risk in our econometric model, explain no share of output

variance in China or the average economy in the sample, while they have a contribution to output

variance comparable to that of the global financial shocks in the case of Korea, which is an outlier

in our sample in this particular respect.

   Finally, we report some evidence of a possible trade-off between exposure to global factors and

lower diversification opportunities of idiosyncratic risks, in Korea and China, respectively. In par-

ticular, the better insulation of China's stock market to the GFC factor is associated with a very

large exposure of the local stock market to domestic financial shocks. Similarly, home-grown real

shocks play a much larger role in explaining Chinese output fluctuations. By the same token, Ko-

rea's better financial diversification opportunities associated with an open capital account result in a

lower sensitivity of the domestic stock market to idiosyncratic financial shocks. Yet, we find that this

lower sensitivity of the local stock market to home grown financial disturbances does not translates

into a smaller exposure of the Korean business cycle to country-specific financial shocks. As noted

already, this latter finding is peculiar to South Korea and does not apply to the average economy in

the sample. An interesting area of future research, therefore, in the specific case of Korea, is to try

to separate the role of capital account openness from that of exchange rate flexibility.

   The literature on the GFC is voluminous. Here we define our contributions relative to the most



                                                   4
closely related papers. A few other studies evaluate the interaction of international business and

financial cycles. Ha, Kose, Otrok, and Prasad (2020) look at a wider set of financial and real

variables, including interest rates, house prices, consumption and investment, in addition to equity

prices and output, but restrict the empirical analysis to the G7 countries. While we focus on GDP

growth rates and stock market returns, we provide evidence based on a much larger country sample

of emerging and advanced economies. In addition, we identify the international business and global

financial cycle shocks based on a set of explicit theory and data-consistent assumptions. Cesa-Bianchi,

Ferrero, and Rebucci (2018) identify an international credit supply shock in the time series dimension

from changes in broker-dealer leverage in the United States. They show that residential house prices,

cross-border BIS claims, consumption and output growths comove strongly conditional on this shock

that explains about 10-20 percent of a capital flows variance and 10-15 percent of consumption

variance, on average, in a sample of about 50 advanced and emerging economies (excluding the

United States).3 Despite using different econometric methods, country samples, and variables, these

studies find remarkably similar results showing limited spillovers from the global financial cycle to

countries' business cycles.4

       Other papers investigate the insulating power of capital controls and the heterogeneous sensi-

tivity of different economies to the GFC. Zeev (2017) investigates whether capital controls can help

countries to mitigate the impact of an international credit shock. He documents that countries at

the 75th percentile of the distribution of an index of capital inflow controls are much more shielded

relative to countries at the 25th percentile. Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2018), however, shows that, while

higher loan-to-value ratios and lower share of foreign currency denominated liabilities, as well as more

flexible exchange rate regimes, are associated with lower consumption sensitivity to the international

credit supply shock that they identify, controls on capital inflows are not, except for a few exceptional

cases like China. Han and Wei (2018) re-examine the international transmissions of monetary policy

shocks from advanced economies to emerging economies. They document a pattern between the

trilemma and the dilemma: without capital controls, a flexible exchange rate offers some monetary

autonomy when the center country tightens its monetary policy, yet it fails to do so when the center

country loosens the policy stance. In contrast, capital controls help to insulate the periphery from
   3
     Cesa-Bianchi, Cespedes, and Rebucci (2015) identify a global liquidity shock as the common component of BIS
cross-border claims finding similar results.
   4
     CPR also document similar results using equity market realized volatility rather than stock returns. CPR, however,
do not focus explicitly on the GFC or the country-specific determinants of the exposure to it.



                                                          5
center country monetary policy shocks even when the latter lowers its interest rate. We provide both

cross-section and country-study evidence on these issues in a unified empirical framework.

   Related to this, Ma, Rogers, and Zhou (2019) study a Chinese stock market liberalization episode

in the mid-2010s­the so called Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect. The connect program allowed

investors based in China, Hong Kong residents, and foreign investors to trade freely some stocks listed

on both markets. Using a difference-in-difference approach, Ma et al. (2019) show that, after the

introduction of the connect program, firm-level investment in China became more sensitive to U.S.

monetary policy shocks, suggesting that capital controls were effective at insulating real domestic

variables before their removal. Gourinchas (2018) extends the Mundell-Fleming model of a small open

economy with financial spillovers from center economies, and shows that the stabilizing properties

of flexible exchange rates diminish with the strength of the financial spillovers. In particular, for

sufficiently strong financial spillovers the economy faces a dilemma and flexible exchange rates become

ineffective as in Rey (2013). Yet, if financial spillovers are present but not strong enough to alter

the transmission of domestic monetary policy­as for instance is the case for Chile­then the economy

still faces a trilemma and flexible exchange rates help stabilize the economy. We compare directly

the performance of two countries with polar capital account and exchange rate regimes, finding that

China is more insulated than South Korea from GFC shocks, providing an example of a possible loss

of effectiveness of the exchange rate regime as an insulation mechanism in the case of Korea and

confirming the exceptional nature of the Chinese case.

   Regarding our identification strategy, other studies have observed that the cross-country correla-

tion in asset prices is much stronger for equity returns than for output growth. Tesar (1995), Colacito

and Croce (2011), Lewis and Liu (2015) highlight similar patterns of cross-country correlations for

equity returns and consumption growth. Bai et al. (2019) document that emerging market sovereign

spreads are much more correlated across countries than their economic conditions. None of these

studies, however, exploit these moment of the data for factor identification purposes. We use these

stylized facts to identify two common shocks in a factor-augmented multi-country Panel VAR model

(PVAR) as in CPR.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the empirical multi-country model

that we use and discusses the identification of the common and country-specific shocks. Section 3

reports key stylized facts of the data that guide the shock identification. Section 4 reports the



                                                  6
empirical results. Section 5 concludes. Some additional results are reported in the appendix.



2    Empirical model

The framework that we apply is a multi-country factor model developed by Cesa-Bianchi, Pesaran,

and Rebucci (2019) to which we refer for technical details. This is a factor-augmented, panel vector

autoregression (PVAR) in which quarterly country-specific output growths and stock market equity

returns are driven by 2 common and 2 × N country-specific shocks. In this section, we discuss the

identification of the common shocks and the specification of the estimation equations used to assess

their relative importance for South Korea and China in the context of a complete multi-country

model of the world economy. Identification of the country-specific shocks plays only an auxiliary role

in the empirical analysis and follows a conventional approach that is also briefly summarized below.

    Consider, without loss of generality, the following first-order PVAR in stock market equity returns,

rit , and output growths, yit , for i = 1, 2, ..., N and t = 1, 2, ..., T


                               rit = air + i,11 ri,t-1 + i,12 yi,t-1 + eir,t ,                      (1)

                             yit = aiy + i,21 ri,t-1 + i,22 yi,t-1 + eiy,t                          (2)


where equity returns, rit , are measured as the log-difference of the stock market index for country i

during quarter t, output growths, yit , are measured as the log-difference of real GDP, and eir,t and

eiy,t are country-specific reduced-form innovations assumed to be serially uncorrelated. Consistent

with classical asset pricing theory (e.g., Lucas (1978) and Ross (1976)), CPR posit the following

unobservable factor representation for the reduced-form PVAR innovations:


                                         eir,t = i  t + i  t +  it ,                                (3)

                                        eiy,t =  i  t + it                                          (4)


where  t and  t are two common shocks to market factors, while  it and it are two country-specific

shocks representing idiosyncratic risk that is not priced in the returns. Thus, they are assumed to be

serially uncorrelated, weakly correlated across countries as in Chamberlain and Rothschild (1982)

and Sentana (2002), but possibly correlated with each other within each country. As we will see in



                                                       7
our application, the innovation factor-structure implied by Equations (1)-(4) has strong empirical

support in the data.

   The econometric model in Equations (1)-(4) states that the country-specific equity returns include

at least one more common shock,  t , than the output growths, capturing all common higher-moment

components not accounted for by the first common shock,  t , driving the cash flow or endowment

processes. As we shall see below, the common shock  t in (4) can be extracted from the panel of

quarterly GDP growth series alone. Therefore, it will be labelled "international or global business

cycle shock". The second common shock,  t , instead, can be shown to be a linear combination of

all other common shocks in the heterogeneous multi-country asset pricing model of CPR, reflecting

second and higher-order moment common innovations, their squares and cross products. Empirically,

this shock also captures changes in non-fundamental aspects of financial markets, such as over-

reactions to news due to excessive optimism/pessimism or bubble components that are ruled out by

the solution of the theoretical model. For this reason, we refer to  t as the "global financial cycle

shock" or "global financial shock" for short. Similarly, it has a more direct mapping into a country-

specific, and hence idiosyncratic "endowment growth shock" shock, while  it is an all-encompassing

country-specific financial shock. We now discuss the intuition for the identification of the common

and the idiosyncratic shocks, in turn, and spell out the estimation equations to evaluate their relative

importance for country cycles, in particular for South Korea and China.


2.1   Identification of the Common Shocks in a Static Heterogeneous Setting

Identification of  t and  t and their loadings, i ,  i , and i relies on placing restrictions on the

cross-country correlations of it and  it , while leaving their within-country correlation unrestricted.

To illustrate the mechanics and the intuition on how the identification strategy works, denote world

GDP growth and the world equity return by ¯
                                          y,t and r
                                                  ¯,t , respectively, and suppose that they can

be measured by the weighted cross section averages of country-specific output growth and equity

returns, namely:
                                     N                                  N
                           ¯
                           y,t =           wi yit ,       and   r
                                                                ¯,t =         w
                                                                              °i rit                (5)
                                     i=1                                i=1

where w = (w1 , w2 , ..., wN ) and °
                                   w = (°
                                        w1 , w         °N ) are N × 1 vectors of aggregation weights,
                                             °2 , ..., w

which can be the same or differ.

   Let us now make the following assumptions: (i) the loadings i ,  i , and i are such that  t is

                                                      8
a strong (or pervasive) factor for both the panels of equity returns and output growths, while  t is

a strong factor for the panel of equity returns only; (ii) the weights, w and °
                                                                              w, are granular in the

sense that individual countries' contribution to world growth and world equity returns are of order

1/N ; and (iii) that the country-specific shocks, it and  it , are weakly correlated across countries in

the sense that

                                  max ( )    = O(1),      and      max ( )        = O(1)                         (6)

where  = V ar (t ) and  = V ar ( t ) denote the covariance matrices of the N × 1 vectors

t = (1t , 2t , ..., N t ) and  t = ( 1t ,  2t , ...,  N t ) , respectively, and    max ()   is the largest eigenvalue

of , assumed to be bounded in Equation 6.

       Assumption (i) is standard in the factor literature (see, for instance, Assumption B in Bai and

Ng (2002)) and allows for consistent estimation of the common shocks by cross section averaging of

country-specific observations (Chudik, Pesaran, and Tosetti (2011)). Assumption (ii) requires that

no individual unit is important enough to influence the world aggregates, consistent with the notion

that, since the mid-1990s, when our sample period starts, world growth and world equity markets

have become progressively more diversified and integrated as a result of the globalization process.5

Assumption (iii) is the most important source of identification and requires that the country-specific

shocks, it and  it , can be treated as idiosyncratic risk for asset pricing purposes in line with the

approximate factor models of Chamberlain and Rothschild (1982) and Sentana (2002).

       Dropping intercepts and dynamics from (1)-(4), the following model for world equity return and

GDP growth obtains:


                                              r
                                              ¯,t =  t +  t + ¯,t ,                                              (7)

                                            ¯
                                            y,t =  t + ¯
                                                       ,t                                                        (8)


where ¯,t = °
            w  t , and ¯                              ,t ) = w  w  (w w)
                       ,t = w t . Note now that V ar (¯                                                   max ( ).

                                                      ,t ) = O (w w) = O N -1 , and hence ¯
Thus, under Assumptions (ii) and (iii), we have V ar (¯                                   ,t =

Op N -1/2 , where Op N -1/2 denotes stochastic boundedness. It follows that, under Assumptions
                                                                                                          N
(ii) and (iii), for N sufficiently large,  t can be identified (up to the scalar 1/ ) by y
                                                                                         ¯,t =            i=1 wi yit
   5
       Formal econometric evidence supporting this assumption is provided by Kapetanios et al. (forthcoming).




                                                           9
as:

                                     t =  -1 ¯
                                             y,t + Op N -1/2 .                                    (9)

Note here that the fact that equity returns have at least one more common factor than growth

rates, on its own, does not provide identification of the international business cycle shock. To get

identification, we also need weak cross-country correlation and large N . This is because, with small

N , we would not be able to disentangle  t from ¯
                                                ,t (the average of it in the equation for output

growth above) and ¯
                  ,t would remain a risk factor priced in the country specific equity returns.

      Identifying the global financial factor follows a similar strategy. Under our assumptions,  t

can be identified from the data as a linear combination of ¯
                                                           y,t and r
                                                                   ¯,t , up to an orthonormal

transformation (as N  ), given by:

                                                 
                               t = -1 r
                                      ¯,t -       ¯
                                                  y,t       + Op N -1/2 .                        (10)
                                                 

This result follows immediately from substituting (9) into (7) and applying the same reasoning as

before.


2.2     Identification and estimation of the common shocks in a dynamic setting

Identifying the common shocks is considerably more complex in the heterogeneous dynamic setting

given by Equations (1) and (2). As CPR show, however, observable proxies for  t and  t , can be

obtained, under additional regularity conditions on the degree of heterogeneity and persistence in

the country systems, by using a suitable pth-order truncated approximation of the the following

infinite-order expressions for the unobservable factors:

                                            
                    t = b +  -1 ¯
                                y,t +               z,t- + Op N -1/2 ,
                                                 c, ¯                                            (11)
                                            =1
                                                            
                                           
                     t = b + -1 r
                                ¯,t -       y,t
                                            ¯           +           z,t- + Op N -1/2
                                                                 c, ¯                            (12)
                                           
                                                            =1


where b and b are fixed constants, ¯
                                   z,t = (¯
                                          r,t , ¯
                                                y,t ), c, and c, are row vectors of coefficients

resulting from the inversion of the matrix representation of the system (1)-(4). Augmenting the

expressions (9) and (10) for the static case with higher order lags of (¯
                                                                        r,t- , ¯
                                                                               y,t- ), for    > 1, is

necessary for consistent estimation to take account of dynamic heterogeneity on the identification


                                                   10
of the unbearable common shocks that depend on lagged variables. In practice, the international

business cycle shocks can be consistently estimated as residuals from the regression of global output

growth on its lagged values as well as the lagged values of global equity returns, whilst global financial

shocks are obtained as residuals from the regression of global equity returns on the estimated global

growth shocks and the lagged values of global output growth and global equity returns.

   As in the static case,  t and  t can be identified only up to a non-singular transformation, which

we take to be orthonormal, as it simplifies the computation and interpretation of impulse responses

and error variance decompositions that we conduct later on in the paper. The latter is achieved

by choosing coefficients in the linear regression of ¯
                                                     y,t on p lags of ¯
                                                                      z,t , and r
                                                                                ¯,t on ¯
                                                                                       y,t and p

lags of ¯
        z,t such that the observable proxy for the common shocks have (in-sample) zero-means, unit

variances, and, for a sufficiently high lag order p, will be serially uncorrelated. Note finally that one

cannot arrive at these estimates by principal component (PC) analysis, where the common factors

are estimated as PCs of output growth and/or equity return series considered separately or together,

since the PC analysis does not make use of the a priori identification of the shocks and, being static

in nature, cannot cope with the heterogeneous dynamics of the interactions between equity return

and growth across countries.


2.3   Alternative Identification Assumptions for Country-Specific Shocks

In our model, the correlation between it and  it captures any contemporaneous causal relation

between equity return and output growth at the country level, conditional on  t and  t . Thus far,

we have not imposed any restrictions on these moments of the data for the purpose of identifying

the common shocks, only assuming that  it and it , have zero means and finite variances, and are

serially uncorrelated, but can be correlated with each other within countries and weakly correlated

across countries, leaving the causal relation between the idiosyncratic shocks unrestricted.

   In order to compute impulse responses to country-specific shocks and their importance in the

variance decompositions that we report below, however, we need to deal with this second identi-

fication problem. To identify country-specific return and growth shocks we exploit the empirical

properties of the estimated multi-country reduced form covariance matrix that we document in the

next section, combined with alternative assumptions regarding the causal relation between equity re-

turns and output growths innovations at the country-specific level. We then show that the inference



                                                   11
we draw is reasonably robust to the alternative assumptions made.

       Consider the complete covariance matrix of the multi-country model (1)-(4) for i = 1, 2, ..., N

and distinguish between off-diagonal covariance terms within each country block, and off-diagonal

covariances terms between countries. In our baseline results reported in the next section, we allow for

non-zero off block-diagonal elements between countries to account for their spillovers and factorize

the within-country blocks with a Cholesky decomposition, ordering the equity returns first as a source

of domestic financial shocks and thus assuming that country-specific equity returns shocks can have

a contemporaneous causal impact on output growths but not vice versa. Before proceeding, however,

we assess the statistical significance of the spillover elements by using the regularized multiple testing

threshold estimator of Bailey, Pesaran, and Smith (2019), setting to zero all pairwise covariances

statistically insignificant using suitably adjusted critical values. The list of statistically significant

off-diagonal elements is reported in the appendix.6 Finally, we compute the generalized forecast

error variance decompositions (GFVD) and impulse response functions (GIRF) of Pesaran and Shin

(1998).

       To check that our inference is robust, we also re-estimate the forecast error variance decomposi-

tions (FEVD) under alternative assumptions. We consider two polar cases. First, we assume that

the estimated multi-country covariance matrix conditional on the estimated global factors shocks

is truly diagonal, consistent with the empirical evidence reported in appendix that very few off-

diagonal elements are significantly different from zero and no within block diagonal covariance term

is statistically significant. This means assuming that our global growth shocks, statistically, explains

100 percent of the conditional correlation between country-specific equity returns and growth rates.

Second, we leave this covariancce matrix completely unrestricted. As we shall see, the inference

one can draw from the two alternative specifications of the multi-country error covariance matrix of

country-specific shocks is essentially the same, except of course for the magnitude of the spillover

effects from country-specific shocks which are larger the more off block-diagonal elements are allowed

for.

       The dynamic impacts and relative importance of all identified shocks can be obtained by sub-

stituting in (1)-(4) the estimated orthogonal factor innovations, ^ and ^
                                                                         t based on the following
                                                                   t
   6
     This regularized estimator provides a consistent estimate of the multi-country error covariance matrix of the
residuals of the multi-country model by exploiting its sparsity. See CPR for more details.




                                                       12
regressions:

                                                                           p
                           rit = aiv + i,11 ri,t-1 + i,12 yi,t-1 +              dv,i ¯
                                                                                     z,t-                       (13)
                                                                           =1
                                    + i,11 ^ + ^
                                            t i,12  t +  it ,
                                                                           p
                         yit = aiy + i,21 ri,t-1 + i,22 yi,t-1 +                dy,i ¯
                                                                                     z,t-                       (14)
                                                                           =1
                                    + i,21 ^ + it
                                            t



which can be estimated consistently by least squares so long as N and T are large enough.7 The

multi-country PVAR model obtains by stacking the country-specific factor augmented VARs, (13)-

(14). The model is solved as explained in the online supplement to the CPR paper. The generalized

variance decompositions and the impulse responses for the full multi-country model are then com-

puted utilizing the CPR Matlab replication code.



3        Data and stylized facts

In this section we describe the data that we use in our empirical analysis and present some stylized

facts on the cross country correlations of output growth and equity returns. The data set is a balanced

panel of 32 advanced and emerging countries, from 1994:Q4 to 2016:Q4, for real GDP growth and

stock market equity returns.8 The sample is cut at the beginning of 1994, as equity price data are not

available earlier for some emerging economies, including Brazil and China. Better quality quarterly

GDP data for China also are available only from 1993.

        As a measure of economic activity, we use the log-difference of real GDP level, which we denote

as yit . Similarly, we compute the stock market return for country i in quarter t as the log-difference

of the the stock market index as:

                                            rit = ln(Pit ) - ln(Pit-1 ),

where Pit is the stock market index price observed at the end-of-quarter t in country i. A battery of

unit root tests show that both output growth rates and equity returns are stationary variables, as
    7
     Large N is required so that the probability order Op (N -1/2 ) becomes negligible. Large T is required to ensure
that the dynamics are estimated accurately.
   8
     See CPR on the data sources for quarterly real GDP and daily equity prices. The equity price indexes that we use
are ex-dividend and in local currency. The list of countries is reported in the appendix.




                                                         13
required by our analysis (results not reported).

      The differential pattern of cross-country correlation among the output growth rates and equity

returns is one way to motivate our identification strategy. So, the reminder of this section focuses

on such patterns.


3.1      Unconditional cross-country correlations

We use pairwise correlation analysis in order to gauge the extent to which the time series of equity

returns and output growths co-move across countries. The average pairwise correlation of country i

in the panel, ¯i , measures the average degree of co-movement of country i with all other countries j ,

for all j = i. The average pairwise correlation across all countries, ¯N , is the cross-country average

of ¯i over i = 1, 2, ..., N . This statistics relates to the degree of pervasiveness or strength of the

factors in a panel of time series. The attraction of the average pairwise correlation, ¯N , lies in the

fact that it applies to multi-factor processes, and unlike factor analysis does not require the factors

to be strong. In fact, ¯N tends to a strictly positive number if the panel of time series is driven by

at least one strong factor, otherwise it must tend to zero as N  . Therefore, non-zero estimates

of ¯N are suggestive of strong cross-sectional dependence, and indicate the presence of at least one

strong factor.9


                             Figure 1 Average Pair-wise Correlations:
                       Equity Return (rit ) and Output Growth (yit ) Series




  Note. For each country, the light (yellow) and the dark (blue) bar show the average pairwise correlation with the remaining
  countries in the sample, for equity return and GDP growth series, respectively (¯  i ). The dotted lines correspond to the
  overall average across all countries, equal to 0.56 and 0.27, respectively (¯
                                                                              N ). Sample period: 1994:Q4-2016:Q4.
  9
      See Pesaran (2015) for more details and also formal tests of cross-sectional dependence based on estimates of ¯N .



                                                              14
   Figure 1 plots ¯i for all i = 1, 2, ...N and ¯N for equity return and output growth series­light

(yellow) and dark (blue) bars, respectively. The figure shows that the average across all countries

of the pairwise correlation for the equity return series is more than twice the average for the growth

series, at 0.56 and 0.27, respectively (dotted lines). This evidence suggests that both series share at

least one strong common factor, as we assumed for identification purposes, but the degree of cross-

country dependence shared among the equity return series is much stronger than among output

growth series.

   Comparing China and South Korea, we see that the two countries have an approximately equal

pairwise output growth correlation, close to the overall average across countries, and consistent with

their comparable degree of trade openness. However, Korea's pairwise equity return correlation is

much higher than in China (0.52 and 0.27, respectively), consistent with a much lower degree of

capital account openness and financial integration in this country.


3.2    Conditional cross-country correlations

Although the assumptions that we discussed above for the identification of the two common shocks

cannot be formally tested, as the model is exactly identified, we can investigate the extent to which

the moments of the data restricted by such assumptions are in line with the assumptions made.

To this end, we can look at the degree of cross-country dependence of the estimated residuals or

innovations from the dynamic regressions (13) and (14), with and without conditioning on the global

financial shock, ^
                 t.

   Consider first the hypothesis that both cross sections of output growths and equity returns are

driven only by the international business cycle shock, ^ . We can then estimate the following country-
                                                        t

specific models for each country i, i = 1, 2, ..., N :


             rit =  i,11 ^ + lagged cross-section averages and lagged endogenous values + uit
                          t

           yit =  i,21 ^ + lagged cross-section averages and lagged endogenous values + it ,
                        t



where uit is a residual capturing any cross-country dependence not captured by ^.
                                                                                t


   Figure 2 shows that, if we condition only on the international business cycle shock ^ in (13)-
                                                                                        t

(14), the equity return innovations display average pair-wise correlations pretty much like those in


                                                     15
     Figure 2 Average Pair-wise Correlations of Equity Return (uit ) and Growth
                       Rate (it ) Innovations Conditional on ^
                                                               t




  Note. For each country, the light (yellow) and the dark (blue) bar show the average pairwise correlation with the remaining
  countries in the sample for the estimated equity return and GDP growth innovations conditional on       ^ only. The dotted
                                                                                                            t
  lines correspond to the overall average across all countries, equal to 0.54 and -0.01, respectively. Sample period: 1994:Q4-
  2016:Q4.



the raw data, reported in Figure 1. In contrast, the pairwise correlations of the estimated growth

innovations is negligible with this conditioning, with an average across all countries of -0.01. This

evidence clearly suggests that, consistent with the identification assumptions made, one common

factor is sufficient to capture the cross-country dependence of the output growth series, while the

equity return series share at least one more strong factor.

   Consider now country-specific models conditional on both the international business cycle shock,
^ , and the global financial cycle shock, ^
                                           t , for all i with i = 1, 2, ...N :
 t



        rit =  i,11 ^ + ^
                     t i,12  t + lagged cross-section averages and lagged endogenous values +  it ,

     yit =  i,21 ^ + lagged cross-section averages and lagged endogenous values + it
                  t



   Figure 3 shows that, if we condition on both ^ and ^
                                                       t , then the cross-country correlations of the
                                                 t

equity return innovations also become negligible, as in the case of the growth innovations, with an

average pair-wise correlation across all countries equal to -0.02. For example, in the specific case

of the United States, which is the most important equity market in world, the average pair-wise

correlation of the return innovations is equal to 0.64 conditioning on ^ alone. But the correlation
                                                                        t

drops to 0.05 if we condition on both common shocks. By comparison, the U.S. average pair-wise

correlation of the growth innovations is 0.03. Similarly, in the case of Korea and China, the pairwise



                                                              16
          Figure 3 Average Pair-wise Correlations of Equity Return ( it ) and Growth
                         Rate (it ) Innovations Conditional on ^ and ^
                                                                     t
                                                                t




    Note. For each country, the light (yellow) and the dark (blue) bar show the average pairwise correlation with the remaining
    countries in the sample for equity return and GDP growth innovations, conditional on  ^ and ^
                                                                                                 t . The dotted lines correspond
                                                                                           t
    to the overall average across all countries, equal to -0.02 and -0.01, respectively. Sample period: 1994:Q4-2016:Q4.



correlation of the equity returns drop from 0.52 and 0.27, to -0.07 and -0.09, respectively, when we

condition on both global factor innovations.

         These results thus indicate that our two common shocks are sufficient to span the cross-country

dependence in both the panel of output growths and equity returns as we assumed in our theoretical

model.10 Even at the level of individual pairwise correlations, the results of the Bailey et al. (2019)

regularized multiple testing threshold estimation procedure show that of the 2032 covariance terms,

only 68 off-diagonal elements are significantly different from zero and no within-country block covari-

ance element is statistically significant. As we noted earlier, the empirical properties of the estimated

multi-country covariance matrix greatly simplify the task to identify country-specific shocks. This

further implies that, effectively, the variable order within the country blocks factorized with the

Cholesky decomposition does not matter. To conserve space, therefore, in the next section, we do

not report this alternative set of results.



4         Empirical results

In this section we report our empirical results. We discuss first the estimates of the international

business cycle and global financial shocks. Next, we evaluate their relative importance in driving
    10
    It is important to stress, here that, as CPR discuss at length, the same results would not obtain inverting the
conditioning order­i.e., conditioning first on ^
                                                t and then on ^.
                                                               t




                                                                17
country-specific equity returns and output growth rates in South Korea, China and the average

economy in our sample. We then provide some intuition for the main results.


4.1    International Business Cycle and Global Financial Shocks

Figure 4 plots the estimated international business, ^ , and global financial shocks, ^
                                                                                       t , together with
                                                      t

a one-standard error band. These shocks have zero means and unit in-sample variances. They are

also serially uncorrelated and orthogonal to each other by construction, as we discussed above.

   Looking first at the international business cycle shock in Panel A, we can see that the two

largest negative realizations were during the Asian crisis in 1997 and the global financial crisis in

2008, consistent with prevailing narratives on the characterization of the international business cycle

during the period considered. The estimated shocks are otherwise well inside the one-standard error.

      Figure 4 Estimated International Business Cycle and Global Financial Cycle
                                        Shocks




  Note. The global shocks ^ and ^
                                 t are computed using (11) and (12), truncated at lag one of zit , using a balanced sample
                           t
  1994:Q1-2016:Q4. The shocks are standardized, and the dotted lines are the one-standard deviation bands around the zero
  mean.




                                                            18
                             Figure 5 Estimated Global Financial Factor




                                                                               t   ^
  Note. Panel A plots the cumulative sum of our global financial shock         s=0  s together with a quarterly average of an
  updated estimate of the Global Factor from Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020). Panel B plots the cumulative sum of our
                            t   ^
  global financial shock    s=0  s (left axis) together with a quarterly average of the U.S. Federal Funds rate and the ECB
  Eonia rate (right axis). Sample period: 1994:Q4-2016:Q4.



   The estimated international business cycle shock, once aggregated at annual frequency, correlates

very closely with alternative measures of global TFP growth. For example, the correlation with the

global utilization-adjusted TFP growth estimate of Huo, Levchenko, and Pandalai-Nayar (2018) is

0.59 for the sample period over which the two measures overlap through 2007, increasing to 0.83

when we consider their unadjusted measure. The estimated shock is also highly correlated with the

TFP growth in advanced economies from The Conference Board Total Economy Database, with a

correlation of 0.52. This evidence supports an interpretation of ^ as a technology factor, even though
                                                                  t

this common shock could also capture other world demand or supply factors, as highlighted by the

difference between the correlations with the adjusted and unadjusted global TFP growth.

   Consider now the the estimated global financial cycle shocks in Panel B of Figure 4. The largest

shock realizations coincide with the boom-bust period of the Asian crisis in 1997, the U.S. dotcom



                                                              19
equity bubble, the global financial crisis in 2008 and the European crisis in 2011. Most other

realizations are inside the one-standard error band or within two deviations.

       To help evaluating the estimation results, Figure 5 plots the cumulative realization of the esti-

mated global financial shock (GFF). Panel A in figure 5 compares our measure to an updated estimate

of the Global Financial Factor in risky asset prices from Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) (GFF-

MAR). As we can see, the two estimates are remarkably close, with a correlation of 0.55. Our

estimate is more volatile, but seemingly better capturing the U.S. dot-com equity price bubble of the

late 1990s and the subsequent period global financial exuberance. Particularly notable is the close

tracking of the European crisis in 2010-11 and subsequent recovery in global financial conditions

triggered by the unconventional monetary policies of the major advanced economy central banks.

Indeed, Panel B of Figure 5 plots our proxy for the GFC together with the U.S. Federal Fund Rate

and the ECB Eonia rate, crude measures of the monetary policy stance in center economies, showing

that our measure co-moves closely with policy rates, with correlations of more than 0.7 and 0.4,

respectively.

       Equipped with these estimated international business cycle and global financial shocks, we can

now proceed to evaluate their relative importance for country-specific equity returns and output

growths in South Korea, China as well as the average economy in our sample.


4.2      Sizing the Global Financial Cycle

Our factor augmented multi-country PVAR model can be used to decompose the forecast error

variance of country-specific equity returns and output growths. In particular, we can assess the

relative importance of the two global shocks that we identified, ^ and ^
                                                                        t , as well as the 64 × 1 vector
                                                                  t

of country-specific shocks, ^it and ^
                                    it , for i = 1, 2, ...., 32, which represent idiosyncratic domestic

shocks and spillover from such shocks in all other countries in the sample.

       The baseline results reported here are based on (13)-(14), conditional on both ^ and ^
                                                                                             t . As we
                                                                                       t

noted earlier, the two common shocks, ^ and ^
                                             t , are orthogonal to each other and to all country-
                                       t

specific shocks. Consistent with the evidence in Figure 3 and Appendix Table 2, the estimated

covariance matrix of the 64×1 vector of country-specific shocks, ^it and ^
                                                                         it for i = 1, 2, ...., 32, is nearly

diagonal with very few off-diagonal elements statistically different from zero.11 In order to evaluate
  11
    As we can see from Appendix Table 2, of the 2032 covariance terms, only 68 are significantly different from zero,
statistically, or about 3.3 % of the total. Moreover, none of these elements are within-country covariance terms between


                                                          20
 Figure 6 Generalized Forecast Error Variance Decomposition of Country-specific
                                 Equity Returns




Note. In this figure, the blue area with vertical lines is the global financial shock, ^  ; the red area with crosses is the country-
specific financial shock, ^i ; the yellow area with horizontal lines is the spillover effect, given by the sum of the contributions
of the country-specific financial shocks in all other countries in the sample, denoted        ^j ; the purple area with diagonal lines
is international business cycle shock,    ^; the green areas with squares is the country-specific GDP growth shock, ^      i ; and the
light blue areas with no pattern is the sum of the contributions of the GDP growth shocks in the other countries i the sample,
denoted      ^
             j . The vertical axis is in percent, the horizontal axis is in quarters. The top panel reports results for the GDP-PPP
weighted average GFVD across all countries in the sample. The left-bottom panel reports results for China. The right-bottom
panel reports results for South Korea. Sample period: 1994:Q1-2016:Q4. Note that the GFVDs need not add up to 100 percent
as the underlying shocks are not orthogonal due to the presence of few off-diagonal non-zero elements.



the importance of the spillover effects of such non-zero elements, we use the generalized forecast error

variance decompositions (GFVD) of (Pesaran and Shin (1998)), which do not necessarily add up to

100 percent because of the off block-diagonal non-zero elements.

    Figure 6 plots the average GFVD decomposition of equity returns across all countries in our

sample, as well as the decomposition for China and South Korea. The figure shows that the global
^it and ^
        it . The result means that, effectively, the variable order within the diagonal country blocks orthogonalized
with the Cholesky decomposition does not matter.




                                                                 21
financial cycle shock, ^
                        t , explains more than 50 percent of the country-specific equity return variance

in the average economy in our sample. In Korea, shocks to the global financial factor account for a

similar share as in the average economy. In contrast, in China, the most important driver of the equity

return variance is the idiosyncratic equity return shock itself, ^it , even though the global financial

factor shock still accounts for more than 20 percent of the equity return variance. In both countries,

common and idiosyncratic shocks to output growth (^ and ^
                                                        it , respectively), the fundamentals of the
                                                   t

country-equity market in our simple model, play a negligible role in accounting for return variability,

in line with the results for the average economy, and consistent with the typical findings in the asset

pricing literature. Spillovers from financial shocks originating in other countries in our sample,    ^j ,

play a sizable but secondary role in both Korea and in China, in a manner comparable to the average

economy. Spillovers from output growth shocks originating in other countries are similarly negligible

in all countries.

   These baseline results are consistent with the Global Financial Cycle hypothesis of Rey (2013),

which states that a single common factor drives a large portion of the international co-movement in

asset prices. As Cerutti et al. (2017) also found, however, it is evident that the global financial cycle

is not the only determinant of country-specific equity returns. Idiosyncratic financial shocks and, to a

lesser extent, spillovers from such country-specific shocks in other countries also play a quantitatively

important role. The different results for Korea and China, in particular, are consistent with the notion

that a more open capital capital account, as in the case of South Korea, is associated with a higher

exposure to the global financial cycle. A closer capital account, in contrast, comes about with a

much larger role for domestic financial shocks, consistent with a standard diversification argument in

favor of capital account openness, but cannot completely insulate the domestic equity market from

the global financial cycle.

   As Figures 9 and 11 in the appendix illustrate, these baseline results are robust to using alter-

native assumptions on the multi-country covariance matrix of the country-specific shocks. Figure 9

assumes that the multi-country covariance matrix is diagonal, while Figure 11 assumes that it is unre-

stricted. What changes across the different specifications is the size of the estimated spillover effects

that depend on the off block-diagonal elements of multi-country covariance matrix. The variance

shares of the common and idiosyncratic shocks, however, are pretty comparable across alternative

specifications, which leads us to draw the same conclusions.



                                                   22
 Figure 7 Generalized Forecast Error Variance Decomposition of Country-specific
                                Output Growths




Note. See Figure 6.



4.3    South Korea and China Exposure to Global and Country-Specific Financial
       Shocks

We have seen in the previous section that the global financial cycle is an important driver of country-

specific equity returns, even in China where the capital account of the balance of payment was

relatively closed over the sample period. In this section, we want to explore the importance of this

common factor for the domestic business cycle.

   Figure 7 reports the GFVD of country-specific quarterly output growth rates. The figure shows

that global financial shocks, ^
                               t , explain about 10 percent of growth variance, on average, across all

countries in our sample; a non-negligible but not conspicuous contribution. This result clearly shows

that even if global financial shocks are very important drivers of equity returns globally, they have


                                                  23
a much smaller role in driving the business cycle of these economies, with a much larger role for

domestic factors.

      Korea business cycle turns out to be as exposed to global financial cycle shocks as the average

economy in our sample, while China appears significantly less exposed according to these estimates,

with a tiny variance share accounted for by the global financial shock. The finding suggests that even

if a closed capital account cannot completely insulate the domestic stock market from the influences

of the global financial cycle, perhaps because of information channel of transmission of news and

sentiment changes that cannot be easily halted at the border, it can go a long way toward shielding

the economy from its real consequences.

      Consistent with their high degree of trade openness, both countries are more exposed to inter-

national business cycle shocks, ^ , than the average economy in the sample. Their share of output
                                 t

growth variance explained by the international business cycle shock is more than 20 percent, at least

twice the relative importance of the global financial cycle shock.

      A surprising difference between China and South Korea is the fact that not only spillovers from

other countries' idiosyncratic shocks, both financial and real in nature (           ^j and   ^
                                                                                              j , respectively),

but also domestic financial shocks, ^j , have some explanatory power for output fluctuations in Korea,

with a GFVD share that is much larger than in the average economy in the sample, and comparable

to the importance of the global financial cycle shock. In the case of China, in contrast, domestic

financial shocks have essentially no explanatory power, like in the average economy in the sample.

      This latter result is puzzling, as a standard diversification argument about the benefits and costs

of capital account openness, would suggest that domestic financial shocks should be more important

in the less diversified economy. A first hypothesis is that this is a reflection of the incomplete

insulation properties of a floating exchange rate regime that accompany the relatively open capital

account in Korea, consistent with the GFC hypothesis as originally formulated by Rey (2013) and

the framework proposed by Gourinchas (2018). An alternative interpretation, consistent with the

extant literature on the elusive benefits of capital account liberalization (or lack thereof), is that

these benefits are not tangible, in the sense that they do not materialize in terms of higher (or less

volatile) real GDP growth and are difficult to detect in macroeconomic data analyses.12

      A second striking difference between the two countries is that idiosyncratic growth shocks, ^
                                                                                                  j ,
 12
      See, for example, Erten, Korinek, and Ocampo (forthcoming) for a discussion.




                                                         24
are estimated to account for more than 70 percent of China's output growth variance, dwarfing

the importance of all other shocks in the model for China's business cycle. In contrast, in Korea,

idiosyncratic growth shocks explain a share of output growth variance that is even smaller than in

the average economy in the sample. Thus, it is possible that the country-specific growth shock picks

up some of the non-diversified risk of the domestic equity return shock. In other words, it is also

possible that the loss of diversification opportunities theoretically associated with a closed capital

account, in China, is reflected in the very large role attributed to the domestic business cycle shock,

thus providing a third possible interpretation of the puzzling result reported above.

   As in the case of the equity return variance decompositions, the baseline results reported in Figure

7 are robust to using alternative identification assumptions for the factorization of the multi-country

covariance matrix of the idiosyncratic shocks (Figures 10 and 12).


4.4   China and South Korea: Further Evidence on the Different Exposure to
      Idiosyncratic Financial Shocks

The different exposure of China and South Korea to global and country specific financial shocks can

be further illustrated by looking at impulse response functions to such shocks. Figure 8 compares

the impulse responses of country-specific equity returns (Panels A and C) and GDP growths (Panels

B and D) to our global (Panels A and B, ^
                                         t ) and idiosyncratic (Panels C and D, ^j ) financial shocks.

The figure plots the responses of China (dashed, red line with circles), South Korea (dashed, blue line

with squares), and a PPP-GDP weighted average of all countries in the sample (solid, black line).

The shaded areas represent a two-standard-deviation error band around the average response in the

sample, based on the dispersion of the impulse responses across countries computed as discussed

by CPR. Recall here that the global financial shock is orthogonal to the international business

cycle shock, by construction. The country specific financial shock is identified with a Cholesky

decomposition of the reduced form variance-covariance matrix, ordering the country-specific equity

return first within the each country block. We focus on the effects of positive one-standard deviation

shocks.

   The impulse responses suggest that the lower (higher) exposure of China (South Korea) to the

global financial cycle that we documented above may come about at the cost (with the benefit) of

reduced (increased) financial diversification opportunities for investors in the Chinese (Korean) stock



                                                  25
 Figure 8 Impulse Responses of Country-specific GDP Growths and Equity Returns
                   to Global and Idiosyncratic Financial Shocks




Note. The figure plots the responses of China (dashed, red lines with circles), South Korea (dashed, blue lines with squares),
and a weighted average of all countries in the sample (solid, black lines), with PPP-GDP weights. The vertical axis is in percent,
the horizontal axis is in quarters. Sample period: 1994:Q4-2016:Q4.



market. The better financial diversification opportunities of South Korea, however, do not translate

into a higher degree of insulation of Korean output from idiosyncratic financial shocks.

    Panels A and B show that the responses of the Korean equity return to the global financial shock

is about 30 percent larger than the Chinese one, leading also to a much larger and more volatile

response of output growth to this shock. The converse, however, hold only partially with respect to

country specific financial shocks. Indeed, Panel C and D show that while equity returns in China

are 30 percent more sensitive to domestic financial shocks, this does not translates into a higher

sensitivity of domestic output to such shocks. On the contrary, as we can see from Panel D, Korea

shows a very strong lagged output response to the domestic financial shock and a contemporaneous

response that is higher than in China, but still on the edge of the error band for the average in the

                                                               26
sample.

    The time profile of the Korean output response to the global financial shock, with an above average

increase one quarter after the shock and below sample average responses for up to two years after the

shock, could be interpreted in terms of the boom-bust cycle in capital flows during the Asian crisis

at the beginning of the sample period, which was amplified by large foreign exchange balance sheet

exposures. However, the output response to the domestic financial shock is more difficult to interpret.

Here, we only notice that Korea has a relatively large domestic financial sector that developed and

was liberalized progressively after the Asian financial crisis, with foreign exchange exposures in the

corporate sector balance sheet that could weaken the insulation properties of a floating exchange

rate. China, in contrast, started this process much later and more slowly. More generally, as we

discussed earlier, while a deeper structural interpretation of these empirical findings is beyond the

scope of this paper, the evidence is consistent with a large body of empirical evidence finding limited

benefit from capital account liberalization and some insulating power of capital controls.



5    Conclusions

This paper evaluates the global financial cycle (GFC) hypothesis and compares the insulating prop-

erties of two different capital account regimes in China and South Korea. We exploit the different

cross-country correlation structure of equity returns and output growth innovations to identify an

international business cycle shock and a global financial factor shock, and use conventional assump-

tions to identify idiosyncratic shocks. We then compare two countries, China and South Korea,

with a closed capital account and fixed exchange rate regime and open capital account with floating

exchange rate, respectively.

    We find evidence of a conspicuous global financial cycle in equity market returns, with Korea

behaving as the average economy in the sample, and China being relatively less exposed. Global

financial shocks, however, are not quantitatively as important as common and country-specific busi-

ness cycle shocks, or spillovers from other countries' idiosyncratic shocks in driving the business cycle

of both countries. In the case of Korea, in particular, we find that global financial shocks explain

about 10 percent of the business cycle volatility.

    The empirical results can be partially interpreted in terms of higher diversification opportunities

offered by capital account openness at the cost of a larger exposure to the global financial factor.


                                                     27
The experience of China, however, suggests that no country can insulate completely from the global

financial cycle, while the case of Korea is in line with a large body of empirical evidence suggesting

that the benefits of capital account liberalization might be more elusive than the theory suggests

and growing evidence that floating exchange rates might not as effective as insulating policy tools as

traditionally assumed.




                                                 28
References
Bai, J. and S. Ng (2002): "Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor Models,"
  Econometrica, 70, 191­221.
Bai, Y., F. Perri, and P. Kehoe (2019): "World financial cycles," 2019 Meeting Papers 1545,
  Society for Economic Dynamics.
Bailey, N., M. H. Pesaran, and L. V. Smith (2019): "A multiple testing approach to the
  regularisation of large sample correlation matrices," Journal of Econometrics, 208, 507­534.
Cerutti, E., S. Claessens, and A. K. Rose (2017): "How Important is the Global Financial
  Cycle? Evidence from Capital Flows," NBER Working Papers 23699, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.
Cesa-Bianchi, A., L. F. Cespedes, and A. Rebucci (2015): "Global liquidity, house prices, and
  the macroeconomy: Evidence from advanced and emerging economies," Journal of Money, Credit
  and Banking, 47, 301­335.
Cesa-Bianchi, A., A. Ferrero, and A. Rebucci (2018): "International credit supply shocks,"
  Journal of International Economics, 112, 219­237.
Cesa-Bianchi, A., M. H. Pesaran, and A. Rebucci (2019): "Uncertainty and Economic Ac-
  tivity: A Multicountry Perspective," The Review of Financial Studies, 33, 3393­3445.
Chamberlain, G. and M. Rothschild (1982): "Arbitrage, Factor Structure, and Mean-Variance
  Analysis on Large Asset Markets," Scholarly Articles 3230355, Harvard University Department of
  Economics.
Chudik, A., M. H. Pesaran, and E. Tosetti (2011): "Weak and strong cross-section dependence
  and estimation of large panels," Econometrics Journal, 14, C45­C90.
Colacito, R. and M. M. Croce (2011): "Risks for the Long Run and the Real Exchange Rate,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 119, 153­181.
Engel, C. (2016): "Macroprudential Policy under High Capital Mobility: Policy Implications from
  an Academic Perspective," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 42, 162­172.
Erten, B., A. Korinek, and J. A. Ocampo (forthcoming): "Capital Controls: Theory and
  Evidence," Journal of Economic Literature.
Gourinchas, P.-O. (2018): "Monetary Policy Transmission in Emerging Markets: An Application
  to Chile," in Monetary Policy and Global Spillovers: Mechanisms, Effects and Policy Measures, ed.
  by E. G. Mendoza, E. Past´  en, and D. Saravia, Central Bank of Chile, vol. 25, chap. 08, 279­324,
  1 ed.
Ha, J., M. A. Kose, C. Otrok, and E. S. Prasad (2020): "Global Macro-Financial Cycles and
  Spillovers," Working Paper 26798, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Han, X. and S.-J. Wei (2018): "International Transmissions of Monetary Shocks: Between a
  Trilemma and a Dilemma," Journal of International Economics, 110, 205­219.
Huo, Z., A. Levchenko, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2018): "Technology and Non-Technology
  Shocks: Measurement and Implications for International Comovement," Unpublished manuscript.
Kapetanios, G., M. H. Pesaran, and S. Reese (forthcoming): "Detection of units with pervasive
  effects in large panel data models," Journal of Econometrics.
Lewis, K. K. and E. X. Liu (2015): "Evaluating international consumption risk sharing gains:
  An asset return view," Journal of Monetary Economics, 71, 84­98.
Lucas, Robert E, J. (1978): "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy," Econometrica, 46, 1429­
  1445.
Ma, C., J. Rogers, and S. Zhou (2019): "The Effect of the China Connect," Manuscript.
Miranda-Agrippino, S. and H. Rey (2020): "U.S. Monetary Policy and the Global Financial
  Cycle," The Review of Economic Studies, rdaa019.
Pesaran, H. H. and Y. Shin (1998): "Generalized impulse response analysis in linear multivariate


                                                29
  models," Economics Letters, 58, 17­29.
Pesaran, M. H. (2015): Time Series and Panel Data Econometrics, Oxford University Press,
  Oxford.
Rebucci, A. and C. Ma (2020): "Capital Controls: A Survey of the New Literature," .
Rey, H. (2013): "Dilemma not trilemma: the global cycle and monetary policy independence,"
  Proceedings - Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, 1­2.
Ross, S. A. (1976): "The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing," Journal of Economic Theory,
  13, 341­360.
Sentana, E. (2002): "Did the EMS Reduce the Cost of Capital?" Economic Journal, 112, 786­809.
Tesar, L. L. (1995): "Evaluating the gains from international risk sharing," Carnegie-Rochester
  Conference Series on Public Policy, 42, 95­143.
Zeev, N. B. (2017): "Capital Controls as Shock Absorbers," Journal of International Economics,
  109, 43­67.




                                              30
A   Additional Tables

                         Table 1 List of Countries


        Argentina   Finland     Malaysia      South Africa
        Australia   France      Mexico        Spain
        Austria     Germany     Netherlands   Sweden
        Belgium     India       New Zealand   Switzerland
        Brazil      Indonesia   Norway        Thailand
        Canada      Italy       Peru          Turkey
        Chile       Japan       Philippines   United Kingdom
        China       Korea       Singapore     United States




                                    31
              Table 2 Non-zero Elements of the Regularized Error
                          Covariance Matrix Estimate
                 All Significant                                 Between-county correlations
       Country - Variable Pairs      Corr              ^
                                                       it , ^
                                                            jt             ^it , ^jt           ^
                                                                                               it , ^jt

    AUS RET          NZL RET          0.37                               AUS,NZL
    AUS RET          USA RET          0.36                               AUS,USA
    AUT GDP          PHL GDP         -0.40           AUT,PHL
    AUT RET          NOR RET          0.43                               AUT,NOR
    BEL RET          BRA RET         -0.38                               BEL,BRA
    BEL RET          FRA RET          0.41                               BEL,FRA
    BEL RET          MYS RET         -0.36                               BEL,MYS
    BEL RET          NLD RET          0.62                               BEL,NLD
    BEL RET          CHE RET          0.50                               BEL,CHE
    BRA RET          CHE RET         -0.42                               BRA,CHE
    CAN RET          NOR RET          0.47                               CAN,NOR
    CAN RET          PHL RET         -0.38                               CAN,PHL
    CAN RET          USA RET          0.42                               CAN,USA
    CHE RET          THA RET         -0.47                               CHE,THA
    CHE RET          GBR RET          0.44                               CHE,GBR
    CHL GDP          MYS RET         -0.36                                                CHL,MYS
    CHL GDP          THA RET         -0.39                                                CHL,THA
    CHN RET          GBR RET         -0.41                               CHN,GBR
    DEU GDP          MYS GDP         -0.36           DEU,MYS
    DEU RET          ITA RET          0.43                               DEU,ITA
    DEU RET          MYS RET         -0.36                               DEU,MYS
    DEU RET          NLD RET          0.51                               DEU,NLD
    DEU RET          PER RET         -0.38                               DEU,PER
    DEU RET          SGP RET         -0.37                               DEU,SGP
    DEU RET          SWE RET          0.51                               DEU,SWE
    DEU RET          CHE RET          0.40                               DEU,CHE
    DEU RET          GBR RET          0.40                               DEU,GBR
    FIN GDP          MEX GDP          0.37           FIN,MEX
    FIN RET          PHL RET         -0.39                               FIN,PHL
    FIN RET          SWE RET          0.64                               FIN,SWE
    FIN RET          THA RET         -0.36                               FIN,THA
    FIN RET          TUR RET          0.38                               FIN,TUR
    FRA RET          MEX GDP          0.37                                                FRA,MEX
    FRA RET          DEU RET          0.71                               FRA,DEU
    FRA RET          ITA RET          0.57                               FRA,ITA
    FRA RET          NLD RET          0.62                               FRA,NLD
    FRA RET          PER RET         -0.46                               FRA,PER
    FRA RET          SGP RET         -0.41                               FRA,SGP
    FRA RET          ESP RET          0.46                               FRA,ESP
    FRA RET          SWE RET          0.54                               FRA,SWE
    FRA RET          CHE RET          0.58                               FRA,CHE
    FRA RET          THA RET         -0.46                               FRA,THA
    FRA RET          GBR RET          0.51                               FRA,GBR
    GBR RET          USA RET          0.53                               GBR,USA
    IDN GDP          CHE GDP         -0.36           IDN,CHE
    IDN RET          MYS RET          0.40                               IDN,MYS
    IDN RET          PHL RET          0.42                               IDN,PHL
    ITA GDP          GBR GDP          0.39           ITA,GBR
    ITA RET          NLD RET          0.43                               ITA,NLD
    ITA RET          PER RET         -0.39                               ITA,PER
    ITA RET          ESP RET          0.57                               ITA,ESP
    KOR GDP          MYS GDP          0.46           KOR,MYS
    KOR RET          NOR RET         -0.38                               KOR,NOR
    KOR RET          THA RET          0.44                               KOR,THA
    MEX GDP          ESP RET          0.40                                                MEX,ESP
    MYS GDP          SWE GDP         -0.37           MYS,SWE
    MYS RET          NOR RET         -0.36                               MYS,NOR
    MYS RET          THA RET          0.40                               MYS,THA
    MYS RET          GBR RET         -0.42                               MYS,GBR
    NLD RET          SWE RET          0.36                               NLD,SWE
    NLD RET          CHE RET          0.56                               NLD,CHE
    NLD RET          GBR RET          0.50                               NLD,GBR
    NLD RET          USA RET          0.42                               NLD,USA
    SGP RET          ESP RET         -0.43                               SGP,ESP
    SGP RET          THA RET          0.48                               SGP,THA
    SWE RET          THA RET         -0.47                               SWE,THA
    SWE RET          TUR RET          0.40                               SWE,TUR
    THA RET          TUR RET         -0.38                               THA,TUR

Note. Non-zero elements of the regularized error covariance matrix estimate proposed by Bailey et al. (2019).
                  There are no within-country correlations that are statistically significant.


                                                      32
B     Robustness Results With Alternative Multi-Country Covariance
      Matrix

    Figure 9 Forecast Error Variance Decomposition of Country-specific Equity
                Returns: Diagonal Multi-country Covariance Matrix




Note. Note: See Figure 6. Forecast error variance decomposition obtained assuming a multi-country diagonal covariance matrix.




                                                             33
   Figure 10 Forecast Error Variance Decomposition of Country-specific Output
               Growths: Diagonal Multi-Country Covariance Matrix




Note. Note: See Figure 6. Forecast error variance decomposition obtained assuming a multi-country diagonal covariance matrix.




                                                             34
Figure 11 Generalized Forecast Error Variance Decomposition of Country-specific
         Equity Returns: Unrestricted Multi-Country Covariance Matrix




Note. Note: See Figure 6. Forecast error variance decomposition obtained assuming an unrestricted multi-country covariance
matrix.




                                                           35
Figure 12 Generalized Forecast Error Variance Decomposition of Country-specific
         Output Growths: Unrestricted Multi-country Covariance Matrix




Note. Note: See Figure 6. Forecast error variance decomposition obtained assuming an unrestricted multi-country covariance
matrix.




                                                           36
