                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 REPURCHASE OPTIONS IN THE MARKET FOR LEMONS

                                             Saki Bigio
                                             Liyan Shi

                                        Working Paper 27732
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27732


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2020




We would like to thank Andrew Atkeson, Jack Bigio, Simon Board, Patrick Bolton, Andres Drenik,
Andrea Eisfeldt, Piero Gottardi, Veronica Guerrieri, Barney Hartman-Glaser, Pablo Kurlat, Ken Miyahara,
Facundo Piguillem, Joao Ramos, Pablo Ottonoello, Tano Santos, Joseph Stiglitz, Victoria Vanasco,
Moritz Meyer-ter-Vehn, and William Zame for useful conversations. We are especially thankful to
Florian Scheuer, whose sharp questions helped us clarify important features of this paper. Bigio thanks
the hospitality of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. Also, we would like to thank seminar
participants at EIEF, Stanford, and UCLA. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Saki Bigio and Liyan Shi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Repurchase Options in the Market for Lemons
Saki Bigio and Liyan Shi
NBER Working Paper No. 27732
August 2020
JEL No. D82,G23,G32

                                          ABSTRACT

We study repurchase options (repo contracts) in a competitive asset market with asymmetric
information. Gains from trade emerge from a liquidity need, but private information about asset
quality prevents the full realization of trade. We obtain a unique equilibrium, which features a
pooling repo contract and full participation among borrowers. The equilibrium repo contract
resolves adverse selection: the embedded repurchase option prevents the market unraveling that
occurs in asset-sale markets. However, the contract is inefficient due to cream skimming.
Competition to attract high-quality borrowers through the terms of the repurchase option
inefficiently lowers liquidity. The equilibrium contract has a closed form and is portable to many
applications.


Saki Bigio
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu

Liyan Shi
EIEF
Via Sallustiana 62
Rome
Italy
liyan.shi@eief.it




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27732
1       Introduction
Many financial contracts such as collateralized debt, bridge loans, factoring, and loan discounts
are de facto asset-sale contracts that embed a repurchase option. Strip away legal differences
and all of these contracts have a common structure: they all specify a collateral security, a loan
amount, and a loan principal.1 Because these contracts are non-recourse or rarely settled in
court, borrowers have the option to default. The option to default is, de facto, an option to
repurchase the asset. We refer to contracts embedding repurchase options broadly as repos.
Why do so many financial contracts take the form of repos? Why don't borrowers simply sell
securities and buy them back later?
    This paper argues that, in any asset market where asymmetric information is prevalent, repos
emerge as a natural market response to adverse selection. We consider a market where borrowers
need funds to carry out investment projects. Borrowers raise funds by trading pre-existing assets.
The issue is that only borrowers know the assets' payoffs. If borrowers can only sell assets, as
in the classic lemons market, the ones with good assets desist from selling because the price is
too low. Adverse selection ensues (Akerlof, 1970). Lenders can resolve this adverse selection by
offering a repurchase option. Indeed, any borrower who is unwilling to sell an asset at a low
price will change her mind if she is also offered the option to repurchase the asset at a price
below its worth, even if this repurchase price has a slight premium (an implicit interest charge).
Of course, the borrowers with bad assets will take advantage by selling their lemons and never
returning for them, implicitly defaulting. If rightly set, the premia can compensate lenders for
default losses and induce good borrowers to participate, thereby resolving adverse selection.
    By virtue of resolving the adverse selection problem, repos can possibly increase the funding
of investment projects. However, lender competition brings about another problem, cream skim-
ming. The issue with repos is that their bidimensional price nature enables lenders to poach good
borrowers, by lowering the repurchase premium of their contracts. Ultimately, cream skimming
is detrimental to liquidity to the point that it can even offset the advantages of repos.
    To understand the contribution of this paper, consider the example in Table 1. A set of
borrowers have investment opportunities that yield a 20% return.2 Among the borrowers, half
own assets worth $40, and the other half own assets worth $80. If only asset sales are possible,
owners of the $80 asset would not sell at the average price of $60: A 20% return on $60 yields
$72 whereas the asset is worth $80. Thus, selling the $80 asset leads to a loss of $8 and the
    1
     These contracts are not a modern financial innovation. In fact, an early form of collateralized debt contract,
the Pignus, was already stipulated in Roman Law. Holmstrom (2014) considers pawning dating back to Tang-
dynasty China, circa 650 AD, as the precursor of these contracts.
   2
     In the original Akerlof (1970) setup, buyers (hereafter lenders) have higher valuations for assets than sellers
(hereafter borrowers), but we can equivalently think of gains from trade arising from borrowers having a higher
need for cash than lenders, albeit both having the same valuation for the asset. What is critical for the impediment
to trading is that borrowers have private information about the asset.



                                                         1
                                      Table 1: Illustrative Example

          Collateral             Value
          Low Quality              $40
          High Quality             $80
                                  Sales          Repurchase           Average
                                                                                       Added Value
                                  Price            Price             Funds Lent
          Sale                     $40                                   $20                 $4
          Repo                     $50                $60                $50                 $10

market therefore unravels. Things change if a lender offers a repo where the borrowers are paid
$50 for the asset, but can repurchase it for $60. A 20% return on $50 yields $60 so the good
borrower breaks even. The example illustrates how repos attract all borrowers, lenders break
even,3 and the total funding liquidity more than doubles.
    Although the example illustrates the advantages of repos, it does not describe an actual
market outcome. In the example, a new entrant lender could offer a repo for $45 with a repurchase
price of $50. Because the implicit rate is much lower, the offer would attract the $80 borrower.4
This cream skimming would in turn lead to less funding. The example is therefore silent about
which contracts we should expect to emerge. The rest of the paper is devoted to the study
of market competition for repos in this lemons market. The paper characterizes the set of
equilibrium contracts, distills the operating forces, and characterizes conditions under which
repos increase investment funding.
    To conduct the analysis, the paper adopts a modern approach to competitive markets with
private information. Asset qualities can be drawn from any arbitrary continuous distribution.
We consider the timing in Netzer and Scheuer (2014), in which lenders can post contracts but can
withdraw them after observing the contracts posted by their competitors. This is a foundation for
the well-known Miyazaki-Wilson-Spence equilibrium (henceforth MWS). The positive analysis
of the environment reveals that the equilibrium is unique and features a single pooling contract
that induces full participation.
    A key result is that any possible equilibrium features a default threshold quality--borrowers
with collateral worse than the threshold quality default. This property narrows the set of traded
contracts in any possible equilibrium to two traded contracts at most: a highest sales-price con-
tract that attracts the default borrowers and a highest nondefault value contract that attracts the
   3
     We know that low-quality borrowers will not exercise the repurchase option so each low-quality borrower
costs the lender $10: the lender pays $50 and ends with a $40 asset. However, lenders make $10 on high-quality
borrowers offsetting this loss.
   4
     Low-quality borrowers would prefer the original {$50, $60} contract; they will default regardless of the con-
tract. The new contract would attract high-quality borrowers, who obtain an investment payoff of $54 dollars.
The deviation is profitable to the lender and would cannibalize the original contract.



                                                        2
nondefaulters. The repurchase option in the highest nondefault value contract allows borrowers
to invest without losing their assets, as in the example. This guarantees full participation.
    Pooling occurs when the highest sales-price contract and highest nondefault value contract
coincide. If the two contracts differ, there exists another profitable contract that offers a higher
nondefault value. This means that an entrant lender can offer a different contract to attract the
best borrowers of the incumbent contracts, thus prompting the withdrawal of its competitors.
The equilibrium must therefore pool all borrowers into one contract. Among the set of possible
pooling outcomes, a unique equilibrium contract emerges, a contract that solves an auxiliary
problem. The auxiliary problem maximizes the nondefault value subject to a zero-profit pooling
condition. The solution to that problem has a unique analytic solution for any asset-quality
distribution.
    Turning to the normative analysis, the market equilibrium is suboptimal relative to a
constrained-planner problem that maximizes total gains from trade. The planner's problem
is also characterized through an auxiliary problem. In this case, rather than maximizing the
nondefault value, the planner maximizes the sales price subject to the zero-profit pooling con-
dition. The parallel between the planner and the market auxiliary problems illustrates that the
source of inefficiency is exclusively cream skimming.5 Intuitively, the planner's optimal contract
provides more liquidity than the market contract because its sales price is higher. A higher sales
price induces a higher default rate and a higher implicit interest rate, which hurts the best bor-
rowers, taking them to be indifferent between participating or not. In the market equilibrium,
as illustrated by the simple example, lenders poach nondefault borrowers. They can do so by
lowering the implicit interest rate, which is only possible by also lowering the sales price. Hence,
the resulting market equilibrium maximizes the nondefault value by trading off a lower interest
rate for a lower sales price. Since cream skimming induces lower sales prices, overall investment is
inefficient. Relative to an equilibrium restricted to asset sales, repos improve efficiency when the
benefits of increasing participation exceed the detrimental effects of cream skimming, a property
we characterize via a sufficient statistic.6
    The idea that richer contracts can resolve adverse selection is also present in security design
(see Gorton and Pennacchi, 1990; Demarzo and Duffie, 1999; Biais and Mariotti, 2005).7 Security
design rests on the assumption that borrowers commit to the terms of a contract, prior to knowing
their assets' quality.8 This commitment is essential to a borrower who wants to guarantee a high
   5
      In the example above, the {$50, $60} contract, in fact, corresponds to the solution of the constrained planner
problem, but as shown above, that contract is not robust to competition.
    6
      For example, if we modify the example setting the high quality asset to $50 such that the asset quality
dispersion is mild, the result reverts and asset sales dominate repos.
    7
      This literature uses the terminology of collateralized debt, but we can view this security as akin to repos.
They also use the terminology of equity issuances, which is essentially asset sales.
    8
      In Demarzo and Duffie (1999) the precise assumption is as follows: "after designing the security, but prior
to the sale of the security to outside investors, the issuer or underwriter handling the sale receives information
relevant to the payoff of the security."


                                                         3
sales price, even when she ends up with a bad asset. In fact, the optimal security design solution
in Biais and Mariotti (2005) coincides with the planner's solution here, which guarantees a
high sales price for all borrowers. To guarantee such high prices, borrowers must commit to
repos where the interest rate equals the return on investment, thus losing all their surplus when
their assets turn out good. By contrast, the paper studies a market equilibrium where lenders
tempt borrowers to break that commitment. The testable implications are very different. With
commitment, the extent of asymmetric information manifests in the sales price and the default
rates, but not in the implied interest, which always equals the return on investment. By contrast,
in our market equilibrium, the default rate is constant regardless of the asset quality distribution.
In turn, the extent of asymmetric information manifests in a wedge between the implied interest
and the return on investment. This feature of the market solution is in line with empirical
observations that are seen as a puzzle.9
    We conclude the theoretical analysis by studying variations to the model that showcase
the roles of different modeling assumptions. To study the role of the equilibrium concept, we
recast the analysis in the competitive search environment of Guerrieri et al. (2010). An implicit
assumption in their model is that lenders serve contracts to at most one borrower. This capacity
constraint affects the nature of competition because, when deviating, lenders do not consider all
the borrowers that could be attracted by their contracts, but form the belief that only those that
are most attracted will show up. Under competitive search, the outcome is also a unique pooling
equilibrium, but the one that minimizes the sales price. Nonetheless, under competitive search,
repos always improve liquidity in relation to outright sales. This showcases that the advantages
of repos hold across different equilibrium concepts. To study the role of lender commitment,
we also study a variation where lenders obtain the option to default and retain the assets with
a certain probability. In this case, the equilibrium is also pooling, but may no longer feature
full participation, something that reintroduces adverse selection and reduces the advantages of
repos.
    The organization of the manuscript is as follows. We lay out the environment in Section
2. Section 3 characterizes the equilibrium. Section 4 discusses the efficiency results. Section
4.1 presents the constrained planner (security design solution), and Section 4.2 compares the
repo equilibrium to an equilibrium where only outright sales are allowed. Section 5 studies the
variations to the environment. Section 6 presents an illustration of the theory in connection
with some empirical facts established by the literature. Before we proceed, we establish some
connections with the literature.
   9
     Loan amounts in repo markets fluctuate substantially relative to their notional values (Gorton and Metrick,
2012) whereas default rates are stable. This is seen as a puzzle because, without asymmetric information, lenders
and borrowers would treat repos as a call option. Arbitrage pricing would maximize loan amounts. As Dang et
al. (2013) put it, "the existence of repo haircuts is a puzzle, as standard finance theory would suggest that risk
simply be priced."



                                                        4
Related Literature. Originally motivated by trade in used goods markets, the lemons model
of Akerlof (1970) is also foundational for finance: asymmetric information is a prevalent friction
that explains asset market liquidity (Eisfeldt, 2004). The study of asymmetric information in
macroeconomics and finance has evolved along two branches. One branch enriches the underly-
ing environment in Akerlof (1970), whereas the other enriches the contract space. This paper
contributes directly to the latter branch, by studying competition in a richer contract space, but
has implications for the first.
    The literature that enriches the contract space has primarily focused on security design,
following Demarzo and Duffie (1999) and Biais and Mariotti (2005). A frequent result is that
collateralized debt is ideal.10 This paper departs from security design because the market trades
after the asset quality is known. The distinction is material: First, commitment may be a good
assumption only in some contexts. Second, the default rate in our equilibrium is invariant to
information, a different testable implication. Third, in security design, contracts are efficient by
construction, something that leaves no room for policy design.11
    The second branch that studies the richer lemons markets is vast. This literature incorporates
features such as dynamic trade and learning (Daley and Green, 2010; Fuchs and Skrzypacz, 2019;
Guerrieri and Shimer, 2014), competitive and random search (Guerrieri et al., 2010; Lester et al.,
2019), information acquisition (Gorton and Ordo~   nez, 2014), multidimensional screening (Chang,
2017; Guerrieri and Shimer, 2018), layered trades (Dang et al., 2013), nonexclusive contracts
(see Attar et al., 2011; Kurlat, 2016), equilibrium with signals (Kurlat and Scheuer, 2020),
etc. With few exceptions, these studies are restricted to asset sales. One exception is Madison
(2017), who studies an optimal security design problem with random search. Other exceptions
are Dang et al. (2013) and Yang (Forthcoming) who study security design problems, taking into
account collateral reuse (as in Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009). We contend that, due to
cream skimming, allowing for repos in such richer environments is a natural extension and can
dramatically change outcomes.12
    The focus on asymmetric information found here complements previous work that explains
the use of repos in response to transaction costs.13 In Duffie (1996), repos are the only way
to hold long positions in securities. In Parlatore (2019) and Monnet and Narajabad (2017),
  10
     The security design solution relates to the durable goods monopoly model of Hendel and Lizzeri (2002), where
a monopolist offers leasing contracts. Because the terms of the lease are fixed, this acts as a form of commitment
akin to that of the security design literature.
  11
     The main normative observation is that default is inefficiently low in the market equilibrium, which relates
to other studies of collateral with default (e.g. Geanakoplos and Zame, 2014).
  12
     When studying outright sales, Guerrieri et al. (2010) obtain full separation with rationing. Here, we obtain
a pooling equilibrium without rationing that Pareto dominates the separating equilibrium.
  13
     The standard argument based of transaction costs is that it is more convenient to pledge collateral rather
than to sell collateral, if there is a social value from keeping the asset with borrowers. This explanation is only
partial. For one thing, repurchase options are often used in markets where the collateral are financial claims
that have no special user value. And for another, observed haircut rates and over-collateralization rates are
surprisingly high. Implied transaction costs are simply too large to account for high over-collateralization rates.

                                                        5
repos minimize endogenous transaction costs. In Gottardi et al. (2019), the repurchase price
is state-contingent and lenders reuse collateral which allows the transfer of wealth to states
where collateral is more valuable. Another point of contact is with the literature on collateral
use. In this paper, assets are used as collateral because investment projects cannot be self
financed (as in Kiyotaki and Moore, 2008). There is also a vast literature that studies different
uses for collateral to relax asymmetric information problems regarding, for example, project
risks (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981; Besanko and Thakor, 1987), costly state verification problems
(Townsend, 1979), or moral-hazard problems (Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997). If we introduce
these agency frictions into our model, the exogenous return on investment here, is replaced by
an endogenous return to relaxing those agency frictions with internal funds. This shadow value
of relaxing supports trade under private information (Bigio, 2015).


2      The Environment
Consider a two-period economy, t = 1, 2. There is a measure-one continuum of borrowers and
a large number of ex-ante homogeneous lenders, indexed by j  J = {1, 2, ..., J }. All agents
are risk neutral and maximize their t = 2 payoff. At t = 1, each borrower is endowed with
an indivisible asset and has access to an investment project. At t = 1, assets pay dividends
and the investment projects yield a return. Assets are heterogeneous in quality: they payout
a different dividend, denoted by    = ,         ¯ . By contrast, projects are identical. Each
project generates a gross return (1 + r)x with certainty at t = 2 where x is the amount of
cash invested in the project at t = 1. The net investment return is fixed at r > 0.14 In order
to invest, the borrowers need external finance because project returns are nonpledgeable, as in
Hart and Moore (1994). To obtain external funding, the only option for the borrowers is to
perform a transaction with their existing assets. Lenders provide liquid funds and engage in
those transactions competitively.

Information. The information regarding asset quality  is asymmetric: it is only known to
the borrower who owns the asset. The asset quality follows a continuous distribution with c.d.f.
F (·) and support   ,   ¯ . The distribution is common knowledge.


Contract. Borrowers and lenders can sign repo contracts. A repo contract is a pair of prices
p = {ps , pr }   × .15 The first entry, ps , is the sales price. It specifies the first leg of the
  14
     The environment is equivalent to one where trade occurs because borrowers discount consumption by a factor
 , as in Guerrieri and Shimer (2014). Consider the same two-period economy except that, instead of the liquidity
need to finance investment projects, borrowers have a liquidity need because they discount time between t = 1
and t = 2 by a factor  whereas lenders do not discount at all. To equate the two settings, one can simply set
                                                                                   1
the borrower's discount factor to the inverse of the gross investment return,  = 1+  r < 1.
  15
     The restriction of prices to the domain box  ×  is without loss of generality.

                                                       6
contract: at t = 1, the lender transfers ps in cash to the borrower and the asset is transferred to
the lender. The second entry, pr , is the repurchase price, that is, the price to be repaid at t = 2
by the borrower. We assume limited commitment on the side of borrowers. Failure to repurchase
is considered a default and, in that case, the asset is seized by the lender who becomes entitled
to the dividend, without further recourse. If the borrower repays pr , honoring the contract, the
asset is returned. Although borrowers cannot commit, the legal environment can enforce the
turnover of the asset if the borrower repays.16 Note that an asset-sale contract is a special repo
contract: the contract subspace, p  ×        ¯ features a repurchase price such that both parties
know that no borrower would repurchase the asset. Finally, given that assets are indivisible,
screening with quantities is impossible. Hence, prices are not contingent on the quantity.

Equivalence between Repo and Collateralized Debt. An alternative interpretation is
collateralized debt: under this interpretation, ps is the loan size, pr the face value, and pr /ps - 1
the implied interest rate. Default occurs when the face value is not repaid. For the rest of the
paper, we bear this equivalence in mind. In practice, there are legal distinctions between repo
and collateralized debt, but we do not delve into them here. We use the repo representation for
exposition purposes.

Timing. At t = 1, the repo markets open. We adopt the timing of the three-stage game by
Netzer and Scheuer (2014), which is a foundation for the MWS equilibrium. The game goes as
follows:

   · Stage 1: Each lender offers a contract. The contract offered by lender j is denoted by
     pj  2 . The set of offered contracts, P0 = {pj : j  J }, is observed by all lenders.

   · Stage 2: After observing P0 , lenders can withdraw the contract they offered in the previous
     stage. Lender j 's withdrawal is denoted by I j  {0, 1}--with 0 denoting withdrawal. The
     set of contracts after withdrawals is

                                        P = pj  P0 : I j = 1, j  J .


   · Stage 3: Borrowers choose a contract in P or opt to keep their assets.

At t = 2, borrowers decide whether to default on repurchasing the asset. For the time being,
and to simplify the exhibition, we assume that lenders offer at most one repo contract. Techni-
cally speaking, this is different from the MWS equilibrium, in which lenders can offer multiple
contracts. We later show that this restriction is without loss of generality.
  16
    The lack of commitment on the side of borrowers implies that a repo contract is equivalent to an asset-sale
contract with an embedded repurchase option.


                                                      7
Borrower's Problem. Consider stage 3. A borrower decides whether to participate in the
repo markets according to:
                                 max {0, v ()} ,                                   (1)

where the maximum value obtained from participating in a repo transaction and choosing the
optimal contract is:
                         v () = max {(1 + r) ps - min {, pr }} .                       (2)
                                       pP


The value function in (1) encodes the borrower's participation constraint: the borrower only
brings the asset to the repo markets if v () is positive. Otherwise, she opts out. In the value
function (2), the borrower chooses the contract that maximizes her wealth, conditional on partici-
pation. The choice follows a cost-benefit analysis: the benefit is the investment payoff, (1 + r) ps ,
and the cost is the repayment, min {, pr }. If the borrower defaults, the cost is losing the as-
set. If the asset is repurchased, the cost is the repurchase price. Because there are no default
costs, the asset is repurchased if and only if its quality is above the repurchase price. The con-
tract chosen by a borrower with an asset of quality  is denoted by the function P :   P,
where P () = {Ps () , Pr ()} is a two-valued set function.  ( | p, P) represents the cumulative
density of assets that choose contract p  P, in a given equilibrium.

Lender's Problem. In stage 2, each lender decides whether to withdraw her offered contract.
This decision depends on whether the profit from keeping the contract is positive, taking as given
all other lenders' withdrawal decisions. If lender j decides to withdraw, the set of remaining
contracts would be
                             P-j = pk  P0 : I k = 1, k  J /j .

The resulting profit for this lender is

             j pj ; P-j , P-
                           0
                             j
                               = max        min , pj      j
                                                   r d | p , P
                                                               -j
                                                                   pj - p j
                                                                          s, 0 .                  (3)


The profit in equation (3) is given by the following: the lender knows that not withdrawing would
result in paying pj                                                                j
                   s in any scenario. The lender anticipates being repaid min {, pr }, from a trans-
action with a borrower with asset quality . Hence, the lender builds an expectation with respect
to the probability distribution of borrowers that sign contract pj given that the set of offered
contracts is P-j  pj . That distribution has a cumulative density function  ( | pj , P-j  pj ).
                                     -j
Hence, min {, pj                j
                     r }  ( d| p , P     pj ) is the borrower's expected repayment. Naturally, the
lender withdraws if the expected profit is negative.
    In stage 1, each lender offers a contract that maximizes profit, taking as given all other offers




                                                  8
P- j  k
 0 = p : k  J /j . For lender j , the optimal contract offer is


                                      argmax j pj ; P-j , P-
                                                           0
                                                             j
                                                               .
                                       pj 2


Equilibrium Concept. We cast an equilibrium as a finite extensive form game. Naturally, the
equilibrium notion is subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. Since many lenders compete to attract
borrowers, taking P-j as given, the solution to the game constitutes a market equilibrium, as
in Netzer and Scheuer (2014). A contract p  P is active if at least some borrowers choose p.
Otherwise, there is no trading volume and the contract is inactive. When we refer to a unique
equilibrium, we refer to uniqueness among the set of active contracts.


3      Characterization
Following sequential form analysis, we first characterize the borrowers' contract choice and their
subsequent default decision. We then proceed by backward induction to study the set of equilib-
rium contracts. We begin with two observations: opting out of any contract is always an option
for borrowers. Second, the value function v () is weakly decreasing. We emphasize the "weakly"
decreasing property due to the repurchase option in the contract. This distinguishes repos from
outright asset sales, in which case the value function from the selling the assets would be strictly
decreasing in . These observations lead to the following lemma:

Lemma 1 (Full Participation and Partial Default). Consider an equilibrium with offered con-
tracts P. The borrowers' participation and default strategy satisfies:

    (i) [Full participation] All borrowers sign a repo contract;

 (ii) [Default threshold] There exists a unique default threshold d such that all qualities   d
      default.

    The first item of Lemma 1 states that all borrowers participate in the repo market. The result
contrasts with the outcome in the standard lemon market equilibrium where, due to private
information, high-quality assets do not participate, and adverse selection ensues as a result. Full
participation here implies that adverse selection is fully resolved: there are no borrowers that
self-select out of the collateral pool. The second item says contracts where the collateral quality
is below the threshold d feature defaults.
    The repurchase option embedded in repo contracts is critical to ensure full participation.
In particular, if the repurchase price pr  (1 + r) ps , the repurchase option allows high quality
borrowers to invest and obtain a positive payoff if they repurchase their assets. Since the payoff
of repurchasing the asset is independent of the asset quality, even the best borrowers are willing

                                                  9
to participate. In equilibrium, lenders compete to guarantee that repurchasing the asset is
indeed attractive for borrowers that do not default. Competition guarantees that the payoff
of repurchasing the asset is indeed positive. If this were not the case, every borrower would
default, but in that case a single lender could deviate and offer a lower repurchase price to
induce the marginal borrowers to exercise the repurchase option and make profits himself. Since
the option to repurchase always brings a positive value to the nondefaulters, there is always full
participation.
    The outcome of the default threshold is also natural. Take a borrower who decides to sign
contract p and intends to default. Consider another borrower with a worse-quality asset who
                  ~ and intends not to default. The borrower with the worse asset had the option
goes for contract p
to sign contract p, but signed contract p~ because it yields a higher value. This means that the
borrower with the better asset could have gone to contract p ~ and obtained a higher value by not
defaulting. Hence, it must be that the borrower with worse-quality collateral that goes to~pmust
also default. This implies the existence of a threshold default asset. Next, we show that to
characterize the borrowers' optimal choice, it is sufficient to consider only two contracts in P.
For any equilibrium, consider the contract that offers the highest sales price and the contract
that offers the highest nondefault value. A highest sales-price contract is

                                        pd  argmax ps ,
                                                pP


and a highest nondefault value contract is

                                 pn  argmax {(1 + r) ps - pr } ,
                                         pP


which is associated with a nondefault value v
                                            ¯. The terms of each contract correspondingly are
pd = p d     d      n     n n
        s , pr and p = {ps , pr }.
   We obtain the following characterization.

Lemma 2 (Borrower Contract Choice). Borrowers who hold assets of quality below the default
threshold d choose a contract with the highest sales price:

                            P () = pd and v () > v
                                                 ¯,   [, d ) .

Borrowers who hold assets of quality above d choose a contract with the highest nondefault
value:
                         P () = pn and v () = v ¯,   d ,    ¯ .

   The lemma states that all borrowers who default must select the highest sales-price contract.
All borrowers who do not default must select the contract that offers the highest nondefault

                                               10
value. These choices are intuitive: borrowers who know they will default only care about the
sales price. Therefore, they must select a contract that offers the highest sales price. Borrowers
who intend to repurchase assets face a trade-off between a higher loan size and a lower implied
interest rate. Those borrowers will choose a contract that maximizes the nondefault value.
All the results so far tell us that we can boil down the equilibrium set of contracts into two
contracts, which simplifies the analysis. In equilibrium, the two contracts could actually be the
same contract. The next proposition establishes that this is indeed the case.

Proposition 1 (Pooling Equilibrium). If an equilibrium exists, it features a unique pooling
contract such that:

  (i) [Repurchase price] The repurchase price equals the default threshold:

                                                        pr =d ;                                (4)


 (ii) [ZPC] The contract satisfies:
                                                 ps = E [min {, pr }] .                        (5)

    Proposition 1 is a stepping stone toward the main result. The proposition states that the
only possible equilibrium must feature a single pooling contract that attracts all assets. Item
1 says that the repurchase price equals the default threshold. Item 2 says that the contract
must satisfy a zero-profit condition (ZPC) associated with full participation, pooling, and the
optimal default decision. This is the set of contracts that satisfy equation (5). To interpret it,
notice that the left-hand side is the outflow of funds to the lender and the right-hand side is the
expected recovery values from defaulting assets and repurchase payments, where the expectation
is calculated with respect to F . For convenience, we define the function Z :    as the sales
price consistent with the ZPC, that is

                                           Z (pr )  E [min {, pr }] .

An important property is that Z is strictly concave.17
    We employ a graphical tool to explain why any separating equilibrium would break down.
Figure 1 is constructed in a ,   ¯ × ,    ¯ box, the space of possible contracts. Sales prices
are depicted on the y-axis and repurchase prices on the x-axis. The solid curve that crosses the
figure plots Z and thus represents the set of contracts that satisfy the ZPC. To show that a
separating equilibrium breaks down, assume the false hypothesis that a separating equilibrium
exists. By Lemma 2, we know that we could have at most two groups of contracts: one where
 17
      Note that Z (pr ) = 1 - F (pr )  0 and Z (pr ) = -f (pr ) < 0.



                                                        11
                       Figure 1: Pooling of default and nondefault assets

                                         ¯
                                         




                        Sales Price ps
                                                         Isovalue: (1 + r) ps - pr = v
                                                                                     ¯
                                                                                             ZPC
                                                                   pooling

                                                                 default pd


                                                     non-default pn

                                                45
                                         
                                                                       d                 ¯
                                                                                         
                                                         Repurchase Price pr




no borrower defaults and another where all borrowers default. For the sake of argument, assume
that each group has one contract.
    Figure 1 depicts the hypothetical candidate separating equilibrium together with the actual
pooling equilibrium. To understand the unraveling of a separating equilibrium, we must first be
assured that, in any separating equilibrium, the default contract must be located at some point
below the Z curve. In the appendix proof, we show that if this is not the case, then the sum
of profits from both separating contracts is negative and at least one must be withdrawn. By
continuity, we also know that an isovalue line intersects both contracts of the separating equi-
librium because the threshold asset must be indifferent between the default and the nondefault
contract. In the figure, this isovalue line is represented by the blue-dashed line.
    Once we understand the location pd in any possible separating equilibrium, it suffices to
show that there's a profitable deviation. Since there exists other isovalue lines under the ZPC
(the gray area in the figure) there is another contract that can be offered, that is profitable and
attracts either all borrowers or nondefault borrowers. This is true for any candidate separating
equilibrium, which means that no separating equilibrium exists.
    Since the equilibrium is pooling, the only possibility is that the contract set is a singleton,
P = {p}, if it exists at all. Because the equilibrium features full participation, the asset quality
distribution underlying the pooling contract is

                                                      (; p, P) = F () ,  .


                                                                  12
                                               Figure 2: Equilibrium refinement

                                        ¯
                                        




                                                       Isovalue: (1 + r) ps - pr = v
                                                                                   ¯
                       Sales Price ps                                         above        ZPC
                                                                          deviation
                                                    equilibrium p

                                                           deviation

                                            below

                                        
                                                                                       ¯
                                                                                       
                                                        Repurchase Price pr



   Given that any equilibrium must feature a single pooling contract which attracts the partic-
ipation of all types, we define the following subset of the contract space:

                     Z  p  2 ps  Z (pr ) and (1 + r) ps - pr  0 .

This set includes all pooling contracts that induce full participation and yield (weak) positive
profits to the lender. We also define the upper boundary of the set, which we denote by Z  ¯ as
the members of Z such that ps = Z (pr ).
    Proposition 1 shows that the equilibrium contract is given by equations (4) and (5). Equa-
tion (4) results from the optimal default decision and (5) results from competition. Of course,
there are many possible contracts that satisfy those equations. Proposition 1 gives us only two
equations for three unknowns {ps , pr , d }. The next proposition establishes which among these
possible solutions is the actual equilibrium.
Proposition 2 (Uniqueness). There exists a unique equilibrium featuring a single zero-profit
pooling contract p . The contract is

                                                p = argmax {(1 + r) ps - pr } ,                  (6)
                                                          ¯
                                                         pZ


                                            ¯ = (1 + r) p
which provides the highest nondefault value v                 
                                                         s - pr among all zero-profit pooling
contracts.
   Proposition 2 states that the equilibrium contract p is the one for which the isovalue of

                                                                13
nondefault is tangent to Z , i.e., the contract that maximizes the value of nondefault assets,
subject to the ZPC. We argue that Z is concave and the isovalue curves are affine. Hence, the
solution exists and is unique and interior.
    To explain why the solution boils down to the optimization problem in (6), we rely on Figure
2. Consider a pooling contract located on the ZPC, but with a sales price above or below p     s , as
depicted in the figure. If the equilibrium contract does not maximize the nondefault value, there
exists a deviating contract that delivers a higher value to nondefault assets. In fact, we can pick
any contract in the shaded area of the figure. That deviating contract will attract all nondefault
assets because the nondefault value is higher. Of course, if the deviating contract is offered in
stage 1, the incumbent contract will be withdrawn due to the loss of nondefault borrowers who
were cross-subsidizing the losses from default. Thus, the deviating contract remains alone and
all assets would end up with the deviating contract. The deviating contract is strictly profitable
because it is under the ZPC curve. The maximization representation follows because the only
contract that can survive these deviations is p , the contract that maximizes the nondefault
value. Any attempt to attract the nondefaulters or the defaulters away from p would lead to
losses, which guarantees that P0 = {p } is indeed an equilibrium.
    The characterization of the equilibrium showcases that the economic force driving the equi-
librium toward p is cream skimming. Cream skimming results from a trade-off. On one hand,
the nondefaulters do not want to cross-subsidize the defaulters. If defaults can be reduced, the
implied interest rate can be made smaller, and this increases the nondefault value. To induce
fewer defaults, the repurchase price (loan principal) must fall to reduce the default threshold.
When the repurchase price falls, competition drives down the sales price (loan size). A trade-off
emerges because, on the other hand, borrowers also want to scale up their investments as much
as possible. Thus, a higher sales price allows them to do so. In equilibrium, the contract that
maximizes the nondefault value equates on the margin the benefit of a lower borrowing cost (less
cross-subsidization) against the cost of reducing the loan size (less investment). Because lenders
make money from the nondefaulters, the competition takes the equilibrium toward p .
    The trade-off between cross-subsidization and investment shows up as an interest rate wedge.
Since v ¯ > 0, the implied rate of p is lower than the return on investment, p          
                                                                                    r /ps - 1 < r .
Proposition 2 resonates a similar result in Wilson (1977) where, in the context of insurance
markets and two risk types, the equilibrium contract maximizes the value of low-risk types,
subject to a zero profit condition. Below we discuss that cream skimming is a source of market
inefficiency that a planner with commitment to the terms of a contract would resolve. Before
that, we present the solution to the maximization problem in (6).

Analytic Solution. The repo equilibrium characterized in Proposition 2 has a simple analytic
solution. We obtain it by solving the maximization problem in equation (6).


                                                 14
Corollary 1 (Analytic solution). The unique equilibrium contract that solves (6) has prices

                                              r
                                 pr = F
                                        -1
                                                                                                   (7)
                                             1+r
                                                          r
                                 ps = E min , F
                                                -1
                                                                     ,                             (8)
                                                         1+r

and a default rate
                                                    r
                                             d=        .                                          (9)
                                                  1+r
    Because of full participation, the aggregate liquidity that funds investment is p  s . A testable
implication of this solution is that, given r, the default rate d is independent of the asset distri-
bution, F . The intuition relies on how the highest nondefault value v   ¯ is obtained. The highest
nondefault value is obtained when an isovalue line, which has a slope, 1/ (1 + r), is tangent
to Z . This tangency implies that, if a lender were to increase the sales price by 1 dollar, the
repurchase price should increase by 1 + r dollars. Given that lenders break even, it must be that
the 1/ (1 + r) fraction of borrowers do not default and the remaining r/ (1 + r) fraction default.
This property must hold for any F . A testable implication of this result is that the margin of
adjustment to greater information asymmetries is the loan size, but not the default risk. This
outcome is a clear example that a contraction in lending resulting from aggravated asymmetric
information can manifest in the amount lent without leading to higher observed default rates.

Discussion: Single-Contract Posting. So far we have assumed for simplicity that lenders
can post at most one contract. This assumption precludes the possibility of lenders offering
a set of contracts and also precludes cross-subsidization across different contracts. The next
proposition says that allowing for multiple contracts would not alter the equilibrium.
Proposition 3 (Multiple Contracts). Consider a modification of the environment where lenders
can individually offer multiple contracts in stage 1. Then, the same pooling equilibrium charac-
terized in Corollary 1 is obtained.
   The proofs are immediate because none of the proofs for the earlier results rely on the
profitability of individual contracts. Importantly, the result differs from other results in insurance
models, where restrictions to single contracts are not without loss of generality (Mimra and
Wambach, 2019). A common result in those models is that allowing for multi-contract offerings
can sustain separating equilibria that would otherwise not be possible.


4     Efficiency
In this section, we analyze efficiency and contrast repos against sales contracts. We investigate
the effects on efficiency of three forces, (i) participation, (ii) the pooling outcome, and (iii) cream

                                                  15
skimming. To set the stage, we need an appropriate efficiency notion. We adhere to Holmstrom
and Myerson (1983) and consider a most natural notion: constrained ex ante Pareto efficiency.18
To that end, we contemplate that at a prior date to t = 1, at t = 0, borrowers are ex ante
identical and endowed with homogeneous assets. Then, at t = 0 borrowers draw  from F (·).
Because all agents are ex ante identical, the appropriate efficiency notion is to maximize the
expected t = 2 borrower wealth.
    Given the information friction, if borrowers could agree to sell all their assets at t = 0 at the
unconditional expected value, they would. An adequate efficiency notion must take into account
that, due to the borrower's lack of commitment to contracts, there is an ex post participation
at t = 1, and that the decision to participate is made once the borrower knows .


4.1      Optimal Repo Contract Design
To study efficiency, we contemplate a planner who maximizes the ex ante borrower payoff,
is subject to the same information constraint as lenders, and takes into account the ex post
participation. Let the planner offer a menu of repo contracts P :   2 that satisfy a balanced
budget. Because borrowers cannot commit to an ex-ante contract, it does not matter if the
planner offers the contract at t = 0 or at t = 1.
    Formally, the planner chooses the menu of contracts and the participation threshold to max-
imize:                            p       
                           maxp              ((1 + r) Ps () - min {, Pr ()}) dF ()                        (M)
                          {P (·), }   

subject to the incentive-compatibility constraint, a participation constraint, and a budget con-
straint:

       (1 + r) Ps () - min {, Pr ()}  (1 + r) Ps ~ - min , Pr ~                     , , ~  [, p ]         (IC)

                                  (1 + r) Ps (p ) - min {p , Pr (p )}  0                                  (PC)
                                      p
                                          (min {, Pr ()} - Ps ()) dF ()  0.                               (BC)
                                 


The planner's problem (M) differs from the competitive outcome along two dimensions. The
first difference is that the planner does not maximize profits and, therefore, does not cream
skim. The second difference is that the planner can choose a separating contract. In the market
equilibrium, competition prevents this.
    We consider the cases where there is enough dispersion in asset quality for adverse selection
under asset sales: situations in which the highest quality asset is unwilling to sell at a price equal
  18
    The market outcome is ex post efficient: the planner's solution cannot improve liquidity without hurting the
value of nondefault borrowers.


                                                        16
to the unconditional average quality. Otherwise, the planner could simply offer that price, all
qualities would participate, and the planner would recover the first-best allocation. Thus, we
impose:

Condition 1 (Heterogeneity.). (1 + r) E [] < ¯.

    The next proposition shows that, although the planner mechanism is also pooling, it offers a
different pooling repo contract than the market equilibrium.

Proposition 4 (Constrained Efficiency). Under Condition 1, the planner's optimal contract is
a zero-profit full-participation pooling contract pp such that

                                          pp = argmax ps .                                        (10)
                                                   ¯
                                                  pZ


In the solution, the participation constraint is binding,

                                      ¯p = (1 + r) pp
                                      v                  p
                                                    s - pr = 0.


    The planner's solution is similar to the market outcome in that the solution is also a zero-
profit pooling contract. The difference is that, rather than maximizing the nondefault value, the
planner's solution maximizes total liquidity subject to the participation constraint of nondefault
assets, v¯  0. Since the planner's solution differs from the market equilibrium, the market
equilibrium is inefficient.
    Under Condition 1, with outright sales, higher quality borrowers opt out of the market due
to adverse selection. By utilizing the repurchase option and adjusting the repurchase price, the
planner can offer a repo contract that induces full participation, as long as the nondefault value
is positive. Full participation improves the outcome. Also, the solution satisfies the ZPC because
otherwise the planner can more efficiently (effectively) redistribute its revenues by raising the
sales price of any contract offered. A final salient feature of the efficient solution is that, despite
the opportunity to separate borrowers into different contracts, the planner solution also pools
all borrowers into one contract, like the market outcome. The rationale behind pooling is that
separation induces a waste of resources. To induce separation, the planner must offer a lower sales
price to the nondefaulters. However, the planner can always do better by raising a nondefault
sales price by  and the nondefault repurchase price by (1 + r), thus moving along the same
isovalue line. This new contract induces the same default threshold because it falls in the same
isovalue line, but it clearly raises planner's revenues by r. Since the planner solution satisfies
the ZPC, this means that the planner solution cannot be separating.
    The discussion clarifies the nature of the inefficiency of the competitive market. Clearly,
(i) full participation plays no role because both the planner and market solutions involve full

                                                  17
                                                Figure 3: Optimal repo contract

                                         ¯
                                         




                                                                                  ¯
                                                      Isovalue: (1 + r) ps - pr = v
                        Sales Price ps                                          optimum pp
                                                                                        ZPC

                                                   equilibrium p


                                                                (1 + r) ps - pr = 0


                                         
                                                                                      ¯
                                                                                      
                                                       Repurchase Price pr




participation. Also, (ii) the pooling nature of the market equilibrium plays no role because the
planner's solution does not exploit the ability to separate across contracts. It is only (iii) cream
skimming, what creates the market inefficiency. Cream skimming, which results from the desire
to attract better nondefaulters, ends up lowering the sales and repurchase prices to reduce the
default and interest rate. The planner is never tempted to attract better borrowers. On the
contrary, the planner cares only about total investment and thus goes all the way to raising the
sales price to the point that the implicit interest rate equals r.
    The planner's solution can be interpreted as an optimal security design problem. In fact, the
planner solution here coincides with the optimal contract in Biais and Mariotti (2005). Security
design has an embedded commitment assumption to a contract at t = 0 and are designed prior
to learning information. For that reason, cream skimming is not a possibility, because lenders do
not compete for the nondefaulters once the terms of the contract are set. The market solution
does not possess that commitment and, thus, allows for inefficient cream skimming. Despite its
inefficiency, the equilibrium repo contract can bring substantial efficiency gains over equilibria
that are restricted to asset sales only, as we explain below.

Discussion: A Tax on Repo? According to Gorton et al. (2020), adverse selection in fi-
nancial markets was an important motivation behind the policy interventions in the repo and
asset-backed security markets during 2008-2009. Motivated by those arguments, Philippon and
Skreta (2011) and Tirole (2012) study optimal policy interventions in markets but use sales
contracts without considering repo contracts explicitly. These interventions are not justified if

                                                                18
contracts are designed efficiently, as in the security design approach. However, as we showed
earlier, in competitive repo markets, the inefficiency may warrant intervention.
    One possible intervention is to set taxes that distort the market equilibrium in order to
reduce cream skimming. We now show that the planner's solution cannot be decentralized with
self-financed taxes. To that end, consider a policy intervention where the planner subsidizes the
sales price by s and finances the subsidy with a tax on the repurchase price r . We assume that,
if borrowers default, they do not pay the tax. In this case, the zero-profit condition for lenders
is:                                p +
                                     r    r

                           ps =               dF () + pr (1 - F (pr + r )) ,
                                  

whereas the budget balance for the planner requires:

                                         s = r (1 - F (pr + r )) .

We can add the two conditions above and obtain a consolidated zero-profit condition:

                                   ps + s = E [min {, pr + r }] .

Using the same arguments to obtain the market equilibrium in Proposition 2, we know that the
market solution will fall in

                       p          argmax             (1 + r) (ps + s ) - (pr + r ) .
                            ps +s =E[min{,pr +r }]

The solution to the repo contract with subsidies and taxes is:

Corollary 2 (Taxed Contract). Given s and r , the unique equilibrium contract has a repur-
chase price of:
                                           r
                                pr = F -1         - r .
                                          1+r
and a sales price of
                                                            r
                             ps = E min , F -1                         - s .
                                                           1+r
Furthermore, the nondefault value, the default threshold, and the default rate remain unchanged.

    The proof is immediate by change of variables, so we omit it. The intuition is simple:
whatever the tax rates are, if they apply to all contracts uniformly, they are undone by market
competition! As simple as it is, the corollary is meaningful. It implies that the second-best
allocation cannot be implemented with uniform taxes. Instead, the planner must either directly
dictate the terms of trade of the contract or contribute resources. Because the intervention cannot
be self financed, an optimal intervention must be explicit about the cost of the intervention.

                                                      19
4.2     Repo vs. Outright Sales: Efficiency Comparison
We now characterize conditions under which repo contracts increase market liquidity in relation
to outright sales. Recall that repo contracts encompass outright sales--setting the repurchase
price above the highest asset quality. Restricting our subsample to sales contracts only and using
the market timing formulation of Netzer and Scheuer (2014), we obtain a unique equilibrium
with a single pooling contract. This equilibrium coincides with the Pareto dominant equilibrium
in Akerlof (1970). We first characterize this equilibrium with an alternative representation. We
define the following statistics:

                 Za ()  E ~ ~               and La ()  E ~ ~   F () ,   .


The term Za () is the pooling price (in an asset-sale contract) consistent with zero profits for
a given an arbitrary quality threshold . The term La () denotes the corresponding level of
aggregate liquidity obtained for that price and threshold; it represents the total value of assets
up to that threshold. The solution to the lemons problem is:

Lemma 3 (Asset-Sale Equilibrium). The equilibrium with outright sales is given by a threshold
participation
                       a = argmax { |(1 + r) Za () -   0 } .                             (11)
                                        

The equilibrium price is given by pa = Za (a ) and the liquidity provided is xa = La (a ) .

   Equation (11) characterizes the highest possible quality willing to participate in the pooling
contract and thus the unique equilibrium of the sales contracts under the Netzer and Scheuer
(2014) formulation.19 This characterization allows us to present a sufficient statistic to guarantee
that repos dominate outright sales. We specialize the distributions along one dimension:
                                                                         F ()
Assumption 1. Let F (·) be such that (1 + r) ( - Za ()) <                f ()
                                                                                for all   .

   This assumption ensures that we consider the class of distributions for which the Akerlof
(1970) equilibrium is unique without further refinements.20

Proposition 5 (Repo vs. Outright Sales). Let Assumption 1 hold. When Condition 1 holds,
there is partial participation in the asset-sale equilibrium. The repo equilibrium generates more
  19
     The solution exists and is unique since (1 + r) Za () -  = r  0. Under Condition 1, (1 + r) Za  ¯ -  ¯ < 0,
which implies partial participation, a <      ¯ . However, it is possible that Za () intersects  multiple times.
The solution under Netzer and Scheuer (2014) corresponds to the largest root of the equation. See Azevedo
and Gottlieb (2017) for a thorough analysis of the regulating conditions such that the price correspondence is
continuous with respect to the primitives.
  20
     The condition guarantees that (1 + r) Za () -  is strictly decreasing. When Condition 1 holds, since
(1 + r)Za () -   0 and (1 + r) Za      ¯ -   ¯  0, then (1 + r) Za () -  = 0 has exactly one root in . A unique
root is necessary to obtain the sufficient statistic below.


                                                      20
aggregate liquidity than the asset-sale equilibrium if and only if

                                  (1 + r) Za L- 1        -1  
                                              a (ps ) < La (ps ) .                                (12)

When Condition 1 does not hold, there is full participation and the asset-sale equilibrium gener-
ates more aggregate liquidity than the repo equilibrium.

    We start by examining situations where Condition 1 holds. When inequality (12) holds, the
repo equilibrium provides more aggregate liquidity than the asset-sale equilibrium, and thus,
repos bring about efficiency gains. To understand inequality (12), fix p . In the repo market
equilibrium, p                                                                              -1
               s also represents total liquidity (because of full participation). In turn, La projects
a given level of liquidity into a participation threshold in the asset-sale equilibrium. Therefore,
Condition 1 checks if the participation constraint of the sales equilibrium is satisfied for the
threshold, L-  1   
              a (ps ). If it is not satisfied, then the threshold of the sales equilibrium must be
lower than L-  1   
              a (ps ) and, by Assumption 1, the equilibrium under sales must deliver less liquidity
than the repo equilibrium. Figure 4 provides a graphical illustration. From the value of p       s , we
                                           -1                               -1   
obtain a sales equilibrium threshold La (ps ) on the x-axis and Pa (La (ps )) the corresponding
sales price depicted on the y-axis. In the figure, {L-     1             -1   
                                                         a (ps ) , Pa (La (ps ))} does not satisfy the
participation constraint. The sales equilibrium features a threshold quality to the left of L-  1    
                                                                                               a (ps ),
implying lower efficiency under outright sales. Conversely, when the informational asymmetries
very mild the efficiency loss from cream skimming is greater than the advantage of reduced
adverse selection brought about by repos.
    When Condition 1 doesn't hold, it is because adverse selection under the sales-only equilib-
rium is mild. In such instances, repos bring about little efficiency gains by increasing partici-
pation because adverse selection, the problem to solve, is mild to begin with. However, in that
scenario, repos allow for cream skimming that ultimately impairs cross-subsidization and thus
reduces aggregate liquidity.
    To further illustrate the trade-off behind the introduction of repos, we conduct a comparative
static exercise with respect to the asset quality distribution F . For ease of exposition, we consider
the example of a uniform quality distribution, as in Hendel and Lizzeri (2002). This case has
closed-form solutions for both the repo and outright sales. Details are included in Appendix A.9.

Example (Uniform Distribution). Let the asset quality follow a uniform distribution  
U (1 - , 1 +  ), where the bound of distribution   [0, 1]. The average asset quality E [] = 1.
Absent any information frictions, aggregate liquidity equals 1. As we increase  from 0 to 1, we
are inducing a mean-preserving spread in the distribution of qualities. In the case of a uniform
distribution, condition (1) translates into  > r. When there is little dispersion, i.e.,   r,
the asset-sale equilibrium features full participation and obtains aggregate liquidity of 1. The


                                                  21
                                         Figure 4: Comparison of repo contract vs. asset sales

                                                  ¯
                                                  




                                                                                              ¯
                                                                  Isovalue: (1 + r) ps - pr = v
                     Sales Price ps



                                                                                                         ZPC (repo)
                                      Pa (L-1 (ps ))                                                    ZPC (sale)
                                                          repo equilibrium p              sale equilibrium


                                                                            (1 + r) ps - pr = 0


                                                  
                                                                                            L-1 (ps) 
                                                                                                     ¯
                                                                    Repurchase Price pr




expressions for the equilibrium repo contract is:

                                                                                             1-r
                                                ps = 1-                   and pr = 1-            .
                                                              (1 + r)2                       1+r

When there is sufficient dispersion,  > r, the asset-sale equilibrium has a participation cutoff,
sales price, and aggregate liquidity given by:21

                                      1+r                 1                        r     (1 -  )2
                  a =                     (1 -  ) , pa =     (1 -  ) , and xa =                   .
                                      1-r                1-r                    (1 - r)2    

When  = r, there is full participation in the asset-sale equilibrium and, thus, the asset-sale
equilibrium Pareto dominates the repo equilibrium. As the dispersion increases beyond that
point, the aggregate liquidity in sales equilibrium declines due to a lower participation and a
lower sales price. The details for the calculations are included in Appendix A.9. In Figure 5,
we plot the threshold level of dispersion  , above which the repo contract dominates outright
asset sales, given the investment return r.22 Of course, with a higher investment return, even
the highest quality assets are more eager to sell. As a result, the repo dominance threshold is
higher. When investment return is reasonably low, say 5%, the repo dominance threshold is just
  21
    When the asset quality follows uniform distribution, the Akerlof asset-sale equilibrium has a participation
                                                           1
threshold a characterized by (1 + r) E [ |  a ] - a = 2      [(1 + r)  + (1 - r) a ] = 0. Under Condition (1),
                                      1+r
there is a unique interior root , a = 1-r .
  22                                                          2
       The threshold condition is  > (r + 1)                      r2 + 1 - r2 - 1    r2 (r2 + 4r + 6) + 1 / (2 (1 + r (r (r + 3) - 1))).


                                                                          22
             Figure 5: The welfare improvements of repo contracts over asset sales




slightly higher.

    For further illustration, we set the investment return r to be 5% and plot the resulting
contracts in Figure 6, as we vary  . Panel (a) shows the aggregate liquidity in the repo and
sales equilibria. With a small dispersion in asset quality and hence mild adverse selection, the
repo equilibrium and the asset-sale equilibrium both obtain a level of aggregate liquidity close to
the full information benchmark. In that case, selling assets dominates repo contracts. As asset
quality becomes more dispersed and adverse selection aggravates, aggregate liquidity plummets
in the sales equilibrium. Eventually, for a sufficiently high dispersion, repos dominate outright
asset sales and ameliorate the lemons problem.
    Panel (b) reveals that when adverse selection is severe, the gains from repos are due to higher
participation. Repo contracts bring all assets to the market thanks to the repurchase option.
Furthermore, the cross-subsidization from a better pool of high quality assets allows for a higher
sales price. With asset sales, high quality assets opt out of the market because the sales price is
unappealing. When  increases from 0.05 to 0.2, the fraction of sold assets decreases from 100%
to around 20% under the sales equilibrium.
    Panel (c) shows an additional channel by which repos improve over asset sales, once infor-
mation asymmetry is severe: the sales price is higher in the repo equilibrium contract than in
outright sales. For the repo equilibrium, recall that the default probability is fixed, as shown in
panel (d). The decline in the aggregate liquidity occurs as lenders anticipate the average quality
decreasing and hence offer a lower sales price. The repo equilibrium experiences mild decline,
while in the asset sales case, the equilibrium aggregate liquidity declines sharply. Although sim-
ple, this example showcases that repos are a natural outcome in markets with severe adverse

                                                23
                   Figure 6: The welfare improvements of repo contracts over asset sales
                      (a) Aggregate liquidity                                       (b) Participation rate
           1                                                       100
                                                                                              Optimal Repo
         0.8                                                           80                     Repo Equilibrium
                                                                                              Asset-Sale Equilibrium
         0.6                                                           60




                                                               %
         0.4                                                           40

         0.2                                                           20

           0                                                           0
               0       0.2        0.4     0.6   0.8   1                     0       0.2     0.4     0.6       0.8      1


                             (c) Sales price                                        (d) Default probability
          1                                                            100

         0.8                                                            80

         0.6                                                       %    60
     %




         0.4                                                            40

         0.2                                                            20

          0                                                                0
               0       0.2       0.4      0.6   0.8   1                         0     0.2     0.4     0.6      0.8         1
                                                          ,


selection.
    We can conclude the section by stating that repos are a valuable financial innovation, and
are only detrimental when the asymmetric information is not a big problem to begin with.


5    Variations
Competitive Search for Repos. In this section, we investigate the effects of introducing
repos into an alternative market environment. As a particular example, we introduce repos into
the competitive search environment with asymmetric information developed by Guerrieri et al.
(2010). There are two meaningful departures relative to the equilibrium we have studied so far.
First, under competitive search, lenders self select into contracts that differ not only in prices
but also in trading probability. Second, there is a capacity constraint where each lender can
at most service one contract. The latter departure is important as it affects the off-equilibrium
beliefs and in turn the equilibrium outcome.
    Let's begin by discussing outright sales equilibrium in the competitive search framework.


                                                              24
With outright sales, the solution is diametrically different to the one discussed above. Assuming
away contract posting costs, Guerrieri et al. (2010) show that the equilibrium is fully separat-
ing and all assets are sold at their true quality . Separation is possible because the trading
probabilities differ across contracts. With a continuum of qualities, the trading probability of
                                           1+r                                                1+r
a given quality    is  () = (/) r . In turn, the aggregate liquidity is E (/) r  .
Compared to the repo or sales equilibrium shown above, the aggregate liquidity is lower. Details
are included in the Online Appendix.
    We extend the competitive search framework to allow for repos. When repo contracts are
offered, the competitive search solution is no longer separating but becomes pooling once again.23
The reason is that competition forces inhibit the use of trading probabilities as a screening device,
when a repurchase price can be used.24 Despite featuring a unique pooling contract, the nature
of the problem changes relative to the outcome under the Netzer and Scheuer (2014) setting.
With repos, the unique pooling contract is given by:

                                                pGSW = {, } .

This contract induces full participation and zero default. However, it is the worst contract
among the contracts that satisfy the ZPC. Thus, the repo market equilibrium under the Netzer
and Scheuer (2014) formulation dominates the repo equilibrium under competitive search. Still,
under competitive search, repos improve liquidity relative to outright sales only. We can see this
                  1+r
from   E (/) r  .25

Lender's Lack of Commitment. We now relax the assumption that the lenders can commit
to returning the asset to borrowers. In particular, we grant lenders the option to retain the
  23
      Under competitive search, we can show that the equilibrium is characterized following identical steps to those
that lead to Proposition 1, adding an intermediate step showing that all contracts are serviced with probability
of one, i.e., no rationing. That is, any equilibrium must produce full participation, must be pooling, and must fall
on the ZPC. Hence, the differences in the equilibrium outcome are generated by how the off-equilibrium beliefs
in competitive search affects potential deviations.. Because of the capacity constraint, the off-equilibrium belief
is that deviations attract assets that have the most to gain and hence can bear the lowest trading probability.
Deviations toward higher prices will attract only low-quality default assets. This creates a force to never raise
prices. Deviations downward have an embedded off-equilibrium belief that the deviation will attract high-quality
nondefault assets. This creates an force toward offering the zero-profit contract with the lowest possible price.
   24
      The pooling result here relates to other pooling outcomes in competitive search models. In Chang (2017)
and Guerrieri and Shimer (2018), sellers possess multidimensional private information, which breaks the single-
crossing property that allows separation in Guerrieri et al. (2010). Here, multidimensional contracting breaks
the single-crossing property and hence the possibility of separating equilibria.
   25
      The competitive search solution has an unappealing feature: with an arbitrary small amount of assets with
zero quality,  = 0, and we reach a "no-trade" equilibrium. Hence the amount of aggregate liquidity vanishes to
zero. In that case, repos and outright sales both produce zero liquidity, something that does not occur under the
baseline formulation.




                                                        25
asset with probability,  .26 In equilibrium, whenever they have the option to keep the asset, the
lender will keep the asset. If the contract features a default from the borrower, the lender will
keep the asset. If the borrower does not intend to default, the lender knows that it is because
the asset is worth more than pr , so it is convenient to keep the asset. Hence, the asset ends with
the lender with probability  .
   With this modification, the borrower's value function (2) becomes

                             v () = (1 + r) ps - (1 -  ) min {, pr } - .

The modified value function considers that, with probability (1 -  ), the borrower's cost is
min {, pr }, as before and that, with probability  , the cost is  because either the borrower or
the lender will default. Thus, without full commitment on the side of the lender, the contract
becomes a blend between an asset sale and a repo. The zero-profit condition in (5) is modified
to:
                            ps = E [(1 -  ) min {, pr } +  | <  ] ,                         (13)

where the condition now includes a threshold participant quality denoted by  . The ZPC is
modified to capture that, with probability 1 -  , the lender obtains the same expected revenue
as before and, with probability  , the lender will keep the asset. A key distinction is that now
the participation threshold  might be interior. The participation threshold solves:

                                        = argmax { |v ()  0 } .                                           (14)
                                               


Relative to the equilibrium with full commitment, the system of equations includes an extra
equation--the participation constraint. To solve for the repo contract and obtain {ps , pr ,  },
we follow the same principle as before. We find that the equilibrium contract maximizes the
nondefault value
                                max {(1 + r) ps - (1 -  ) pr }

but is now subject to the zero-profit condition (13) and the participation constraint (14).
    Some observations emerge. We consider situations where Condition 1 holds. When  is very
small, all qualities still participate. The insight that repo resolves adverse selection extends
to more general settings when allowing for a small degree of limited commitment on the side
of lenders. In the other extreme, as   1, the solution collapses to the Akerlof equilibrium,
because no asset would be returned. For intermediate values, we have partial participation.
The reason is that the value for borrowers is no longer constant among the nondefaulters but
decreasing in the value of the asset. By inducing partial participation, the lack of commitment
  26
     One can endogenize  by letting lenders receive signals about the underlying asset quality. But for now, we
keep the analysis simple.


                                                      26
by lenders reintroduces adverse selection as a force that, together with cream skimming, shapes
the repo market equilibrium.


6      Interpretation and Evidence
We think of our theory as applying to any asset market that features repo-like structures (col-
lateralized debt, bridge loans, factoring, and loan discounts) including the repo market itself,
which is an important source of funding in securities markets. In this section we show that the
market equilibrium uncovered in this paper is consistent with observed patterns in repo mar-
kets.27 To that end, we recast the model to capture the additional institutional details of actual
repo markets, which allows us to map the model to data.

An Extended Model. We embed our model in an environment in which repo markets are
a funding source in securities trading. Borrowers and lenders are both risk-neutral, as before.
The timing is as follows. At t = 0 borrowers agree to buy a security at a known market price.
We assume that borrowers buy at most one security and have no funds to purchase the security
themselves. At t = 1, borrowers are obliged to come up with funds to settle the transaction.
The borrower can settle the transaction by drawing on a credit line that has an implicit interest
cost of r. The credit line requires no collateral by the borrower and is full recourse. To avoid
using the credit line, the borrower can access a repo market that works exactly as in Section 2.
As before, lenders in the repo market have no cost of capital so repo markets are intrinsically
a cheaper source of funding. However, the information problem of this repo market is that, at
t = 0, the borrower receives a perfect signal regarding the future price of the security at t = 2
while lenders don't.
    To let the model fit a cross-section of asset classes, we allow for asset heterogeneity and
multiple asset classes. In particular, there is a continuum of assets indexed by i  [0, 1]. Each
asset belongs to one of a discrete number of asset classes, indexed by n  {1, 2, ..., N }. The
function  (i) : [0, 1]  {1, 2, ..., N } maps each asset to its class. Securities in the same class
have common attributes. Denote the t = 0 price of security i by p0                             2
                                                                     i . The price evolves to pi at
t = 2, following a stochastic process,

                                  p2
                                   i                        1 2
                                      (1 + r) · exp (i) Xi -      .
                                   0
                                  pi                        2 (i)

Here, (i) is the volatility of the corresponding asset class to which i belongs. The term Xi is a
standard normal distribution random variable which is i.i.d. We subtract 1    2 to normalize the
                                                                            2 (i)
  27
    In practice, repo contracts are subject to lender recourse. However, failures in repo markets are rarely taken
to courts. For that reason, we think that repo markets are a perfect environment to align our theory with the
facts.

                                                       27
mean growth to zero. The growth in the price (1 + r) implies that it is profitable on average to
buy the asset, even in absence of the repo market. Naturally, it's cheaper to fund the purchase
in the repo market.
    We think of borrowers and lenders as differing in their ability to process information that
is relevant for the price formation process. Namely, borrowers are specialists in identifying
securities and learn Xi at t = 0. Hence, they perfectly identify the growth in the price of the
security--we can leave some unpredictable component, but this is not necessary to make the
point. Lenders, on the contrary, cannot observe the signal. Lenders can observe the class where
the security belongs but they cannot distinguish a security i from security j : in mathematical
terms, lenders can observe  (i) but not i. Finally, p0i and (i) are known to everyone. All in
all, the asymmetry of information only regards the future price, and the risk for the lender is
the same within the asset class.
    Now, we map this enriched model to the original model. Consider asset i. We define the
intrinsic quality of the security at t = 1 by

                                                   p2
                                                    i   1
                                             i =    0
                                                            .
                                                   pi 1 + r

The asset quality follows i  LN - 1     2 , (i) with an average value of 1. We now
                                      2 (i)
apply the formulas uncovered earlier in Corollary 1, as the repo market will work the
same way. The repurchase price is pr,i = -    1
                                            (i) (r/ (1 + r )) and the sales price is ps,i =

E(i) min i , -     1
                  (i) (r/ (1 + r ))    . Following the jargon of repo markets, the haircut of the
asset class of security i:

                                                                       r
                             hi = 1 - E(i) min i , - 1
                                                   (i)                         ,                   (15)
                                                                      1+r

is the difference between a notional value at t = 0, pi                         i
                                                      0 , and the sales price ,ps , for the repo market,
relative to the notional price. This expression uses the convention of denoting by (i) the c.d.f.
of i . The implied interest rate (also called the repo rate in the jargon of repo markets) is

                                               - 1
                                               (i)
                                                       r
                                                      1+r
                                ri =                                    - 1.                       (16)
                                       E(i) min i , - 1
                                                    (i)
                                                                 r
                                                                1+r


This term amounts to the ratio of the repurchase price to the sales price minus 1. Finally, note
that the default rate, or in the jargon of repo markets the "failures," is d = r/ (1 + r).
   Before we discuss some empirical evidence on repo markets, we provide some context of the
types of assets involved in repo transactions. An asset class can be a set of fixed-income se-
curities of a specific maturity issued by the same issuer--e.g., the set of three-month Treasury


                                                   28
securities. Another class can be a collection of unrelated securities--e.g. for example, a menu of
asset-backed securities, or a collection of corporate bonds or stocks. The theory equally applies
to homogeneous as to heterogeneous asset classes. We can think of a homogeneous asset class
as, for example, the class of government bonds. Despite there being no individual asset charac-
teristics that are payoff relevant, the price of fixed income securities can fluctuate. The notion of
asymmetric information is that borrowers are better informed about the predictable component,
the price of bonds. Hence, the notion of private information is not about the payoff of a given
serial number, but rather about the greater ability to process macroeconomic information. The
information story therefore applies to homogeneous assets too, for example the extensive trade
of government securities in repo markets. For a heterogeneous class, asymmetric information
stems from the ability to process specific information about a security. For example, in the case
of non-investment grade securities, the serial number is relevant for the asset payoff. Thus, in
our formulation the signal Xi captures both idiosyncratic information as well as macroeconomic
information. Hence, an alternative interpretation for the lemons problem in our theory is that
borrowers are better at forecasting future security prices than lenders. We embrace this financial
interpretation here.

Evidence from Repo Markets. We are now equipped with the right objects to discuss how
the model relates to empirical findings in the literature. Despite the importance of repos as a
major source of short-term liquidity funding for security dealers and hedge funds, data on repo
markets is only slowly being collected. Most evidence on the behavior of repo markets is either
anecdotal or obtained from specific investor segments. Nevertheless, the known evidence points
toward adverse selection as a driver of the key features in repo markets.
    The central prediction of our theory is that repo failure rates are unresponsive to the degree
of asymmetric information and only respond to the underlying investment return r; see equation
(9). Rather, the margin of adjustment to scenarios with more asymmetric information is the
loan size (the haircut) and the corresponding repo rate, see equations (15-16). In contrast, the
security design approach predicts that only the haircut would move, but the interest rate would
remain fixed, as illustrated by Figure 6.
    We start with some background of repo markets. As Copeland et al. (2014) explains, repo
markets are divided into two categories: bilateral and tri-party repos. Bilateral repo markets
operate just like in our model, where buyers and sellers agree on contracting terms. In tri-party
repos, an intermediary is hired to manage the collateral, setting strict rules such as verifying
collateral eligibility and centralizing settlements. According to Copeland et al. (2014), active
participants in bilateral repo markets are hedge funds, asset managers, and security dealers, and
these participants can be on either side of the trades. In the tri-party repo markets, typically
only security dealers act as the borrowers in our model, and money market mutual funds and


                                                 29
security dealers act as the lenders.
    Julliard et al. (2019) and Auh and Landoni (2016) are among the few studies on bilateral
repo markets. Using transaction-level data of six major banks that participate in the U.K. repo
markets, Julliard et al. (2019) find that, consistent with our theory, maturity (which affects the
investment return r and the extent of informational asymmetries in our model) and collateral
quality (which reflects the extent of asymmetric information) are the main determinants of
haircuts. The authors also find that the identity of counterparties matters for haircuts. For
example, they note that hedge funds as borrowers receive higher haircuts after controlling for
counterparty risk. Our theory is also consistent with this finding if we conceive hedge funds as
the best informed players in the market. Julliard et al. (2019) conclude their study by arguing,
"We find evidence in favor of an adverse selection explanation of haircuts, but little evidence in
support of lenders' liquidity position or default probabilities affecting haircuts." In the case of
the U.S. repo markets, Auh and Landoni (2016) use a sample of repo transactions reported by
hedge funds from 2004-2007. The authors find that, as loan risk increases (which we interpret
as leaving more room for private information), lenders require both higher rates and haircuts.28
    Our model can also help interpret different findings in the literature that are hard to reconcile
without an information story. In the context of bilateral repos, an influential study by Gorton and
Metrick (2012) show dramatic increases in haircuts during 2007-2008. For some asset qualities,
haircuts reached levels beyond 40% without corresponding increases in failures. Yet, for similar
asset classes, Krishnamurthy et al. (2014) find that haircuts for tri-party repos were stable around
the same time. We interpret this striking difference as supporting evidence of our model. We
attribute the evidence that bilateral repo markets have larger and more volatile haircuts than
tri-party markets to the fact that the participating borrowers in bilateral repos are usually the
best informed specialists in the finance industry (hedge funds and security dealers). By contrast,
borrowers in tri-party repo markets are less sophisticated.
    We now turn to a final discussion focused on observed haircut patterns across different asset
classes. According to the evidence in these works, we expect that asymmetric information is
more pronounced in the bilateral repo market. Unfortunately, only tri-party repo data, where
information asymmetries are less severe, is readily available to us. Still, the cross-sectional
patterns in tri-party repos are consistent with an asymmetric information story. Using data on
tri-party repo haircuts, we investigate the necessary variation in informational advantage, the
value of (i) , needed to capture the size of observed repo haircuts across different asset classes.
We factor in an annualized cost of capital of 1% and think of the repo terms as lasting one week.
Figure 7 describes the result from the exercise. In the top panel, the y-axis corresponds to the
  28
    The authors find that a 1 point higher rate is associated with 9 points of haircut. The authors claims that
"there is no obvious theoretical reason why the lender should take more risk (as evidenced by the higher spread)
when the collateral quality drops." We, however, interpret higher spreads not as lenders taking more risk, but as
cream-skimming behavior by lenders.


                                                       30
haircut measured in percentage. The x-axis presents the value of the informational advantage
needed to explain a given level of haircut. The dots in the figure correspond to the haircut data
of different asset classes. We observe that haircuts are increasing in the riskiness of the collateral
assets. For example, the lowest average haircut of 2% corresponds to the safest homogeneous
asset classes, US Treasury and agency securities, followed by international agency debt, agency
collateralized mortgage obligations (CMO), and money market shares. The haircuts for more
risky heterogeneous asset classes, such as municipal debt, corporate debt, asset-backed securities
(ABS), private-label CMOs, collateralized debt obligations (CDO), and equities, ascend from
4% to 9%, while wholesale loans have 10% haircuts. In addition, for the same asset type,
the non-investment grade requires a larger haircut than the investment grade. The pattern
is visible: asset categories where there is a greater scope for informational difference feature
higher haircuts. The bottom panel presents the model implied repo rates associated with each
category. Consistent with these empirical patterns and the evidence in Julliard et al. (2019)
and Auh and Landoni (2016), the model produces a positive correlation between haircuts, as
well as rates, and the extent of quality dispersion that is not present in the security design
outcome. Finally, observe that the model does not require substantial information differentials
to rationalize the haircuts. Take Treasury securities: to explain the 2% haircut in Treasuries,
the model needs borrowers to be able to predict 0.5% of the weekly fluctuations in Treasury
securities that borrowers can't. For wholesale loans, borrowers need to have a 3.5% advantage.


7     Conclusion
This paper exhibits a competitive market model of financial contracts that have repo like struc-
tures. The main insight is that, whenever asymmetric information is prevalent, lenders can
offer repurchase options to attract borrowers that would otherwise not participate in these mar-
kets due to adverse selection. This improves the asset pool but comes at the expense of cream
skimming of the high quality ones. The equilibrium contract is characterized in closed form.
    Recent financial crises spurred an interest in models that incorporate private information
into asset market models. These studies link changes in asset quality or information dispersion
to firm funding and, through funding, into macroeconomic variables (Kurlat, 2013; Gorton and
Ordo~ nez, 2014; Bigio, 2015). It is not difficult to see how the framework can be applied to
environments with limited insurance, as in Alvarez and Jermann (2000), or to environments
that feature collateral multipliers and endogenous prices (Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009;
Simsek, 2013). A modeling advantage is that the contracts here render closed forms, making the
theory readily portable to other settings, unlike other popular environments such as costly state
verification by Townsend (1979).
    Being generic, the theory only touches the surface of the questions postulated in the in-


                                                 31
                          Figure 7: Haircuts in the Data and Model Fit


      10

      9

      8

      7

      6
  %




      5

      4

      3

      2

      1


                  0.005         0.01         0.015         0.02         0.025         0.03          0.035




    900

    800

    700

    600

    500

    400

    300

    200

    100


                  0.005         0.01         0.015         0.02         0.025         0.03          0.035




Notes : In the first panel, the haircut data are measured by the average of the monthly median hair-
cut for tri-party repo transactions in the U.S. from May 2010 to July 2019. The data are obtained
from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (https://www.newyorkfed.org/data-and-statistics/data-
visualization/tri-party-repo/index.html#interactive/margins). The model-implied standard deviation
is the one required by the model to match the observed average haircut in the data for each asset class,
using a calibration of the model with r = 5%, and the distribution F is log-normal with mean 1. The
second panel plots the model-implied interest rate.


troduction. The specific use of collateralized debt or repos typically depends on economic or
institutional forces that are out of the scope of this paper. Further research could explore which
market forces induce the same assets to be traded simultaneously in sales markets and repo
markets and the coexistence of bilateral and tri-party repo markets.




                                                     32
References
Akerlof, George A., "The Market for "Lemons": Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mecha-
 nism," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84 (3), 488­500.

Alvarez, Fernando and Urban J. Jermann, "Efficiency, Equilibrium, and Asset Pricing
 with Risk of Default," Econometrica, 2000, 68 (4), 775­797.

Attar, Andrea, Thomas Mariotti, and Fran¸      cois Salani´e, "Nonexclusive Competition in
 the Market for Lemons," Econometrica, 2011, 79 (6), 1869­1918.

Auh, Jun Kyung and Mattia Landoni, "Loan Terms and Collateral: Evidence from the
 Bilateral Repo Market," jan 2016.

Azevedo, Eduardo M. and Daniel Gottlieb, "Perfect Competition in Markets With Adverse
 Selection," Econometrica, 2017, 85 (1), 67­105.

Besanko, David and Anjan V Thakor, "Competitive Equilibrium in the Credit Market
 under Asymmetric Information," Journal of Economic Theory, 1987, 42 (1), 167 ­ 182.

Biais, Bruno and Thomas Mariotti, "Strategic Liquidity Supply and Security Design," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 2005, 72 (3), 615­649.

Bigio, Saki, "Endogenous Liquidity and the Business Cycle," American Economic Review, June
  2015, 105 (6), 1883­1927.

Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Lasse Heje Pedersen, "Market Liquidity and Funding
 Liquidity," The Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 22 (6), 2201­2238.

Chang, Briana, "Adverse Selection and Liquidity Distortion," The Review of Economic Studies,
 04 2017, 85 (1), 275­306.

Copeland, Adam, Antoine Martin, and Michael Walker, "Repo Runs: Evidence from
 the Tri-Party Repo Market," The Journal of Finance, 2014, 69 (6), 2343­2380.

Daley, Brendan and Brett Green, "Waiting for News in the Market for Lemons," 2010.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmstro
                                            ¨m, "Haircuts and Repo Chains," Working
 Paper, 2013.

Demarzo, Peter and Darrell Duffie, "A Liquidity-Based Model of Security Design," Econo-
 metrica, 1999, 67 (1), 65­99.

Duffie, Darrell, "Special Repo Rates," The Journal of Finance, 1996, 51 (2), 493­526.

                                             33
Eisfeldt, Andrea L, "Endogenous Liquidity in Asset Markets," The Journal of Finance, 2004,
  59 (1), 1­30.

Fuchs, William and Andrzej Skrzypacz, "Costs and Benefits of Dynamic Trading in a
  Lemons Market," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2019, 33, 105 ­ 127. Fragmented Financial
  Markets.

Geanakoplos, John and William R. Zame, "Collateral Equilibrium, I: A Basic Framework,"
 Economic Theory, 2014, 56 (3), 443­492.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick, "Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo," Journal
 of Financial Economics, 2012, 104 (3), 425 ­ 451.

   and Guillermo Ordo~
                     nez, "Collateral Crises," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2),
  343­78.

Gorton, Gary B. and George Pennacchi, "Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,"
 Journal of Finance, 1990, 45 (1), 49­71.

Gorton, Gary, Toomas Laarits, and Andrew Metrick, "The Run on Repo and the Fed's
 Response," Journal of Financial Stability, 2020, 48, 100744.

Gottardi, Piero, Vincent Maurin, and Cyril Monnet, "A Theory of Repurchase Agree-
 ments, Collateral Re-use, and Repo Intermediation," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2019.

Guerrieri, Veronica and Robert Shimer, "Dynamic Adverse Selection: A Theory of Illiquid-
 ity, Fire Sales, and Flight to Quality," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (7), 1875­1908.

  and , "Markets with Multidimensional Private Information," American Economic Journal:
  Microeconomics, May 2018, 10 (2), 250­74.

  , , and Randall Wright, "Adverse Selection in Competitive Search Equilibrium," Econo-
  metrica, 2010, 78 (6), 1823­1862.

Hart, Oliver and John Moore, "A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human
 Capital," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (4), 841­879.

Hendel, Igal and Alessandro Lizzeri, "The Role of Leasing under Adverse Selection," Journal
 of Political Economy, 2002, 110 (1), 113­143.

Holmstrom, Bengt, "Understanding the Role of Debt in the Financial System," 2014. BIS
 Working Papers No. 479.



                                             34
   and Jean Tirole, "Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real Sector," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (3), 663­691.

   and Roger B. Myerson, "Efficient and Durable Decision Rules with Incomplete Informa-
  tion," Econometrica, 1983, 51 (6), 1799­1819.

Julliard, Christian, Zijun Liu, Seyed E. Seyedan, Karamfil Todorov, and Kathy
  Yuan, "What Drives Repo Haircuts? Evidence from the UK Market," Working Paper, 2019.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, "Liquidity, Business Cycles, and Monetary Policy,"
 2008.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Stefan Nagel, and Dmitry Orlov, "Sizing Up Repo," The Jour-
 nal of Finance, 2014, 69 (6), 2381­2417.

Kurlat, Pablo, "Lemons Markets and the Transmission of Aggregate Shocks," American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2013, 103 (4), 1463­89.

  , "Asset Markets With Heterogeneous Information," Econometrica, 2016, 84 (1), 33­85.

   and Florian Scheuer, "Signaling to Experts," 2020.

Lester, Benjamin, Ali Shourideh, Venky Venkateswaran, and Ariel Zetlin-Jones,
 "Screening and Adverse Selection in Frictional Markets," Journal of Political Economy, 2019,
  127 (1), 338­377.

Madison, Florian, "Asymmetric Information in Frictional Marketsfor LiquidityCollateralized
 Credit vs Asset Sale," 2017.

Mimra, Wanda and Achim Wambach, "Contract Withdrawals and Equilibrium in Com-
 petitive Markets with Adverse Selection," Economic Theory, 2019, 67 (4), 875­907.

Miyazaki, Hajime, "The Rat Race and Internal Labor Markets," The Bell Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 1977, 8 (2), 394­418.

Monnet, Cyril and Borghan Narajabad, "Why Rent When You Can Buy?," FEDS Working
 Paper No. 2017-094, 2017.

Netzer, Nick and Florian Scheuer, "A Game Theoretic Foundation of Competitive Equilibria
 with Adverse Selection," International Economic Review, 2014, 55 (2), 399­422.

Parlatore, Cecilia, "Collateralizing Liquidity," Journal of Financial Economics, 2019.




                                             35
Philippon, Thomas and Vasiliki Skreta, "Optimal Interventions in Markets with Adverse
 Selection," 2011. American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Simsek, Alp, "Belief Disagreements and Collateral Constraints," Econometrica, 2013, 81 (1),
  1­53.

Spence, Michael, "Product Differentiation and Performance in Insurance Markets," Journal of
  Public Economics, 1978, 10 (3), 427 ­ 447.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Infor-
  mation," The American Economic Review, 1981, 71 (3), 393­410.

Tirole, Jean, "Overcoming Adverse Selection: How Public Intervention Can Restore Market
  Functioning," The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 29­59.

Townsend, Robert, "Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State Verifica-
  tion," Journal of Economic Theory, 1979, 21, 265­293.

Wilson, Charles, "A Model of Insurance Markets with Incomplete Information," Journal of
 Economic Theory, 1977, 16 (2), 167 ­ 207.

Yang, Ming, "Optimality of Debt under Flexible Information Acquisition," Review of Economic
 Studies, Forthcoming.




                                            36
A     Proofs
A.1     Proof of Lemma 1 and Lemma 2
To prove Lemma 1, we start by studying the borrower's contract choice strategy in stage 3 and
subsequent default.

Proof of Lemma 1: Default Threshold. We first show that v () is weakly decreasing
in . For any 1 < 2 , let their optimal contract choices be P (1 ) = p1 = {p1    1
                                                                           s , pr } and
P (2 ) = p2 = {p2    2
                s , pr }. The values obtained satisfy the following:


                           v (1 )  (1 + r) p1            1
                                            s - min 1 , pr

                                  (1 + r) p2            2
                                           s - min 1 , pr

                                  (1 + r) p2            2
                                           s - min 2 , pr = v (2 ) .                          (17)

In equation (17), the first inequality follows from the optimal contract choice of 1 : it obtains a
higher value from contract p1 than from contract p2 . The second inequality is due to 2 > 1 .
The two inequalities may not be strict due to the repurchase option min {, pr }. That is, the
value function is weakly decreasing in .
    Next, we show that all nondefault assets obtain the same value. Continuing from the argu-
ments above, if neither asset defaults, the repurchase prices must satisfy 1  p1   r and 2  pr .
                                                                                                 2

Their values now also satisfy,

                                v (2 ) = (1 + r) p2    2
                                                  s - pr

                                       (1 + r) p1            1
                                                s - min 2 , pr

                                      = (1 + r) p1    1
                                                 s - pr = v (1 ) .                            (18)

In obtaining equation (18), the first inequality comes from the optimal contract choice of 2 : it
obtains a higher value from contract p2 than from contract p1 . The second equality is due to
2 > p1 r : if quality 2 were to choose the contract for 1 , it wouldn't default either because it
is worth more that 1 , and 1 does not default. Combining equations (17) and (18), we obtain
that the two nondefault qualities obtain the same value, v (1 ) = v (2 ).
    Denote the value obtained by nondefault assets by

                                     ¯  max (1 + r) ps - pr .
                                     v
                                          pP


Consider the highest quality asset that ends up defaulting in equilibrium, i.e., d  maxPr () .



                                                37
It must be that
                                v (d ) = (1 + r) Ps (d ) - d  v
                                                              ¯.

For any quality  < d , we have

                      v ()  (1 + r) Ps (d ) -  > (1 + r) Ps (d ) - d  v
                                                                      ¯.                       (19)

In equation (19), the first inequality states that the value obtained by quality  is at least above
the level it can derive by deviating to the contract for d and subsequently defaulting. With
this deviation, the value obtained has to be above the nondefault value v   ¯ since  < d . Hence
the second inequality is strict. It must be that asset quality  defaults in equilibrium to obtain
a value above v¯. To conclude, all assets with quality below d must also default in equilibrium.
QED.

Proof of Lemma 1: Full Participation. We consider two hypothetical scenarios to show
that there must be full participation. In the first scenario, suppose that there is at least one
participating borrower that doesn't default. Then the nondefault value is v ¯  0. Hence, it must
be that all assets with higher quality can at least obtain the same nondefault value by choosing
the same contract and not defaulting. Thus, there is full participation.
   Suppose now that in all active contracts, all participating borrowers strictly prefer to default.
Thus, it must be that for all participating borrowers,   d , and that the repurchase price is
above the quality Pr () > d . Then, in stage 1, a lender could deviate and offer an alternative
contract {Ps (d ) , d }. With this contract, the entrant lender would attract all assets above the
default threshold and obtain a value v (d ) = (1 + r) Ps (d ) - d  0; therefore all qualities
would participate. The proposed contract is a profitable since it would attract more high quality
assets and obtain a greater amount of cross-subsidization within its asset pool. Hence, there
must be full participation. QED.

Proof of Lemma 2. By the previous results, if an agent chooses not to default, it must select
a contract that offers the highest nondefault value v ¯. If the agent chooses to default, it must
select a contract with the highest sales price. We therefore restrict attention to two groups of
contracts, those that offer the highest nondefault isovalue and those that offer the highest sales
price. QED.


A.2     Auxiliary Lemmata
In this section, we prove two auxiliary Lemmata. According to Lemma 2, we can restrict our
attention to two sets of contracts: those that offer the highest sales price and those that offer
the highest nondefault value. We restrict to one contract pd among the highest sales-price set

                                                38
and one contract pn among the highest nondefault value set. Later in the proof we deal with
multiple contracts in each set. Thus, for the time being, we consider only two contracts. We
show the following properties.

Continuity of Value Function. First, we show that the default contract pd and the non-
default contract pn must deliver the same nondefault value; i.e. they must be located along an
isovalue line. In particular, the default threshold asset must be indifferent between defaulting
or not. Formally,

Lemma 4 (Continuity). The value function must be continuous at the default threshold, i.e.,
v (d ) = v
         ¯. That is, the default threshold asset is indifferent between the two contracts:

                             ¯ = (1 + r) pn
                             v                 n             d
                                          s - pr = (1 + r ) ps - d .                         (20)

Proof. Suppose by contradiction that v (d ) > v  ¯, then the nondefault types slightly above the
default threshold can obtain a higher payoff by switching to the contract for d . Formally, there
exists a small  > 0 such that, for d                                                d  d
                                   + = d +, the deviation pays off, since (1 + r ) ps -+ > v
                                                                                           ¯.

  Next, we show that the isovalue line that crosses the two contracts must necessarily cross the
ZPC, given by equation (5), in equilibrium.

Isovalue line crosses the ZPC. Consider a hypothetical separating equilibrium where only
two contracts are offered, a highest sales-price contract pd and highest nondefault value contract
pn . Using the optimal default actions, the profits per contract are correspondingly:

                    d pd , d  E [ |   d ] - pd     n  n    n    n
                                             s and  (p )  pr - ps .


Recall the zero-profit equation (5) and the contract set Z. The contract {Z (d ) , d } is
in the set of Z¯ . Since Z (pr ) is concave, { p  2 | ps  Z (pr )} is a convex set and so is
{ p  2 | (1 + r) ps - pr  0}. Being the intersection of two convex closed sets, Z is also convex
and closed. We have the following Lemma.

Lemma 5 (pd must be inside Z.). Consider a possible separating equilibrium with contracts pd
and pn that induces a default threshold d < ¯ . Then, the default contract has a sales price
below Z (d ) and, thus, pd  intZ.

Proof. The proof is by contradiction. Suppose that pd and pn are offered and that pd
                                                                                   s  Z (d ).
We show that if that is the case, the sum of lender profits are negative and, as a result, this
situation cannot occur in equilibrium. By Lemma 4, an isovalue line must cross both contracts



                                               39
and the default threshold asset must be indifferent between the two contracts. Rewriting equation
(20), we have
                                  d = pn                d    n
                                          r + (1 + r ) ps - ps .

Next, observe the following relationship:

 n (pn ) = pn    n    n    n      d    n    n             d    n   d
            r - ps < pr - ps + r ps - ps = pr + (1 + r ) ps - ps -ps  
                                                                       n
                                                                                      pd
                                                                                       s , d   . (21)
                                                         =d


The inequality follows from the fact that r > 0 and pd       n
                                                        s > ps where the latter condition is
necessary to have a separating equilibrium. Note then that:

  d pd , d F (d ) + n (pn ) (1 - F (d )) < d pd , d F (d ) + n            pd
                                                                           s , d      (1 - F (d ))
                                                                                                 (22)
                                              E [min {, d }] - Z (d ) = 0.

The first inequality follows from (21) and F (d ) < 1--which is also the case in a separating
equilibrium. The second inequality follows from pd                            d
                                                    s  Z (d ) and thus, when p  / intZ. Since
  d     n              d
 +  < 0, when p          / intZ, at least one contract must be withdrawn. Hence, a separating
equilibrium cannot occur with pd   / intZ.

    In the proof of Lemma 5 we use two contracts. We argued above that proving the result for
only one default contract is without loss of generality. We can restrict to one contract pd among
the highest sales-price set, because in a separating equilibrium, the highest sales-price contracts
feature default on all assets and, thus, pdr is immaterial. Now consider a situation where more
than one nondefault contract is offered and denote that set by Pn . Inequality (21) holds for any
pn in the set of nondefault contract. Hence, if we had multiple nondefault contracts, (22) can
be written as:

d pd , d F (d ) +             n (pn )  (; pn , P) < d pd , d F (d ) + n      pd
                                                                              s , d     (1 - F (d ))
                     pn  Pn

                                                E [min {, d }] - Z (d ) = 0,

which implies that the contradiction in the proof of Lemma 5 is there, even if there are more
than two contracts in the separating equilibrium. We make use of both Lemmata in the results
that follow.




                                                40
A.3      Proof of Proposition 1
In this section, we prove Proposition 1 and show that a separating equilibrium is impossible.
According to Lemma 2, we can restrict our attention to two set of contracts. We prove the result
for two contracts, respectively pd and pn . When we show that a separating equilibrium breaks
down, we show that it would break down for all nondefault contracts that yield the same value,
making the restriction to one contract in each set without loss of generality. Also, without loss
of generality, we focus on partial default, that is d  [, ¯ ).29 Hence, in the rest of the proof we
consider a separating equilibrium with two contracts and an interior threshold. We proceed to
show that any separating equilibrium would break down.
    By Lemma 4, pd and pn are in the same nondefault isovalue line with value v   ¯. By Lemma 5,
pds < Z 
           d
              and pd  intZ. Since pd and pn falls in the isovalue line, but pn       d
                                                                               s < ps , the isovalue
line is not tangent to Z and thus v ¯<v ¯ .
    To rule out the separating equilibrium, we consider a deviation to a contract:

                                           ~ = Z d - , d ,
                                           p

where  is a small positive value such that Z d -  > pd          s . The nondefault value associated
with p ~ is above the existing level, v~ = (1 + r) Z d -  - d > v           ¯. Thus p ~ attracts all
nondefault assets. It also attracts all default assets because it offers a higher sales price than
pd , Z d -  > pd         n
                   s > ps . Therefore p ~ attracts all assets from their original contracts. Finally,
since the deviating contract p ~  intZ, it is strictly profitable so a lender will indeed offer it.
To conclude, for any postulated separating equilibrium, we can find a profitable deviation that
breaks the candidate separating equilibrium. Note that the deviation works independently of
the number of original contracts offered, given that all nondefault contracts must yield the same
value and default contracts must feature the same sales price.
     Now, we show the remainder of Proposition 1, that is, if the equilibrium is pooling, the
contract must satisfy the ZPC. Assume that the equilibrium is pooling, then, by Lemma 1,
it must feature full participation and have a unique threshold. Suppose the contract does not
satisfy the ZPC. In that case, the incumbent contract belongs to intZ. Then, consider a deviation
~ = p + {, 0}. Since the sales price is higher, the deviation must attract all borrowers. Since for
p
sufficiently small  the contract remains in intZ, the deviation is profitable. Then the contract
must satisfy the ZPC. QED.
  29
    If there is default in all contracts, again, contracts must all have the same sales price and the repurchase
price is irrelevant. Thus, the equilibrium is pooling.




                                                      41
A.4     Proof of Proposition 2
From Proposition 1 we know the set of candidate equilibria must fall in the ZPC. We now prove
that the equilibrium contract is p . To prove the result, we proceed in two steps: first we show
that p would break any other pooling equilibrium in the ZPC and, then, that if p is indeed
offered, there are no profitable deviations.

Claim 1: p dominates other ZPC-contracts. Recall that p  Z and falls on the tangent
plane of Z and, because of strict concavity of Z (·), is therefore unique. Thus, assume p is a
pooling equilibrium that falls on the ZPC, as required by Proposition, and differs from p . Since
it is not on the tangent plane, then it yields a value v
                                                       ¯<v¯ . Consider a deviation to

                                         ~ = p - {, 0} ,
                                         p

for some small , with associated nondefault value v ~=v ¯ - (1 + r) . Since p is not in the tangent
plane of Z, it is possible to find  such that v ¯ - (1 + r)  > v                         ~ attracts
                                                                 ¯. If this is the case, p
all nondefault types from p. However, since p falls in the ZPC, but loses all its nondefault
assets--which bring positive marginal revenues, p has to be withdrawn. Since p       ~ remains the
sole contract, but belongs to intZ, the deviation is profitable. QED.
    To verify that the zero-profit pooling contract p is indeed an equilibrium, we now argue that
the introduction of another contract would not be profitable.

Claim 2: p cannot be broken. Suppose p is offered and lender deviates and offers p               ~.
                                                                                   
   ~ offers a higher nondefault value than p , it must be that p
If p                                                               ~  / Z since p maximizes the
nondefault value in Z. In that case p ~ attracts all nondefault assets away from p . But since p
is in the ZPC, then p must be withdrawn. Thus, p       ~ must be left as a sole contract. However,
since p~ / Z, it makes losses if it remains as the contract offered. Hence, the deviation is not
profitable.
    Thus, it must be that p ~ offers a (weakly) lower nondefault value than p does. If p   ~s < ps,
                                                            
then the contract does not attract any borrowers from p . Thus, the only case left to rule out
is one where p ~s > ps . In this case, p~ can attract default assets away from p . Since p was
                                   ~ attracts the worse quality among the assets in p , p remains
originally earning zero profit and p
profitable. However, p~ is unprofitable. This concludes the proof of Proposition 2. QED.


A.5     Proof of Proposition 3
Consider a separating equilibrium where a lender offers a nondefault contract and a default
contract, pn and pd , respectively. We allow one contract to cross-subsidize the other. First, we



                                                42
show that if we allow for cross-subsidization across contracts, at least one contract must make
losses and there cannot be an equilibrium with cross-subsidized contracts.

Observation 1: at least one contract must make losses. Assume both contracts make
profits. According to Lemma 4, we know that the threshold asset is indifferent between the
two contracts, i.e., d satisfies equation (20). It cannot occur that both contracts make a
profit. Otherwise, a competitor could offer two contracts that raise slightly pd      n
                                                                               s and ps by the
same amount, still make a profit while keeping the same default threshold. Hence, at least one
contract must make a loss. QED.

Observation 2: a pooling contract dominates the separating ones with cross-
subsidies. Now consider an equilibrium where at least one contract makes losses. Recall
from Lemma 4 and Lemma 5 that the default contract would have to fall in Z. The rest of the
proof of Proposition 3 is a direct corollary of Proposition 1: In particular, the proof of Propo-
                       ~ = Z d - , d is offered, it attracts all borrowers, making pd and
sition 3 shows that if p
pn inactive, regardless of whether the two original contracts were offered by the same lender or
two different lenders. Thus, a separating equilibrium with cross-subsidization across contracts
would be broken by a lender that offers this pooling contract. QED.


A.6     Proof of Proposition 4
The first distinction of the planner's problem from the lenders in the competitive equilibrium is
that individual contracts don't need to satisfy zero-profits. Hence the planner has the possibility
to cross-subsidize between two contracts that potentially separate default assets from nondefault
assets. The second distinction is the objective. Next, we proof that it is optimal for the planner
to pool all assets. We proceed with the following steps. First, we simplify the planner's problem,
then we show that the planner will choose a pooling contract, and finalize the proof showing
that the participation constraint of the nondefaulters must bind.

Step 1: Simplification of the Planner's Problem. In the first step, we simplify the
mechanism design problem (M) into a problem where the planner chooses only among two
contracts. We simplify the problem by mimicking the arguments that lead to the threshold
default asset in Lemma 1 and Lemma 2. Namely, the borrower's optimal strategy is to chose
either the highest sales price or the highest nondefault value. Therefore, we study a planner's
problem that chooses only two contracts: one for default assets pd and the other for nondefault




                                                43
assets pn . The planner's problem is to maximize average ex-ante borrower payoff:
                           d
              max              (1 + r) pd                       n    n       p
                                        s -  dF () + ((1 + r ) ps - pr ) (F ( ) - F (d ))    (M )
       pd ,pn ,p ,d p   


subject to

                                                              pd   n
                                                               s  ps                          (23)
                                                  (1 + r) pn    n            d    d
                                                           s - pr  (1 + r ) ps - pr           (24)
                                                  (1 + r) pd                n    n
                                                           s - d  (1 + r ) ps - pr            (25)
                                                              d  pd
                                                                  r                           (26)
                                                              d  pn
                                                                  r                           (27)
                                                  (1 + r) pn    n
                                                           s - pr  0                          (28)
                     pd F (d ) +  (pn ) (F (p ) - F (d )) = 0.                                (29)

Condition (23) is an incentive compatibility constraint for default assets to choose pd . Condition
(24) is an incentive compatibility constraint for nondefault assets to choose pn . Condition (25)
states that the default threshold asset weakly prefers pd . Condition (26) states that if the agent
chooses the default contract, it will indeed default. Condition (27), on the other hand, states
that if the agent chooses the nondefault contract, she will indeed not default. Condition (28) is
a participation constraint for nondefault assets. Condition (29) makes sure that the the menu
of contracts does not use external funds. There are six choice variables, together with seven
constraints. We solve the problem by eliminating constraints and variables.

Step 2: Solving the Simplified Planner's Problem. First, the objective function can
be reformulated as a liquidity maximization problem. To see that, we re-arrange the objective
setting it to:
          d
              (1 + r) pd                       n    n       p
                       s -  dF () + ((1 + r ) ps - pr ) (F ( ) - F (d ))
       

    =r pd           n     p
        s F (d ) + ps (F ( ) - F (d )) - 
                                          d
                                            pd , d F (d ) + n (pn ) (F (p ) - F (d )) .

We proceed by making the following observations, which simplify the problem.

   Observation 1: in the solution to the planner's problem, the planner makes zero
profits. Suppose not. Then, the planner could simply raise both pd          n
                                                                     s and ps by some small .
Raising both sales prices satisfies all the constraints and d remains unchanged. However, the
value of the objective would increase.


                                                    44
    Observation 2: pd       ¯                   d
                       r  . Observe that pr enters nowhere in the objective. Hence, con-
ditions (24) and (26) can be trivially satisfied by setting pd   ¯                    d
                                                             r = . Thus, we can drop pr and
eliminate conditions (24) and (26) from the problem.

   Observation 3: d is interior. If Condition (1) holds, it is not possible to offer a contract
that pools all assets into a default contract and have the planner break even.30 That is, the
default threshold has to be interior, d < ¯.


    Observation 4: p = .    ¯ The fourth observation is that the planner's problem must feature
full participation. As in the proof of Lemma 1, if at least one nondefaulter participates, then all
qualities weakly prefer to participate. We proceed by contradiction. Suppose that nondefaulters
do not participate, without loss of generality, by trivially setting pn = 0 and hence, setting
p = d . That is, the planner prefers an asset-sale contract rather than a repo contract. Recall
observation 3 that, with asset sales, there must only be partial participation. Because the
contract must make zero profits (observation 1), the solution would be

                               (1 + r) pd              d
                                        s - d = 0 and ps = E [ |   d ] .


In this case, the planner could offer the nondefault contract, p~ n = pd s , d . Default assets
clearly remain as default assets, but holders of any better-quality asset would participate. It
is immediate to show that the planner's would generate revenue, while it would not reduce the
value of its objective. Since by observation 1, the solution must earn zero revenues for the
planner, partial participation is suboptimal.

     Observation 5: the default threshold asset is indifferent. By the continuity result
in Lemma 4, it must be that the default threshold asset is indifferent between the two contracts,
i.e., condition (25) is binding. Hence,

                                     d = (1 + r) pd     n    n   n
                                                  s - p s + pr  pr ,


with equality if and only if pd    n
                              s = ps . This implies that equation (27) is redundant. We can
substitute out d and eliminate condition (27).
   Thus, with the observations we have collected so far, we have that the problem is:

                                     max          pd           n
                                                   s F (d ) + ps (1 - F (d ))                              (M )
                                  pd   n n
                                   s ,ps ,pr ,d

  30
    If Condition (1) does not hold, then the planner can buy all assets at their fair value after agents learn the
quality of their assets. In that case, the planner can implement the first best allocation.




                                                         45
subject to

                                                           pd   n
                                                            s  ps                            (30)
                                               (1 + r) pd                 n    n
                                                        s - d = (1 + r ) ps - pr             (31)
                                               (1 + r) pn    n
                                                        s - pr  0                            (32)
                      pd F (d ) +  (pn ) (1 - F (d )) = 0.                                   (33)

    Observation 6: The planner must pool all assets together. Suppose that the plan-
ner's solution is not pooling. Then, it is the case that pd      n
                                                           s > ps . However, consider a deviation
along the direction (1, 1 + r), i.e., a contract such that p~ n = (pn      n
                                                                    s + , pr + (1 + r ) ) for some
small . Both (31) and (32) are satisfied and the default threshold remains unchanged. Fur-
thermore, nondefault profits increase by r and the objective also remains unchanged. However,
since the deviation generates profits, by observation 1, we have that there is another solution
with zero profits that yields greater value. Hence, it must be that pd       n
                                                                       s = ps = ps . This in turn
implies that the default threshold satisfies pn
                                              r = d .


Step 3. Packaging the Solution. Collecting the observations so far, the planner's problem
becomes one of maximizing the sales price

                                                 max ps                                    (M )
                                                 ps ,d


subject to

                                              (1 + r) ps - d  0                              (34)
                                     ps - E [min {, d }] = 0                                 (35)

We have shown that ps is increasing in d along the zero profit condition. Hence, the sales price
is maximized when the participation constraint is binding at the point that maximizes liquidity.


A.7     Proof for Corollary 1
Substituting the sales price as a function of the repurchase price according to the zero-profit
condition, the problem of maximizing the nondefault value becomes
                                         pr
                       max (1 + r)            dF () + (1 - F (pr )) pr - pr .
                       pr             




                                                    46
The first-order condition with respect to pr :

                                                         1
                                        1 - F (pr ) =       ,
                                                        1+r
                                           1                            r
which implies that the nondefault rate is 1+ r
                                               and the default rate is 1+ r
                                                                            . Hence we obtain the
repurchase price in equation (7). Using the zero profit condition, we further obtain the sales
price in equation (8).


A.8     Proof for Proposition 5
When Condition 1 does not hold, the asset-sale equilibrium has full participation. It generates
more liquidity than the repo equilibrium, since

                                             E [] > ps.


In contrast, when Condition 1 holds, there is partial participation in the asset-sale equilibrium.
In this scenario, we obtain equation (12), a condition that guarantees that the repo equilibrium
dominates in providing higher aggregate liquidity. To obtain this condition, we consider a par-
ticipation threshold in the asset sales market, which at the pooling price generates the same
                                                                                     -1
liquidity as the repo equilibrium p                                                      
                                     s . This hypothetical participation threshold La (ps ) is on the
right-hand side of equation (12). In Figure 4, it is depicted as the green dot in ZPC for selling
assets. Notice that La     ¯ = E [] > p and La [] = 0 < p . Since La (·) is strictly increas-
                                           s                      s
                            -1  
ing, it is ensured that La (ps ) is a unique interior point in the asset quality domain . The
left-hand side is the investment return from the pooling price Za (L-     1  
                                                                         a (ps )). The equation says
that this threshold asset is unwilling to participate. When this occurs, the asset-sale equilibrium
(depicted as the black dot in the figure) has a participation threshold below the hypothetical
            -1
one a < La (p    s ). This implies that the asset-sale equilibrium must generate less liquidity than
the repo equilibrium, La (a ) < p   s.



A.9     Solutions under Uniform Distribution
Akerlof Asset-Sale Equilibrium. In the Akerlof asset-sale equilibrium, a pooling equilib-
rium is obtained. The pooling price ps and participation threshold a satisfy the following
participation constraint and zero-profit condition:

                                        (1 + r) pa - a = 0

and
                                        pa = E [ |  a ] .

                                                 47
The aggregate liquidity is pa F (a ) . With a uniform distribution   U (1 - , 1 +  ), we obtain
a closed-form solution for the aggregate variables. If there is little dispersion   r,

                            a = 1 + , pa = 1, and pa F (a ) = 1.

When dispersion becomes larger  > r, that is when Condition 1 holds,

                1+r                 1                               r     (1 -  )2
          a =       (1 -  ) , pa =     (1 -  ) , and pa F (a ) =                   .
                1-r                1-r                           (1 - r)2    

Optimal Repo Contract. In the optimal repo contract, when  > r is satisfied,

                                     (1 + r) ps - d = 0,

and
                                     pp
                                      s = E [min {, d }] .

With a uniform distribution   U (1 - , 1 +  ), the aggregate variables also have a closed-form
solution:

                                         2            r
                          p
                          d = 1+-                1-     (1 + r) - r
                                        1+r           

and
                               1+       2              r
                        pp
                         s =       -             1-      (1 + r) - r .
                               1+r   (1 + r)2          




                                                48
