                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         FINANCIAL RETURNS TO HOUSEHOLD INVENTORY MANAGEMENT

                                        Scott R. Baker
                                     Stephanie G. Johnson
                                        Lorenz Kueng

                                      Working Paper 27740
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27740


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




Researchers own analyses calculated (or derived) based in part on data from The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts
Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The
conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views
of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and
preparing the results reported herein. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Scott R. Baker, Stephanie G. Johnson, and Lorenz Kueng. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Returns to Household Inventory Management
Scott R. Baker, Stephanie G. Johnson, and Lorenz Kueng
NBER Working Paper No. 27740
August 2020
JEL No. D11,D12,D13,D14,E21,G11,G51

                                          ABSTRACT

Households tend to hold substantial amounts of non-financial assets in the form of inventory.
Households can obtain significant financial returns from strategic shopping and optimally
managing these inventories of consumer goods. In addition, they choose to maintain liquid
savings ­ household working capital ­ not just for precautionary motives but also to support this
inventory management. We demonstrate that households earn high returns from inventory
management at low levels of inventory, though returns decline rapidly as inventory levels
increase. We provide evidence using scanner and survey data that supports this conclusion. High
returns from inventory management that are declining in wealth offer a new rationale for poorer
households not to participate in risky financial markets, while wealthier households invest in both
financial assets and working capital.

Scott R. Baker                                   Lorenz Kueng
Kellogg School of Management                     Northwestern University
Northwestern University                          Kellogg School of Management
2211 Campus Drive                                Suite 4394
Evanston, IL 60208                               2211 Campus Drive
and NBER                                         Evanston, IL 60208
s-baker@kellogg.northwestern.edu                 and NBER
                                                 l-kueng@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Stephanie G. Johnson
Jones Graduate School of Business
Rice University
6100 Main Street
Houston, TX 77005
stephgwallace@gmail.com
1   Introduction
While a large number of American households hold small amounts or even zero financial assets,
all households hold at least some wealth in the form of consumer good inventories. These invento-
ries can be managed over time through strategic shopping behavior as households are able to take
advantage of coupons, temporary low prices at retailers, and savings from buying in bulk. Aggre-
gating across all Nielsen Homescan goods, we estimate that households hold approximately $1,100
in consumer goods inventory at any given time, representing an unmeasured source of non-financial
wealth. For households in the lowest quintile of household income, this inventory likely makes up
a majority of total household wealth. Moreover, households can earn high returns through the
maintenance of liquid savings and strategic shopping behavior.
    In this paper, we study how the financial return to investment in inventories affects households'
portfolio allocation and desire to hold liquid assets like cash and cash equivalent assets (such as
checking accounts, transaction accounts, credit card lines of credit, etc.). We refer to these combined
resources ­ the sum of cash and inventory ­ as household working capital. We show that for low levels
of working capital, the marginal returns to inventory management are very high and dominate
stock market returns. While returns are high at low levels of working capital, they decline rapidly
with inventory holdings.
    Optimal inventory management provides a rationale for households to hold sizable amounts of
cash above and beyond the desire to maintain a buffer stock or precautionary source of savings. If
low-asset households hold a large share of their assets in the form of inventory, these motives will
be relevant for understanding the ability of such households to smooth consumption in response
to temporary income shocks. The high returns observed in our data can also rationalize high-cost
borrowing like credit card debt in some instances.
    Using scanner data from AC Nielsen and income and asset data from the Survey of Consumer
Finances (SCF), we provide evidence in support of this new channel. In particular, we compute the
total net returns to investment in household working capital. We go one step further than existing
work (e.g. Griffith, Leibtag, Leicester and Nevo (2009); Nevo and Wong (2019)), which focuses on
in-store savings as a percentage of the product price, but does not take into account the additional
household working capital that must be held to facilitate these savings and the financial returns
to this working capital. Moreover, we extend our framework to include the costs from product
depreciation and the relation between the level of inventory holdings and differences in shopping
trip fixed costs associated with different shopping behaviors.
    We build a parsimonious model of inventory management to incorporate these additional com-
ponents of returns to household working capital investments. The model highlights two sources of
returns. By taking larger and less frequent trips, households can save on trip fixed costs and also
take advantage of lower unit prices by buying goods in bulk. Alternatively, consumers can shop
more frequently, at higher cumulative trip fixed costs, giving them additional opportunities to take
advantage of temporary deals at retailers.
    Both strategies require a substantial amount of resources: liquid assets in the former and con-
sumer inventory in the latter, which are associated with depreciation costs. The household op-


                                                  1
timally chooses shopping trip frequency to minimize the cost of providing a given consumption
stream, subject to a household working capital constraint. The model therefore allows us to study
how investing in household working capital generates a return in the form of reduced trip costs and
lower per unit prices, taking into account depreciation costs.
    Existing models of deal shopping focus on individual products in a stochastic framework (e.g.
Boizot, Robin and Visser (2001); Hendel and Nevo (2013)). In contrast, we focus on an aggregate
deterministic steady state, which is derived from stochastic foundations under the assumption of in-
dependent price deals across goods and backed by observations from the data. This has implications
for households' cash holdings. If deals are independent across products, stocking up in response
to deals is consistent with a deterministic steady state where consumers hold a substantial level of
inventory at all times, but where trips are consistently spaced and of a similar size. Although when
focusing on purchases of individual products, fluctuations in prices are observed, when focusing on
aggregate shopping trips these fluctuations are smoothed out. In contrast, if aggregated deals are
autocorrelated, households may want to hold substantial additional cash to stock up more in those
(random) weeks. We provide empirical evidence supporting the former scenario. Stores generally
feature consistent amounts of goods on sale throughout the year rather than concentrating deals in
particular weeks.1
    The model predicts that households with high shopping fixed costs ­ such as rich households
with a high opportunity cost of time ­ are more likely to engage in bulk buying and shop less
frequently. The proportion of working capital held in liquid financial assets is higher for these
households. As the fixed cost of shopping rises from $1 to $50 per trip, the cash component of
working capital increases by 74%, while the inventory component increases by 40%.
    By highlighting the role of household working capital for households' portfolio allocation ­
which is especially important for households with relatively low financial wealth ­ our paper re-
lates to a large literature in household finance. While inventories have long been recognized as
an important part of firms' working capital, which has received considerable attention in finance
(e.g. Petersen and Rajan (1997); Fisman and Love (2003); Yang and Birge (2018)), inventories of con-
sumers goods and household working capital has been largely ignored by the household finance
literature.2
    For instance, none of the country studies of household portfolios in the widely cited book by
Jappelli, Guiso and Haliassos (2002) include household inventories. This also applies to the chapter
by Bertaut and Starr (2000), who study U.S. households' portfolios.3 One explanation for this gap
is that inventories are often hard to observe and measure. For example, they are missing from
traditional consumer finance data such as the SCF.
    Our paper is therefore one of the first systematic studies of the role of household inventories in
   1 See Appendix Figure A.1 and Figure A.2.
   2A   notable exception is Samphantharak and Townsend (2010) who focus on households in developing economies.
These households are heavily engaged in agriculture and thus have a substantial fraction of their wealth invested in
inventories.
   3 The category "other nonfinancial assets," which could in principle include inventories, does not. Instead, it includes

"all standard passenger vehicles (cars, trucks, vans, minivans, jeeps, etc.) not owned by a business; all other types of
personal-use vehicles (motor homes, recreational vehicles, planes, boats, motorcycles, etc.); and miscellaneous nonfinan-
cial assets such as artwork, antiques, jewelry, furniture, and valuable collections (coin, stamp, etc.)."


                                                            2
household finance.4 We also highlight how adding household inventory management to a house-
hold's portfolio choice problem affects its decision of whether to participate in the stock market.
This gives another partial explanation to the stock market participation puzzle: the fact that many
households do not participate in risky financial assets to take advantage of the risk premium as
predicted by standard portfolio theory (Mankiw and Zeldes (1991); Haliassos and Bertaut (1995)).
The literature on the participation puzzle is among the oldest in household finance and too large to
adequately survey here.5
    We contribute to this literature by showing that investment in household working capital has
returns that vary systematically across households by wealth and that dominate equity returns
for poorer and less educated households.6 Importantly, the return on working capital is investor-
specific, approximately risk-free, and declines as wealth and inventory holdings increase.
    We show that consistent with our model's predictions, observed stock market participation
choice of households with higher education is well explained by variation in returns to working
capital investments. At low levels of financial assets relative to income, educated households do not
participate in the stock market but instead invest largely in liquid assets. As the ratio of financial
assets to income increases, the participation rate of these households increases sharply.
    Our model implies that participation rates quickly approach 100% as financial wealth increases,
while in the data direct participation rates "only" reach slightly above 40%. This is not surpris-
ing since our model intentionally abstracts from all other dimensions discussed in footnote 5 that
have previously been proposed in the literature to explain non-participation of relatively wealthy
households, such as participation costs, correlated background risk, trust, peer effects, etc.
    In the data, we find that households with low education, such as high school dropouts, do not
participate in the stock market and instead maintain a high share of their portfolio invested in liquid
assets. Such behavior can be rational in light of previous studies that have shown that households
with low education tend to earn low returns on their stock market investments conditional on
participation (Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2007)), for example due to under-diversification, local
bias, excessive trading or paying high management fees.
   4 There is a related literature in macroeconomics that studies heterogeneity in the effective unit price paid for similar
goods across households and over the business cycle; e.g. Chevalier, Kashyap and Rossi (2003); Aguiar and Hurst (2007);
Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Hong (2015); Kaplan and Menzio (2016); Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017); Stroebel and
Vavra (2019).
   5 The handbook chapters by Guiso and Sodini (2013) and Beshears, Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2018) provide recent

surveys of this literature. A non-exhaustive list of explanations of the participation puzzle include pecuniary and non-
pecuniary participation fixed costs (Luttmer (1999); Vissing-Jørgensen (2002)); low financial literacy (Van Rooij, Lusardi
and Alessie (2011); Black, Devereux, Lundborg and Majlesi (2018)); non-expected utility with first-order risk aversion
(Barberis, Huang and Thaler (2006); Epstein and Schneider (2010)); heterogeneity in beliefs (Kézdi and Willis (2009);
Malmendier and Nagel (2011); Hurd, Van Rooij and Winter (2011); Adelino, Schoar and Severino (2020)), lack of trust
(Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2008); Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny (2015)), and unawareness of the excess return
premium (Guiso and Jappelli (2005); Grinblatt, Keloharju and Linnainmaa (2011); Cole, Paulson and Shastry (2014));
background risk (Heaton and Lucas (2000); Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout (2005)) and positive correlation of stock returns
with returns of other assets in household portfolios (Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2007); Davis and Willen
(2014); Bonaparte, Korniotis and Kumar (2014)); liquidity constraints, illiquid assets and consumption commitments
(Grossman and Laroque (1990); Haliassos and Michaelides (2003); Chetty and Szeidl (2007)); or social interactions (Hong,
Kubik and Stein (2004); Kaustia and Knüpfer (2012)).
   6 The only other asset class we are aware of that has been suggested to dominate equity returns and to justify non-

participation in the stock market ­ especially early in life ­ is human capital (e.g. Roussanov (2004); Athreya, Ionescu and
Neelakantan (2015)).


                                                             3
   Uneducated household also tend to put low trust in financial markets and financial advisors ­
often justifiably so (e.g. Bergstresser, Chalmers and Tufano (2008); Mullainathan, Noeth and Schoar
(2012); Anagol, Cole and Sarkar (2017); Linnainmaa, Melzer and Previtero (forthcoming)). However,
when investing in consumer goods inventory, households do not have to delegate their investment
decision. Moreover, they have lots of experience with store price discounts from frequent shopping
and are therefore capable of taking advantage of the investment opportunities offered by working
capital management. We show that while the returns to working capital investments are similar
across households with similar inventory holdings, uneducated households in our data achieve
indeed slightly higher in-store savings from shopping strategically.
   Hence, working capital investment with returns that decrease with wealth meet the challenge
posed by Guiso and Sodini (2013) "to identify when and for which investors some of the explana-
tions [of non-participation] are more relevant than others." In this respect, this new explanation is
comparable to participation costs as it applies to all households and it is directly related to wealth.
An interesting difference is that returns to working capital investment can be high because (and not
despite) the fixed costs involved, which in this case are shopping trip fixed costs.
   Even though we do not consider this explicitly in the paper, time-varying investment opportuni-
ties in working capital (e.g. temporary large store price discounts, sales tax holidays, "Black Friday"
sales) could therefore potentially rationalize the observation that poorer households often borrow
at fairly high interest rates (e.g. Zinman (2015)). Investment in working capital is therefore related
to the literature that motivates household borrowing as a way to invest in illiquid assets which
offer high rates of return but require a small amount of capital to reach a certain threshold for
investment, such as contributing to an employer-matched 401(k) retirement savings plan or making
a down-payment for a home purchase (e.g. Angeletos, Laibson, Repetto, Tobacman and Weinberg
(2001); Laibson, Repetto and Tobacman (2003)).
   Alterations in strategic shopping behavior also help explain portions of the "excess sensitivity"
of consumption to unanticipated temporary income shocks experienced by households (e.g. Jappelli
and Pistaferri (2010)). In the existing consumption literature, many retail purchases, such as grocery
store and pharmacy spending, are treated strictly as nondurables. As much of the literature moves
to monthly and even daily measures of spending to improve identification of causal effects, the
wedge between household spending and actual consumption grows more important. We show that
households hold substantial stocks of consumer goods, make purchases in discrete bundles, and
run them down over time. This reinforces the idea that large increases in household spending in
one period may translate into increased consumption only over several periods.
   The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the data sources. Sec-
tion 3 discusses how we construct our measures of household inventory and the various channels
of savings. Section 4 describes our measures of financial returns from investment in inventory.
Section 5 lays out the household shopping model and discusses various out of sample predictions.
Section 6 uses the model to estimate the financial net returns to investing in household working
capital. Section 7 applies our model to the current pandemic to show how government mandated
quarantines might affect shopping behavior and returns to working capital investments. Section 8
concludes.

                                                  4
2     Data
Our analysis uses data from three main sources, the Nielsen Consumer Panel (NCP), the Nielsen
Retail Scanner Panel (NRP), and the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF).

2.1     Nielsen Consumer Panel (NCP)
The Nielsen Company Consumer Panel (2004­2014) consists of a long-run panel of nationally rep-
resentative American households in 52 metropolitan areas. The goal of the NCP is to measure
the detailed shopping behavior of American households while linking this data to household char-
acteristics like household income, composition, age, and gender. Using bar-code scanners and
hand-coded diary entries, participants are asked to report all spending on household goods that
they engage in and also to detail information about the retail location that they visited in a given
trip. Nielsen uses monetary prizes and continual engagement with panelists to try to maintain high
levels of continued participation and limit attrition from the sample.7
      The NCP is constructed to be a representative sample of the US population and fresh demo-
graphic information about participants is obtained each year. Nielsen maintains high quality data
with regular reminders to participants that prompt them to report fully, and will remove non-
compliant households from their panel. Broda and Weinstein (2010) provide a more detailed de-
scription of the NCP. Einav, Leibtag and Nevo (2010) perform a thorough analysis of the NCP,
finding generally accurate coverage of household purchases though having some detectable errors
in the imputed prices Nielsen uses for a subset of goods. Overall, they deem the NCP to be of
comparable quality to many other commonly-used self-reported consumer datasets.
      The NCP primarily covers trips to grocery, pharmacy, and mass merchandise stores but also
spans a wider range of channels such as catalog and online purchases, liquor stores, delis, and
video stores. The types of goods purchased span groceries and drug products, small electronics
and appliances, small home furnishings and garden equipment, kitchenware, and some soft goods.
Almost all of this spending is done in-store. In our sample years, under 5% of spending is done
online or via catalog purchase in these categories.
      In this paper, we utilize data from the 2013 and 2014 NCP. In each year, there are over 60,000
unique households with millions of individual shopping trips and tens of millions of individual
product purchases. Overall, the NCP tracks a sizable amount of a household's spending on material
goods. On average, we observe over $393 of spending per month for each household. This ability
to measure household spending at the good level is key to our ability to understand inventory
management as well as mechanisms by which households save on a given shopping trip.

2.2     Nielsen Retail Scanner Panel (NRP)
The Nielsen Company Retail MSR Scanner Data (2006­2014) contains price and quantity informa-
tion at the store-week level of each UPC carried by a covered retailer and spans the years 2006-2014.
Nielsen also provides the location of the stores at the three-digit ZIP code level (e.g. 602 instead of
60208). This data covers almost 100 retail chains with over 40,000 unique stores in over 350 MSAs
across the country.
    7 Around   80% of NCP households are retained in the sample from one year to the next.

                                                            5
      In general, the data span a wide range of the largest retailers in the grocery, mass merchandiser,
drugstore and pharmacy, and other miscellaneous retail sectors. Within the store, the data provide
a comprehensive view of products sold, with more than 2 million unique UPCs across 1,100 product
categories. During these years, the database picks up about half of total sales in grocery stores and
pharmacies and about 30% of sales in other mass merchandisers. In total, these data comprise over
10 billion transactions per year worth nearly $250 billion.

2.3     Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF)
The Survey of Consumer Finances (1983­2016) contains detailed information on U.S. households'
income and assets. We define a stock market participation measure that is equal to one if a house-
hold owns stocks or stock mutual funds outside of retirement accounts. Income is gross household
income over the calendar year preceding the survey. Financial assets include checking accounts,
savings accounts, CDs, mutual funds, bonds, stocks, and money market funds.

2.4     Food Safety and Inspection Service Foodkeeper Data (FSIS)
The Food Safety and Inspection Service FoodKeeper Data (2020) contains information on recom-
mended food and beverage storage times. We rely primarily on this information to infer deprecia-
tion estimates for each Nielsen product module.

3     Household Inventory Management
3.1     Computing Household Inventories
We now turn to computing consumer goods inventories at a household level across our sample. To
compute household inventories using the NCP data, several assumptions are necessary. Although
it is possible for us to track the flow of purchases for different items over time, the initial inventory
is not observed and must be imputed. The rate of consumption is also not directly observed.
      The first assumption we make is that a given product's consumption (and thus rate of inven-
tory depletion) is constant throughout the year, and that total consumption equals total spending.
Consistent with this approach, we must also aggregate individual products to a broader level to
better understand consumption of certain product types. For instance, if a household switches ce-
real brands or types of apples purchased, they are not necessarily stocking up on all brands at once,
but keeping consumption of that product type constant using a substitute product. That is, if a
household buys a different brand of the same product for variety and we use product-level inven-
tory calculations, it will look like the household has bought that product on only one occasion and
smoothed consumption over the entire year.
      In practice, the household was consuming these products one after the other, so consumption
was only continuous at a higher level of aggregation. For this reason, we group individual products
at a Nielsen "product group" level when computing inventories.8
    8 This
         still leaves us with fairly disaggregated data as Nielsen covers 118 "product groups" spanning categories such
as "Crackers", "Dough Products", "Fresh Meat", "Fresh Produce", "Prepared Food Ready to Serve", "Soft Goods",
"Automotive Products", "Hardware and Tools", and "Toys and Sporting Goods". In general, if the assumed groups are
too small, inventory will be overstated.


                                                          6
    Next, we set initial inventory for each product group to the level that ensures that inventory for
that product group is never negative during our observed sample window. Then we sum over the
categories to get total inventory in both dollars and quantities.9 If households' true inventories in
each product group do not hit zero at some point during the year, our measure of inventories will
be lower than the true level of inventories.
    The validity of both the constant consumption assumption and the initial inventory assumption
depend on the level of aggregation. If the product categories are too narrowly defined, the constant
consumption assumption will be violated and inventory will be overstated. If the product cate-
gories are too broad the second assumption will be violated and inventory will be understated. Our
choice of product group code is motivated by our personal assessment of the validity of the assump-
tions. However, we show below that even with a more conservative aggregation choice household
inventories are still substantial.
    Next, we derive a formula for annual average inventory. While the dataset only includes obser-
vations for days on which the household shops, the formula properly takes into account the time
between trips.
                                                                                       1      T
    The average inventory held over the period from t = 0 to T is                      T     0 t
                                                                                                I dt,   where It is the level of
inventory at time t. Inventory at time t reflects the time zero level of inventory I0 , purchases made
on trips between time 0 and time t, and the rate of consumption, c, which we assume to be constant:

                                                                  nt
                                                   It = I0 +  St j - c · t.                                                  (1)
                                                                 j =1


t1 , t2 , ...tnt are the dates of the nt shopping trips occurring between time 0 and time t. St j is the value
of purchases made on the jth trip.10
                                              T                                              T2
    Next we compute the integral             0 t
                                                I dt   = I0 T + n
                                                                j =1 S t j ( T - t j ) - c
                                                                  T
                                                                                             2    and we divide by T to get
an expression for the average inventory:

                                             T                   nT     (T - tj )
                                     1                                               T
                                                 It dt = I0 +  St j               -c· .                                      (2)
                                     T   0                       j =1
                                                                           T         2

When applying the formula to the data, we compute average annual inventory, so with t measured
in years we have T = 1. Assuming annual spending is equal to annual consumption, annual average
inventory is:

                                                           N                                                N
                                                                                                        1
        Avg. Inventory = Initial Inventory +  Spending j · % of Year Left j -                                Spendingj .     (3)
                                                          j =1
                                                                                                        2   j =1


N is the number of trips over the year, Spending j is the value of products purchased on shopping
    9 We restrict attention to goods measured in "ounces." This is the most common unit of measurement in the NCP and

accounts for over half the UPCs. The other main unit of measurement is "count," which does not allow for quantities to
be compared reliably across different UPCs.
   10 In practice, some purchased goods deteriorate before they are consumed. Incorporating depreciation would mean,

firstly, that spending reflects not only goods consumed, but also depreciation, and secondly, that the decline in invento-
ries reflects both consumption and depreciation. Consequently, assuming that inventories decline in line with average
spending is probably no less appropriate in the presence of depreciation.

                                                                   7
                                     Figure 1 ­ Observed Consumer Goods Inventory


           .3




                                                                                .3
           .2




                                                                                .2
    Fraction




                                                                         Fraction
           .1




                                                                                .1
           0




                                                                                0
                0          1000           2000         3000   4000                    0       .1              .2           .3             .4   .5
                                  Avg. Inventory ($)                                               Inventory (Share of Annual Spending)

                    (a) Distribution of Inventory Levels                            (b) Distribution of Inventory-to-Spending Ratio
        Notes: We compute the average value of inventory for households in the NCP over 2013 and 2014. Panel (a)
        plots shows how the average inventory level varies across households. Panel (b) plots the distribution of
        inventory as a share of the household's annual spending on goods covered by Nielsen.




trip j (i.e. trip size), and "% of Year Left j " is the share of the calendar year remaining when trip j
occurs.
   With this approach (and over the product groups that the NCP data covers), the average amount
of inventory for a household in the data is $1,132. Figure 1 shows the distribution of our inventory
measure across households. This measure of inventory naturally excludes inventory holdings in
goods not covered by the NCP; most notably it excludes all large durable items like cars, furniture,
most clothing and electronics. On the household balance sheet, such items would be classified
as long-term physical assets ­ corresponding to "Property, Plant, and Equipment (PP&E)" on the
corporate balance sheet ­ and are therefore not included in our definition of household working
capital.
   The average level of inventory is sensitive to the level of aggregation we assume. For trans-
parency, we also report average inventory under alternative assumptions. The most conservative
approach is to aggregate over all products the household consumes before backing out the initial
inventory. This is likely to understate inventories, but still yields an average inventory value of $511.
Nielsen includes a number of levels of product classification. Aggregating to the broadest product
category, "department", gives average inventory of $726. Other possibilities include aggregating to
"product module" or UPC. This yields average inventories of $1,398 and $1,870 respectively. In our
opinion, these aggregation choices are likely to overstate inventories as the constant consumption
assumption is probably inappropriate.
   The result that households maintain a large stockpile of products on average is supported by
Appendix Figure A.3, which shows that when households move to a new Zip Code they start to
cut purchase quantities several months in advance. This is also accompanied by a drop in coupon
usage (Appendix Figure A.4). The results continue to hold when restricting attention to staple items
such as dried vegetables and grains, pasta and cereal.
   Overall, inventory (even with durables excluded) is an important asset for many households. To
show this, we compute household income quintiles using the SCF, and use income information in

                                                                     8
                                                      Figure 2 ­ Inventory Portfolio Share by Income




                                                                                        10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000
                 .8         .6
     Inventory Portfolio Share




                                                                                               Median Assets ($)
               .4.2




                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                             1       2            3            4            5
                                                                                                                                           Income Quintile
                 0




                                     1         2         3           4      5
                                                   Income Quintile                                                                    Inventory          Financial Assets


                                         (a) Inventory Portfolio Share                                                           (b) Portfolio Composition
            Notes: This figure is constructed by combining data from the NCP over 2013 and 2014 and the SCF over 2010,
            2013 and 2016. We compute household income quintiles using the SCF and use household income reported
            by the Nielsen panelists to assign them to a quintile. We then compute the average value of inventory for
            each household and take the median across households in each quintile q, Inventoryq . Finally, we compute
            the median level of financial assets held by the corresponding income quintile q in the SCF, Financial Assetsq ,
            and also the corresponding inventory portfolio share, Inventoryq /(Financial Assetsq + Inventoryq ).




the NCP to assign each Nielsen household to a quintile. We compute the average value of inven-
tory for each household and take the median across households in each quintile during 2013 and
2014. Using data from the 2010, 2013 and 2016 SCF, we compute median financial assets within
each income quintile. For each income quintile, we then compute the inventory portfolio share,
         Inventory
Financial Assets+Inventory .                       Figure 2 shows the inventory portfolio share by income. For households in
the bottom income quintile, inventories account for around 70% of assets. As income increases, in-
ventory holdings grow more slowly than financial assets and the inventory portfolio share declines.
    Table 1 shows that the inventory ratio is increasing in durability. It serves as a check on the
magnitudes for our calculations of inventory levels. We manually assign each Nielsen product
module a usable life in months, relying primarily on the FSIS data. Product life ranges from less
than a week up to five years or more.11 We consider products with a lifetime of less than three
months to be non-durable. We define semi-durable products as those with a lifetime of at least three
months and less than one year, and products with a lifetime longer than one year are considered
durable. In Column 1, we see that households hold about an extra 2.5 weeks of spending in semi-
durable products relative to non-durables, and an extra 4.5 weeks of spending in durable products
relative to non-durables. Columns 2 through 4 show the relationship is robust to controlling for the
number of shopping trips as well as household fixed effects.
    Figure 3 shows average inventory levels by store department and their relationship to durability.
The inventory ratio on the vertical axis is the ratio of inventory to annual household spending in
that department. An inventory ratio of 0.1 corresponds to around 1.2 months of spending held as
inventory, on average. Departments with high inventory are health and beauty, general merchan-
dise, dry grocery, non-food grocery and frozen food. The departments with the low inventory are
  11 Some                        products can be stored indefinitely (e.g. salt).


                                                                                    9
              Table 1 ­ Relationship between Durability and Inventory Ratio

                                                             (1)                (2)                        (3)                        (4)
 Semi-durable                                            4.8***               5.3***                   4.9***                      5.2***
                                                          (0.0)                (0.0)                    (0.0)                       (0.0)
 Durable                                                 8.3***               8.5***                   8.3***                      8.3***
                                                          (0.0)                (0.0)                    (0.0)                       (0.0)
 Potential Bulk Savings                                                                                8.9***                      8.7***
                                                                                                       (0.1)                       (0.1)
 Number of Trips (100s)                                                                               -3.7***
                                                                                                       (0.0)
 Household FE                                                                   X                                              X
 Number of Observations                                 1,781,712           1,781,712                1,652,696             1,652,696
Notes: This table combines data from the NCP over 2013 and 2014; the SCF over 2010, 2013 and 2016; and the
FSIS. We estimate the following regression specification, where i indexes households and c indexes product
durability categories (durable, semi-durable and non-durable):

             Inventory Ratioi,c =  1 Semidurablec +  2 Durablec +  3 Xi,c + Household FE +                                     i ,c         (4)

Inventory Ratio is the ratio of household inventory to annual spending; see Figure 1(b). Columns 1 and
3 show results without household fixed effects. The base durability category is "Nondurable". These are
products which have a life of less than three months. We define semidurable items as those with a life of more
than three months and less than one year. Coefficients are multiplied by 100. When computing inventory for
this table, we assume that consumption is continuous within product group × durability groups. Standard
errors are clustered by household. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.



                                          Figure 3 ­ Average Inventory by Department
                        .24




                                                                                                 Health and Beauty
                        .22




                                                                                                         General Merchandise
              Avg. Inventory Ratio




                                                                                         Non-food Grocery
                             .2




                                                                                   Frozen Food
                  .18




                                                                                       Dry Grocery
                                                               Dairy
                        .16




                                             Deli
                                                    Packaged Meat
                        .14




                                              Fresh Produce                                                  Alcohol

                                     -2                  0                   2                       4                         6
                                                                    Log Avg. Product Life

Notes: This figure shows average inventory as a share of annual spending by product type using the NCP
over 2013 and 2014. We compute the average inventory by household and department and then divide by
the household's average annual spending in that department. We drop observations where the household
purchased less than one item per quarter on average in that department. Average product life is computed
by assigning values to product modules based on the FSIS, and then aggregating to department weighting
by product module expenditures.




                                                                         10
deli, packaged meat, fresh produce and alcohol. The horizontal axis shows log average product
life. With the exception of alcohol, department inventory ratios are positively related to product
life, consistent with Table 1. The relationship between inventory and durability is also non-linear.
Conditional on products being storable, there is only a weak relationship between inventory ratios
and product life.
      In general, this section shows that inventory levels are non-trivial for many households. For a
large proportion of SCF households, this liquidity need for inventory management represents a large
proportion of SCF financial assets, and therefore it is plausible that a large part of non-participation
by poor households can be explained by this motive.

3.2     Coupon, Deal and Bulk Savings
Households can obtain financial returns from investing in household working capital, by stocking
up on goods that are on sale (i.e. "deals"), utilizing coupons, or by buying goods in bulk sizes at
lower unit prices. This channel can act as a substitute to the channel identified by previous work
that has focused on more frequent shopping trips to take advantage of lower prices (e.g. Aguiar and
Hurst (2007)). In this way, people with a relatively high opportunity cost of time can obtain savings
by allocating money to inventory instead of engaging in more frequent trips.

3.2.1    Coupon Savings
Coupon savings are relatively straightforward to measure in the NCP data as the total value of
coupons used during a given shopping trip is directly reported. Average reported coupon savings
are 6% of spending across households, though there exists substantial heterogeneity in coupon
usage. Figure 4(a) shows how coupon savings increase with the ratio of inventory to total spending.
That is, households that engage in more stocking up tend to utilize coupons more heavily than other
households do. Consistent with Aguiar and Hurst (2007), and in line with the model we present in
Section 5, use of coupons is also increasing the number of shopping trips as shown in Figure 4(b).
      Table 2 shows estimates from the following regression specification, where i indexes households
and Yi are the different forms of savings from inventory management:

           log(Yi ) =  1 log(Inventory Ratioi ) +  2 Xi + Income FE + Household Size FE + i .        (5)

Column 1 shows that increasing the inventory ratio by 10% is associated with a 12% increase in
coupon savings.

3.2.2    Deal Savings
We construct savings from deals and general price reductions (or "sales") by comparing the prices
that households pay with the price they would pay if they engaged in "untargeted shopping" (or
"inattentive shopping") in their area. In particular, for each UPC-ZIP3 combination, we compute the
average unit price for a year. This is an unweighted average from the retailer data, so it approximates
the average price paid if the household randomly shopped across weeks and stores in the same ZIP3
(i.e. not targeting particular week-store combinations with a lower price).
      Using the consumer panel data, we compute the total amount actually spent by the household

                                                  11
                                                Figure 4 ­ Coupon Savings (%)


     .07




                                                                      .07
     .06




                                                                      .06
     .05




                                                                      .05
     .04




                                                                      .04
     .03




                                                                      .03
     .02




                                                                      .02
           .15      .2           .25            .3     .35                  0             50                   100     150
                              Inventory Ratio                                              Number of Shopping Trips

                         (a) Inventory Ratio                                     (b) Number of Shopping Trips
      Notes: This figure is constructed using the NCP over 2013 and 2014. It shows bin scatter plots of the average
      coupon savings obtained for each decile of the average inventory ratio (Panel a, controlling for number of
      trips) and the average number of shopping trips per year (Panel b). For comparability with our measure of
      non-coupon deal savings and with the model, we compute coupon savings as a percentage of counterfactual
      household spending if the household had paid the average price reported for the same UPC and 3-digit zip
      code in the year the item was purchased.



                   Table 2 ­ Relationship between Inventory Ratio and Log % Savings

                                                        (1)                       (2)                           (3)
                                                      Coupon                     Deal                          Bulk
           Log(Inv. Ratio)                            120.3***                  52.2***                      -5.4***
                                                        (5.6)                    (3.4)                        (1.6)
           Log(Potential Bulk)                         -8.4***                  13.5***                     155.3***
                                                        (3.0)                    (2.8)                        (3.0)
           Log(# Trips)                                57.2***                  18.4***                      -4.6***
                                                        (2.5)                    (0.8)                        (0.8)
           Income Group FE                               X                         X                           X
           Household Size FE                             X                         X                           X
           Number of Observations                      97,533                   111,903                     118,491
      Notes: This table reports estimates of regression specification (5) using data from the NCP over 2013 and 2014.
      The inventory ratio is the ratio of household inventory to annual spending; see Figure 1(b). The dependent
      variables in each column are log coupon savings, log deal savings, log bulk savings, and log total savings
      respectively. Potential bulk savings are the savings which would be obtained if the household bought the
      largest pack size available for each product. Savings are measured in dollars. Coefficients are multiplied by
      100. Standard errors are clustered by household income group × household size. * p < .1, ** p < .05, ***
      p < .01.


(excluding any coupon savings) and subtract the total amount they would have spent if paying
the average per unit price. This number represents their dollar savings from sales. Average deal
savings are 11% of total observed household spending. This may seem low, but recall that savings
are computed by comparing the price paid with the average price rather than the "full retail" price.
Many goods are on sale relative to their full retail price and thus the average price a consumer
would pay, even when shopping randomly for that item, is correspondingly lower than the full
retail price.


                                                                 12
                                 Figure 5 ­ Deal Savings (%) and Deal Flag Share


    .1




                                                                   .1
    .09




                                                                   .09
    .08




                                                                   .08
    .07




                                                                   .07
          .15        .2          .25            .3      .35              0              50                   100     150
                              Inventory Ratio                                            Number of Shopping Trips

                 (a) Inventory Ratio (deal savings)                       (b) Number of Shopping Trips (deal savings)
    .22




                                                                   .27
    .21




                                                                   .24
                                                                   .21
    .2
    .19




                                                                   .18
    .18




                                                                   .15




          .15        .2          .25            .3      .35              0              50                   100     150
                              Inventory Ratio                                            Number of Shopping Trips

                (c) Inventory Ratio (deal flag share)                    (d) Number of Shopping Trips (deal flag share)
     Notes: This figure is constructed using the NCP over 2013 and 2014. The top row shows bin scatter plots
     of the average deal savings obtained for each decile of the average inventory ratio (Panel a, controlling for
     number of trips) and the average number of shopping trips per year (Panel b). The bottom row shows bin
     scatter plots of the average Nielsen deal flag share (excluding coupon events) for each decile of the average
     inventory ratio (Panel c, controlling for number of trips) and the average number of shopping trips per year
     (Panel d). We define deal savings as the % difference in price paid relative to the average price reported
     for the same UPC and 3-digit zip code in the year the item was purchased. We compute the average retail
     price using the Nielsen Retail Scanner Data. The Nielsen deal flag is equal to one for items the household
     considered to be on sale. While this includes coupons, to construct this chart we compute a measure of
     non-coupon deals, as we examine coupons separately in Section 3.2.1.




   In the top row of Figure 5, we show how deal savings increase with the ratio of inventory to
total spending and also in the number of shopping trips. Column 2 of Table 2 shows that increasing
the inventory ratio by 10% is associated with a 5.2% increase in deal savings.
   In addition, the NCP data feature a "deal flag" equal to one if the household considered a
purchased product to be a deal or on sale. The bottom row of Figure 5 uses the Nielsen deal flag,
instead, finding consistent results for the inventory ratio, and a broadly flat relationship between
self-reported deals and number of trips. While the deal flag includes coupon events, here we use a
measure of non-coupon deals only as we consider coupons separately.




                                                              13
3.2.3     Bulk Savings
Finally, bulk savings represent savings obtained by buying a particular product in a large size or in
a pack with multiple individual units at a lower per unit price. In general, each package size will
have a separate UPC associated with it. Thus, to properly compute bulk savings, we are required to
group UPCs associated with the same product. Unfortunately, this is not a straightforward exercise
in the NCP data.
    Our approach is to group products based on product module, brand, and common consumer
name. Essentially we are trying to group otherwise identical products which are available in differ-
ent sized packages.12 We then compute pack size quintiles for each product that exists in multiple
sizes. Looking across the quintiles of product size, we compute the average ZIP3 price associated
with the second quintile.13 Bulk savings are then calculated as the per unit price actually purchased
relative to the per unit price in the second quintile in the same ZIP3. On average, households save
about 13% through buying in bulk.
    There is considerable variation in potential bulk discounts across products. This means that
some consumers may find it easier to take advantage of bulk discounts than others depending on
the types of products and brands that they typically purchase. We construct a measure of potential
bulk savings that we use to control for access to bulk discounts.14 This is defined as the difference
between the average price in the highest quintile and the average price in the second quintile. For
products where these quintile values are not defined due to limited dispersion, the potential bulk
savings are set to zero.
    In general, we find that bulk savings at the household level are mainly driven by "potential bulk
savings" (i.e. whether a household consumes products where sizable bulk discounts are available,
as measured by the difference in average unit price between the top quintile pack size and the
second quintile pack size). For many products, substantial bulk discounts are not possible. This
phenomenon explains about 75% of the variation in bulk savings. Importantly, looking only at prod-
uct size or quantity without also examining product type can lead to overestimating the potential
bulk purchase savings. This is driven by the fact that cheaper products tend to come in larger pack
sizes, on average. For instance, caviar and imported cheeses are expensive and typically come only
in a small package size.
    Figure 6 shows how bulk savings relate to the inventory ratio. We find that, unlike coupon
and deal savings, bulk savings are basically unrelated to the inventory ratio. If anything, there is a
negative relationship, but this largely disappears after controlling for potential bulk savings due to
product choice. This suggests that households making bulk purchases do so because it is consistent
with their "normal" purchases of that product. That is, they have a sufficiently high consumption
  12 We    manually inspect and drop combinations where this approach is problematic because the group is likely to
contain products which are not identical. For example, we drop store brands because this group contains a large number
of products that are likely to be different from each other. We also drop video products and nail polish ­ these modules
contain a large number of products that are not easily substitutable because they are typically different colors or different
films.
   13 We exclude the lowest quintile for most purposes because this typically represents a different use case (e.g. travel

sizes of shampoo) rather than simply more units of a particular product.
   14 It is possible that a household's product choice may also be driven by this bulk savings potential. Because of this

possibility, we present results both with and without this control.


                                                             14
                                                   Figure 6 ­ Bulk Savings (%)


    .15




                                                                     .15
    .14




                                                                     .14
    .13




                                                                     .13
    .12




                                                                     .12
          .15     .2           .25            .3         .35               0          50                   100      150
                            Inventory Ratio                                            Number of Shopping Trips

                       (a) Inventory Ratio                                     (b) Number of Shopping Trips
    .15




                                                                     .15
    .14




                                                                     .14
    .13




                                                                     .13
    .12




                                                                     .12




          .15     .2           .25            .3         .35               0          50                   100      150
                            Inventory Ratio                                            Number of Shopping Trips

   (c) Inventory Ratio ("potential bulk savings" control)           (d) Number of Trips ("potential bulk savings" control)
     Notes: This figure is constructed using the NCP over 2013 and 2014. It shows bin scatter plots of the average
     savings from buying in bulk for each decile of the average inventory ratio (Panel a, controlling for number
     of trips) and the average number of shopping trips per year (Panel b). Savings from buying in bulk are
     computed by first grouping UPCs that are likely to correspond to the same product (for example, different
     pack sizes of Coca Cola). We then compute bulk savings as the difference in unit price between the quartile of
     pack size purchased and the second quartile of pack size for the same product. Panels c and d are conditional
     on "potential bulk savings." Potential bulk savings are the savings attainable if the household purchased the
     largest available pack size for each product. This is to control for the fact that holding their basket of goods
     or varieties fixed, some households have lower potential for bulk savings than others.




flow because of large family size or just consuming large amounts of that product relative to other
products. Their normal purchases may also be higher because they make infrequent trips, consistent
with Figure 6(d). Column 3 of Table 2 shows that increasing the inventory ratio by 10% is associated
with only a small 0.5% decrease in bulk savings.
   Overall, we find that households do not periodically purchase a pack size much larger than
what they ideally want in order to save money. This may be driven by the fact that a coupon and
deal-based strategy offers at least as much if not better savings and also better align with desired
quantities (e.g. depreciation can be an issue for many of these household goods if consumption is
not sufficiently high). That is, it makes sense for big families to buy in bulk because it is at least
somewhat cheaper and not costly in terms of depreciation, but for small households it may make
more sense to use coupons, or buy items when they happen to be on sale. The approximately flat


                                                               15
            Table 3 ­ Relationship between Log(Unit Price), Coupons, Deals, and Pack Size

                                                         (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
         Coupon                                      -36.4***          -46.5***        -36.4***         -46.6***
                                                       (0.9)             (1.3)           (0.9)            (1.3)
         Deal (Price < Local Avg.)                   -26.6***                          -26.7***
                                                       (0.9)                             (0.9)
         Nielsen Deal Flag (Non-Coupon)                                 -8.1***                          -8.2***
                                                                         (0.7)                            (0.7)
         1st Pack Size Quintile                                                         12.6***          12.5***
                                                                                         (2.0)            (2.0)
         3rd Pack Size Quintile                                                        -14.7***         -15.0***
                                                                                         (4.1)            (4.2)
         4th Pack Size Quintile                                                        -22.5***         -22.8***
                                                                                         (2.9)            (3.0)
         5th Pack Size Quintile                                                        -30.2***         -30.3***
                                                                                         (3.3)            (3.3)
         Pack Size > 2nd Quintile                    -25.0***          -25.2***
                                                       (2.9)             (3.0)
         Product-Household FE                           X                X                X               X
         Number of Observations                     44,809,003       44,809,003       44,809,003      44,809,003
        Notes: This table is constructed using the NCP over 2013 and 2014. It reports estimates from the following
        regression specification, where i indexes transactions at the UPC level:

                  log(Pi ) =  1 Couponi +  2 Deali +  3 Bulki + Month FE + Product × Household FE + i .            (6)

        Pi is the price paid by a household for a UPC on a particular trip. Couponi is an indicator equal to 1 if the
        purchase was made using a coupon and zero otherwise. Deali is an indicator equal to 1 if the transaction was
        classified as a deal and zero otherwise. Bulki is equal to 1 if the UPC purchased had a pack size greater than
        the second pack size quintile. Products are the product categories defined to measure bulk savings. Each
        product category contains multiple UPCs. Coefficients are multiplied by 100. Standard errors are clustered
        by product group code. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.


relationship between bulk savings and inventory is also consistent with our model results.

3.2.4     Product-level Analysis
In addition to analyzing the relationship between inventory and savings at the household level, we
also run regressions at the product level to study how price and quantity purchased are related to
whether the product was on sale or whether a large pack size was purchased.
   Table 3 shows that each channel reduces the unit price of purchased goods. All specifications
include product-by-household fixed effects. The average discount associated with a coupon event
is about 36%. For deal events, it is about 27% (and approximately 8% when using the self-reported
deal flag). For bulk savings, we use an indicator for purchases of products greater than the 2nd size
quintile in columns 1 and 2, and size quintile indicators in columns 3 and 4. Savings when buying
a larger pack size are about 25%.
   In Table 4, we look at how quantity purchased is related to the different discount events. Using
a coupon or getting a deal according to the Nielsen definition is associated with buying around
10-20% more on average. That is, households do indeed engage in "stocking up" when confronted
with a deal or with lower prices. Pack size is very strongly related to buying more at the prod-
                                                               16
         Table 4 ­ Relationship between Log(Quantity), Coupons, Deals, and Pack Size

                                                      (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
      Coupon                                       12.0***          18.7***          12.1***          19.1***
                                                    (0.7)            (1.1)            (0.8)            (1.1)
      Deal (Price < Local Avg.)                    3.3***                            3.5***
                                                    (0.5)                             (0.6)
      Nielsen Deal Flag (Non-Coupon)                                15.2***                          15.7***
                                                                     (1.9)                             (1.9)
      1st Pack Size Quintile                                                        -24.1***         -24.2***
                                                                                       (4.7)           (4.6)
      3rd Pack Size Quintile                                                         29.8***         29.7***
                                                                                       (5.4)           (5.3)
      4th Pack Size Quintile                                                        58.6***          58.5***
                                                                                      (10.1)           (9.8)
      5th Pack Size Quintile                                                        87.2***          87.7***
                                                                                       (9.8)           (9.7)
      Pack Size > 2nd Quintile                     57.0***          57.0***
                                                    (5.9)            (5.7)
      Product-Household FE                           X                X                X               X
      Number of Observations                     45,385,243       45,385,243       45,385,243      45,385,243
     Notes: This table is constructed using the NCP over 2013 and 2014. It reports estimates from the following
     regression specification, where i indexes transactions at the UPC level:

               log(Qi ) =  1 Couponi +  2 Deali +  3 Bulki + Month FE + Product × Household FE + i .            (7)

     Qi is the quantity of a UPC (in OZ) purchased by a household on a particular trip. See Table 3 for more
     details. Coefficients are multiplied by 100. Standard errors are clustered by product group code. * p < .1, **
     p < .05, *** p < .01.


uct level, almost by definition, though bulk savings are not positively related to total household
inventory holdings, perhaps because these households tend to have higher consumption of such
bulk-purchased products. Buying a pack size larger than the second quintile is associated with a
57% increase in quantity purchased.

4   Gross Savings from Inventory Management
By setting aside working capital, the household can reduce the average price it pays for consumer
products. In order to understand the implications for other investment or borrowing behavior, we
want to know the marginal financial return to allocating additional funds to working capital. We
compute marginal returns using a calibrated model which we describe in Section 5. However, it
is also possible to learn something about the potential returns to working capital directly from the
data. In this section, we measure the relationship between average inventory and in-store savings.
We refer to this as a gross return as it does not incorporate trip fixed costs or depreciation costs.
The gross return is higher than the net return we compute using the model. We also uses changes
in observed inventory in the place of working capital, because we do not observe cash directly in




                                                            17
the NCP, which is part of household working capital.15
      In the previous section, we described how each of the different types of savings is computed and
we illustrated the relationship between the inventory ratio and the percentage savings of each type.
Now we show how the total savings households obtain on their purchases are related to the amount
of inventory they hold. We can observe these amounts directly in the data using the aforementioned
definitions, but the amount of inventory that a household holds varies for a range of reasons.
      One of these is related to potentially endogenous trip frequency, where increasing inventory can
decrease the number of shopping trips and thus the incurred trip fixed costs. For this reason, we
hold the number of shopping trips constant in our calculations (e.g. a household might have large
inventories of specific items based on what was on sale, but there are still other items they need to
shop for). In general, the benefit of reducing fixed costs is only relevant at relatively low levels of
inventory and, at the margin, what matters is how much the additional inventory can reduce the
price per unit.16
      Figure 7 illustrates the relationship after controlling for the number of shopping trips. In-store
savings increase with inventory. On average an increase in the inventory ratio of 1 percentage point
is associated with an increase in the savings ratio of 0.34 percentage points. This suggests a gross
return of around 34 per cent over the range of inventory values we observe in the data. Appendix
Figure A.5 shows that similar results are obtained when using Nielsen departments to compute
average household inventories rather than product groups. For our final calculations of financial
returns to household working capital investment, we will use the calibrated model in Section 5.

5      A Model of Optimal Household Inventory Management
Next, we use the NCP to calibrate a model of optimal household inventory management. We then
use the model to compute the (net) marginal returns to household working capital investment,
taking into account holding costs due to depreciation and trip fixed costs, which are not directly
observed in the data.
      The model incorporates two types of savings: buying in larger quantities ("bulk") and buying
items on sale ("deals"). This essentially drives two key relationships between unit prices and shop-
ping trip frequency. Buying in bulk relates directly to the size of the trip (i.e. the amount spent per
trip) and buying items on sale relates directly to the frequency of the trip (i.e. more frequent trips
yield on average more items on sale for a given trip size). Although the NCP distinguishes between
deals and coupons, in the model we include both as "sale events" in the second category of savings.
      We are interested in how allocating a marginal dollar to household working capital facilitates
savings through each channel. The model is quite similar to Arrow, Harris and Marschak (1951) and
the steady state version of the model in Baker, Johnson and Kueng (forthcoming). The primary dif-
ference here is that households can benefit from buying in bulk and taking advantage of discounts,
    15 Aswe show in the model in Section 5, changes in household working capital are closely related to changes in average
inventory. Conditional on holding a modest amount of household working capital, the model predicts that cash holdings
display little relationship to the total amount allocated to household working capital. Instead, the additional household
working capital is reflected in higher inventory holdings.
  16 In the context of the model presented in Section 5, it is possible for us to compute returns incorporating the trip fixed

cost explicitly.


                                                             18
                                                               Figure 7 ­ In-store Savings and Inventory




                                     34
                      Annual Savings (% of Spending)
                         28         30
                                     26        32




                                                       15                 20              25               30       35
                                                                            Annual Avg. Inventory (% of Spending)
                                                       Slope Estimate = 0.3368


       Notes: This figure uses the NCP over 2013 and 2014 to illustrate the relationship between in-store savings
       and average inventory as a percentage of spending. Each point on the charts represent deciles of households,
       controlling for the number of shopping trips a household makes each year. The savings measure reflects
       in-store savings only and does not incorporate holding costs or trip fixed costs. The red dotted line shows
                               Annual Savings       Annual Avg. Inventory
       predicted values from Annual Spending =  +  Annual Spending        + Tripsi + i .
                                                                          i                          i




whereas the model in Baker et al. (forthcoming) captures intertemporal substitution behavior in
response to an anticipated price change induced by an anticipated consumption tax change.
      Because buying large quantities reduces trip frequency and the ability to take advantage of sales,
there is a trade-off between the two types of shopping policies to reduce the average unit price. In
general, depending on various parameters (amount of household working capital, depreciation
rate, shopping trip fixed cost, frequency and magnitude of sales, etc.), households may prefer one
shopping policy over the other.

5.1     The Household's Problem
The household's problem is to minimize the cost of providing a monthly consumption flow of
C, subject to an inventory constraint. For simplicity, we assume that the flow of consumption is
constant both between trips and across trips.17 The cost per trip can be decomposed into two com-
ponents ­ a fixed cost (e.g. the opportunity cost of time spent shopping) and a variable component
which depends on the quantity of products purchased. The effective price per unit depends on
the quantity purchased (bulk savings) and also on the household's choice of bargain-hunting policy
(deal savings).
      In the model, households consume goods with varying degrees of storability. Allowing for
varying storability is important for matching the data and is consistent with what we observe in the
NCP. Perishable goods are important for generating a realistic trip frequency, while storable goods
 17 This   assumption can be relaxed. For the CES case, see Baker et al. (forthcoming).

                                                                                          19
allow us to simultaneously match the value of inventories. Appendix Figure A.6 shows that the
majority of spending in the NCP is on products with a lifetime of either less than one month (23%)
or more than one year (around 55%). Of the goods lasting more than a year, some can be stored for
many years (e.g. some tinned products and cleaning products).
    The household's problem is to choose the time between trips  (measured in months) and
bargain-hunting policies ml  N0 for each good indexed by its level of perishability, l . The policy
variable ml is the maximum number of trips in advance that a household is willing to purchase and
store an item with perishability level l . All goods are purchased according to the same trip schedule
determined by , but households are allowed to choose a distinct value of ml for each type of good.
This is described in more detail in Section 5.5.18
    The household minimizes the average monthly cost of providing the exogenous consumption
flow C:

                                         ¯;  ) = min k + l Pl (, ml )Sl ()
                                       V(I                                                                                (8)
                                                 ,{ m l }      

subject to:


                                                    l Il (, ml )  I¯.                                                     (9)

k is the shopping trip fixed cost. Pl (, ml ) is the effective price per unit, taking into account bulk
discounts, sales, and holding costs associated with setting ml > 0 (i.e. stocking up in advance).
Sl () is the quantity required immediately following a trip to satisfy consumption flow C until
the next trip occurs.19 Section 5.3 describes how the trip interval  and the trip size Sl are linked
given the requirement that inventory levels neither grow without bound, nor hit zero prior to the
next shopping trip. With this restriction, the household cannot choose  and Sl independently.
Consequently, when the household chooses a trip interval, this directly implies a trip size.
    The vector  = ({l , sl }, x, p f , pd , , , , k, C ) collects the parameters of the model. l are the
monthly rates of depreciation for goods in each storability group l . The effective unit price paid
by the household depends on x, the probability that a particular product is on sale, as well as the
full price (or "list price") p f and the discounted price pd . For simplicity, we assume that the sale
probability is the same every trip regardless of trip length . This assumption is reasonable for the
typical trip intervals we observe in the Nielsen data (see the discussion below). It also depends on
the relationship between quantity purchased Sl and price per unit because of bulk discounts. The
parameters which describe this bulk discount relationship are ,  and . Total consumption is
C = l Cl , where Cl = sl C with good shares sl such that l sl = 1.
   The effective price function Pl (, ml ) reflects bulk discounts and the net effect of bargain hunting
   18 We do not allow households to set different values of  for different goods. Although setting different values of 

allows households to reduce depreciation costs, this is more than offset by the increase in trip fixed costs associated with
maintaining multiple trip schedules, and so households prefer to buy all goods on the same trip. For a more detailed
explanation of this tradeoff, see Bartmann and Beckmann (1992).
   19 When calibrating the model in Section 5.8, we normalize prices such that the effective unit price equals one on average

for untargeted or inattentive shopping (ml = 0) and when purchasing the "standard" pack size of each product (Sl = S        ^l
and thus  =     ^ ), i.e. P(^ , 0) = 1, which is therefore the price of one physical unit of Sl .



                                                             20
(i.e. incorporating additional holding costs occurred due to stockpiling) and is characterized in
Section 5.5.
      At a given point in time, a portion of household working capital will be held as cash and the
rest will be held as stored inventory goods. The inventory constraint means that the value of stored
goods cannot, at any point in the shopping cycle, exceed the amount of assets set aside for managing
inventory. The maximum inventory holdings occur immediately following a trip and at this point
in time 100% of household working capital is held as stored inventory goods.20
      Il is the level of inventory of each good with perishability l immediately following a trip (i.e. the
value of inventory remaining prior to the trip, plus the value purchased Pl Sl ) and hence l Il is
equal to household working capital at this point since cash holding is zero. The level of inventory
remaining immediately prior to a trip depends on x, the probability that a given product is on sale,
and l , the depreciation rate. This is because x and l determine the household's optimal strategy
for stocking up on goods when they are on sale. The more a household engages in this savings
strategy, the higher the level of inventory will be when going to the store.
      Ultimately, we are interested in the relationship between the dollar amount invested in house-
hold working capital and the dollar value of savings. In order for a particular shopping strategy
to be feasible, the level of inventory immediately following a trip must not exceed the amount of
household working capital I   ¯. We will solve the problem at different levels of I
                                                                                  ¯, and use this to com-
                                                                             ¯). The investment payoff
pute the return to "investing" in household working capital (i.e. increasing I
will be the reduction in the cost of providing the household's exogenous consumption stream.
      While the problem does have a stochastic foundation, it is effectively deterministic. This is
because we assume that, aggregating across many products, the share of products on sale each trip,
x, is constant and equal for all good types l . This is fairly consistent with the NCP and NRP data,
where we see regularly rotating sets of goods on sale over time; see Appendix Figures A.1 and A.2.

5.2     Implications for Portfolio Choice
In the model, working capital and consumption are exogenous. The model should be considered
as one component of a higher-level problem in which the household chooses consumption and
allocates assets to several investments, including working capital. Our model focuses on the choice
of shopping strategy to minimize the cost of supplying a given consumption flow. Knowing how
our model fits into this higher-level problem is important for understanding the implications for
stock market participation. Therefore, before solving the shopping problem we demonstrate how
our model fits into a static portfolio choice problem.
      We consider the effect of working capital on the cost of supplying consumption to be analogous
to interest earned on an investment. For simplicity of exposition, we assume the portfolio choice
problem can be solved independently of the consumption problem.21 Assume the household has
  20 In this model, we abstract from other motives to hold cash, such as precautionary motives in response to income

uncertainty or speculative motives to take advantage of time variation in investment opportunities (i.e. time-varying
sales).
  21 The marginal return to working capital is independent of consumption assuming that both k and S        ^l are scaled
proportionally. This assumption is likely to be reasonable in cases where the opportunity cost of time is increasing in
consumption, and where increases in consumption are reflected in purchases of higher quality products rather than
purchasing larger quantities of the same products. In general, the marginal return to working capital does depend on the


                                                           21
                                                           ¯; a risk-free bond, f ; and a risky asset
access to three investment opportunities: working capital, I
m, which could be thought of as the market portfolio. The household maximizes expected utility of
end-of-period wealth (or consumption) by solving the following problem:

                           max =            U   1 +  I¯r I¯ ( I¯ w) +  f r f + m rm w dF (rm )                     (10)
                           I¯ , f ,m   rm


subject to:

                                                   I¯ +  f + m = 1.                                                (11)

 I¯ is the share of initial wealth w allocated to working capital,  f is the share allocated to the risk-
free bond with return r f , and m is the share allocated to the risky asset.22 F (rm ) is the probability
distribution of returns for the risky asset, with E[rm ] > r f .
      r I¯ ( I¯ w) is the working capital return function we solve for using our model. While the risk-free
bond and risky asset returns do not depend on the amount invested, we show that for working
capital the return depends on both the investment amount and the level of consumption. Note that
                                     ¯ in the shopping model:
 I¯ w in this problem corresponds to I

                                                        ¯ =  I¯ w.
                                                        I                                                          (12)

We treat the working capital investment as a risk-free asset. This is consistent with our assumption
that after aggregating over a large number of products with independently distributed sales over a
sufficiently long time period, the return is effectively deterministic.
      Assuming consumers are risk averse, they choose  I¯ = 1 as long as r I¯ (w)  E[rm ] because
working capital has a higher expected return and lower risk over this range than the risky asset,
and because investing in inventory also dominates the risk-free asset since E[rm ] > r f . In Section 6,
we show that our calibrated model delivers sufficiently high marginal returns that this is the case
for sufficiently low levels of wealth. At higher levels of wealth the optimal allocation depends on
the utility function, but as long as r I¯ (w) > r f consumers will split assets between working capital
and the risky investment, as the risk-free bond is strictly dominated. As wealth becomes large,
consumers will allocate all additional wealth to financial assets and the household working capital
constraint (9) no longer binds. Consequently,  I¯ gradually declines as wealth increases.

5.3     Quantity per Trip, Sl ()
Trip size or Sl () is the amount of good type l which a household needs during a period of length
 to support the constant consumption flow Cl , taking into account depreciation during that time
level of consumption, and the portfolio choice problem and the intertemporal consumption problem would need to be
considered jointly.
  22 The average inventory portfolio share in Figure 2 is closely related to  .  additionally includes a cash component,
                                                                             ¯
                                                                             I  ¯
                                                                                I
but inventory accounts for the majority of working capital in our model for realistic parameter values.




                                                           22
interval [0, ]:

                                                                         Cl l 
                                       Sl (  ) =          el t Cl dt =     ( e - 1).                                 (13)
                                                   0                     l

If the trip size does not satisfy this condition, either inventory will grow without bound or the
household will run out of a product before the next shopping trip. When discussing the bargain
hunting policy below we consider the possibility that the household might want to buy an amount
greater than S() if an item is on sale. We assume that the household chooses a multiple of S()
and for convenience refer to these as packs (i.e. purchasing n packs means purchasing an amount
nS()).

5.4     The Bargain Hunting Policy, ml
The bargain-hunting policy ml is the maximum number of trips in advance that a household is
willing to purchase and store an item with storability level l . Here we describe the household's
strategy for taking advantage of random sales.
      Every trip the household must choose how much of each product to buy. Because the household
faces holding costs, it does not make sense to stock up on full-priced products. However, when the
household observes a product on sale, it may make sense to buy more than is required for current
consumption. For example, suppose the household sees that a product is on sale, but they still have
one pack left in stock (i.e. just enough inventory to provide consumption during a period of length
, the trip interval). This means that if they now buy additional inventory, they will need to store
the product for additional time  before starting to consume it.
      The effective price is thus el  pd (the price paid in store is pd , but the household incurs additional
holding costs which lead to the price paid being multiplied by el   1).23 If the household decides
not to buy the product now, the effective price is the expected price, E[ p] = xpd + (1 - x ) p f .24
      Next, we consider what the household will do when they have two or more packs left in stock
and observe that the item is on sale in store. The problem of whether to buy a jth pack n trips
before running out is the same as the problem of whether to buy a j - 1th pack n + 1 trips before
running out because they both have the same effective price e(n+ j-1)l  pd .
      Consequently, the household's bargain-hunting strategy can be characterized by identifying the
earliest date at which they will buy a product on sale. With bargain-hunting policy ml , the house-
hold will buy one pack ml trips before running out, two packs ml - 1 trips before, three packs ml - 2
trips before, and so on. The optimal shopping strategy for deal savings is therefore completely sum-
marized by ml .
      Note that setting ml > 0 does not lead to stochastic fluctuations in trip size or effective price
when aggregating across a large number of products. However, it does lead to an increase in
  23 We assume that working capital is held in a zero interest checking account when it is not held as physical inventory,
and therefore depreciation is the only holding cost. In practice, there may be other costs, including foregone interest.
Relaxing this assumption has little effect on the optimal trip interval as perishable good depreciation costs are an order
of magnitude larger than the risk-free return.
  24 Note that some of the purchased product would also depreciate even further before it is consumed, but that additional

depreciation cost applies in both cases and cancels out. Depreciation costs over the period when the pack is being
consumed are captured in S.


                                                               23
holding costs for a given trip interval , because products will be bought in advance of when they
are actually required for consumption. Increases in ml will also increase inventory I , holding 
fixed.25

5.5     The Effective Price Function, Pl (, ml )
We now work out how the effective price per unit of good type l is related to the interval between
household shopping trips, , and the bargain-hunting policy ml . First, we explain how ml affects
the expected price paid in store. Intuitively, setting a high value of ml raises the share of goods the
household purchases on sale, and for large values of ml the average price paid in store approaches
the discount price pd . We formalize this below.

5.5.1    Expected price paid in store given bargain-hunting policy ml
We now work out the probability that an item is purchased on sale given that the earliest date
the household will consider buying it is ml trips before running out. Assume that the household
is fully stocked with respect to a particular product (i.e. has ml packs currently in stock). We are
interested in the probability that the next sale appears at trip t = 0, 1, ..., ml respectively. Given that
the probability of a sale is x, and sales are iid, the probability of observing t no-sale trips followed
by a sale trip is x (1 - x )t . The probability that no sale occurs before the product runs out entirely is
(1 - x )ml +1 . The probability that the item is purchased on sale, given bargain-hunting policy ml , is
therefore m                 t
              t=0 x (1 - x ) . Note that this covers all possibilities since (1 - x )
                l                                                                     ml +1 + ml x (1 - x )t = 1.
                                                                                              t =0
    The expected price paid in store given the bargain-hunting policy ml is therefore:

                                                                              ml
                                    E [ p | m l ] = p f (1 - x ) m l +1 + p d x  (1 - x ) t .                           (14)
                                                                             t =0


Note that the expected price with untargeted or inattentive shopping, ml = 0, is E[ p|0] = xpd +
(1 - x ) p f = E[ p]. As the value of ml increases, the probability that the item is purchased on sale
approaches 1 and the expected price paid approaches pd . Hence, ignoring shopping trip fixed
costs, households in the model would optimally shop continuously and buy everything on sale.
In practice, prices are clearly not independently distributed when shopping occurs at a very high
frequency. Upon revisiting the store an hour later, prices are likely to be unchanged. However, at
shopping frequencies observed among households in the Nielsen data (that do take into account
shopping trip fixed costs; see Baker et al. (forthcoming)), and in our calibrated model, independence
is a reasonable assumption.

5.5.2    Adding holding costs and bulk discounts
We factor the unit price Pl into two parts, the bulk discount as a function of the trip size, b(Sl ), and
the shopping discount function arising from shopping strategy ml . We begin with the latter.
      Households incur holding costs if they stockpile items to take advantage of temporarily low
prices. We model these holding costs as exponential product depreciation at rate l . To properly
   25 If we allowed for additional complexity in the model, increases in m should increase the potential for bulk discounts
                                                                          l
at a given pack size because the pack size is spread over fewer products on any given trip. We abstract from this possibility
for simplicity.

                                                              24
account for these costs, we first work out how they differ across the states of the world enumerated
above. Intuitively, inventories, and therefore holding costs, are lower when a sale is not observed
for several trips in a row.
       Goods which are purchased i trips in advance of when they are used incur additional holding
costs of eil  relative to goods which are purchased on the trip immediately prior to consumption.
When multiple packs are purchased on a given trip, each pack is stored for a different length of
time before the household begins to consume it. For example, suppose the household has run out
of a particular product at home and observes it on sale when they go to the store. They will buy
ml + 1 packs of the product (recall ml = 0 corresponds to buying one pack of all products each trip).
They will begin to consume one pack immediately, the second pack after time , and the ml + 1st
pack after time ml . The total holding cost factor associated with this trip is therefore im l  i l  .
                                                                                           =0 e
                                                               ml i l 
   Averaging over the ml + 1 packs purchased gives ml1     +1  i =0 e   per pack. In general, if the
previous sale before this trip was t + 1 periods ago, the holding cost factor associated with the trip
is    it=0 e(ml -i)l  . We compute the average effective price per unit using the probabilities from
        1
      t +1
Section 5.5.1:
                                                                        ml                   t
                                                                                        1
                       Pl (, ml ) = b(Sl ) · p f (1 - x )ml +1 + pd x  (1 - x )t
                                                                                      t + 1 i
                                                                                                e(ml -i)l    (15)
                                                                       t =0                  =0

For simplicity, we assume that the bulk discount function b(Sl ) is applied directly the pack size
Sl (). Households can increase Sl , and take advantage of bulk discounts, by shopping less fre-
quently (see Section 5.3). Bulk discounts therefore tend to raise the trip interval .
       We specify the bulk price discount function b to match bulk discounts observed in NRP data
using the following functional form, implying that unit prices decline as the quantity purchased per
trip Sl increases:26

                                                                          Sl
                                                                       - S
                                                                         ^
                                                    b ( Sl ) =  +  e          l   .                          (16)

S^l is the trip size associated with purchasing standard packs of each item in the NRP and we will
calibrate (, , ) such that b(S   ^l ) = 1.
       The function matches the data well in several respects: unit prices decay exponentially with
pack size and converge to some level above zero. As pack sizes become very small, unit prices
increase but do not become arbitrarily large. We normalize the price in the model to equal 1 when
purchasing the standard pack size (Sl = S ^l ) and in the absence of targeted deal shopping (ml = 0).
This means that  is interpreted as one minus the maximum % savings which can be obtained from
buying in bulk.
           ^l , we solve the model without bulk discounts (i.e. with b = 1) and compute the optimal
    To set S
trip interval   ^ . We then set S
                                ^l = S(^ ). Because we calibrate the price distribution so that E[ p] =
p f x + pd (1 - x ) = 1, the expected price per unit of Sl in the model is normalized to 1 for households
purchasing the standard pack size and using an untargeted shopping strategy, i.e. Pl (      ^ , 0) = 1. The
calibration is described in detail in Section 5.8.
     26 We   compute the average unit price for each UPC over 2013 and 2014.


                                                              25
5.6     The Household Working Capital Constraint
We need to work out how much inventory is left over at trip time in order to test whether the
household working capital constraint is satisfied, l Il (, ml )  I
                                                                 ¯. We value inventory at its total
effective price. Only goods for which there was a sale in the previous ml trips are still in stock
immediately prior to a trip. The amount left in stock depends on how long ago the most recent sale
was. If the most recent sale occurred on the previous trip, there will still be ml packs left in stock.
The total effective price of these loads is pd im l  i l  . In general, if the last sale occurred t + 1 trips
                                                =1 e
                                                                              l - t (i + t ) l 
ago, the value of inventory in stock prior to the current trip is Sl () pd im
                                                                            =1 e                .
      The share of goods for which the most recent sale occurred t + 1 trips ago is x (1 - x )t , i.e. the
probability of a sale event followed by t non-sale events. Immediately following each trip, the value
of inventory of good type l is therefore:

                                                                      m l -1                  ml -t
                    I (, ml ) = Pl (, ml )Sl () + 1{ml >0} Sl () pd            x (1 - x ) t           e(i+t)l  .   (17)
                                                                      t =0                    i =1

That is, the expenditure on the trip, Pl Sl , plus the value of inventory accumulated on previous trips
to be consumed after the current trip. If ml = 0, inventory is just the current trip value. In this
case, inventory hits zero immediately prior to the next trip, and average inventory is Pl Sl /2. The
                    l -1
probability mass m              t                        ml
                  t=0 x (1 - x ) is equal to 1 - (1 - x ) , where (1 - x )
                                                                           ml is the share of goods for

which no inventory remains at trip time.

5.7     Solution Method
We start by defining a grid over trip intervals  and bargain-hunting strategies {ml }. We then search
over all combinations for which the household working capital constraint is satisfied and find the
combination that minimizes the cost function.

   1. Define a grid over trip intervals  and bargain-hunting strategies {ml }, where ml  N0 .

   2. For each possible combination of (, {ml }), compute Sl (), Il (, ml ), and the value of the cost
                    k+l Pl (,ml )Sl ()
        function,                      .

   3. Find the values of (, {ml }) which minimize the cost function subject to the household work-
        ing capital constraint.

5.8     Calibration
We calibrate the model by choosing  to match a number of data moments summarized in Table 5.
We set the fixed cost per shopping trip to k = $4.85 as in Baker et al. (forthcoming). As discussed
there, this is consistent with a hourly before-tax reservation wage of $7.12 to $10.69.
      To calibrate p f and pd , we estimate the average price drop associated with a discount event in the
                                                                                pf
NCP.27 Given an estimated log price difference of 0.293, we set                 pd   = e0.293 = 1.34. We pin down p f
  27 We  define a discount indicator Du which is equal to 1 when a product is purchased either with a coupon, or at
a price which is lower than than the annual UPC-ZIP3 average price. We estimate the average log discount using
log Priceu =  1 Du +  2 Bulk u + Month FE + Product × Household FE + u , where u indexes transactions at the UPC
level.

                                                        26
                                         Table 5 ­ Model Calibration

 Name                             Parameter Calibrated            Source/target
                                            value
 Trip fixed cost                  k              $4.85            Baker et al. (forthcoming).
 Deal probability                 x              0.24             x is calibrated to match NCP deal share.
 Full list price                  pf             1.064            p f and pd are jointly calibrated to match
 Deal price                       pd             0.794            average discount size in the NCP and
                                                                  E[ p] = xpd + (1 - x ) p f = 1.
 1 - max bulk savings %                          0.85             ,  and  are jointly calibrated to match
 Bulk savings parameter                          0.89             the relationship between pack size and
 Bulk savings parameter                          1.80             unit price in the NCP.
 Monthly consumption              C              464.83           C and 0 are jointly calibrated to match
 Storable depreciation            0              0.0026           average annual spending and inventory in
                                                                  the NCP.
 Perishable depreciation          1              2.88             Sets expected expiry to average expiration
                                                                  date for products lasting < 1 month (0.347
                                                                  months)
 Storable good share              s0             0.769            NCP expenditure share of goods with ex-
                                                                  piration date  1 month


and pd by normalizing the expected price achieved using an untargeted shopping strategy without
bulk discount E[ p] = xpd + (1 - x ) p f = 1.
     To calibrate the bulk discount function b(Sl ), we first choose the value S^l which corresponds
to the standard pack size for which there is no bulk price discount, i.e. b(S  ^l ) = 1. We set S
                                                                                                ^l =
Sl ( 
                  ^
     ^ ) = Cl (el  - 1), where ^ is the optimal trip interval in the model without bulk discounts.28
           l
Because we also set E[ p] = 1, this means that the expected effective price per unit of Sl in the model
is normalized to 1 for households purchasing the standard pack size and using an untargeted
shopping strategy, i.e. P(^ , 0) = E[ p] = 1.
    We calibrate the parameters of the function b(Sl ) by estimating relationship (16) with weighted
least squares as follows. First, we prepare the Nielsen data by creating a new product ID as de-
scribed in Section 3.2.3.29 Because each pack size has a unique UPC, we need to create a broader
product definition to examine the relationship between unit price and pack size holding the prod-
uct fixed. We also want to express both prices and pack size relative to the standard pack size for
                  ^l . To do this, we compute the average number of units in the second quartile of
that product, Sl /S
package sizes for each product, as well as the average price per unit.30 We then divide by these
second quartile averages.
  28 The definition of a "standard" pack size is clearly somewhat arbitrary. Our assumption is that the second quartile

of package sizes in the data correspond to the amount households in the model would want to buy if they were not
influenced by the presence of bulk discounts. This assumption yields bulk savings which are similar to what we observe
in the data.
  29 As explained in Section 3.2.3, we restrict attention to products measured in ounces, which is also the most common

unit of measurement. The number of ounces associated with a given UPC is computed as multi × size1_amount.
  30 We compute the average per unit price as the expenditure weighted annual average price for that UPC in the NRP.




                                                          27
     In the model, we assume that households purchase the same multiple of the standard pack size
across all the products with the same perishability. When households in the model take advantage
of bulk discounts by increasing trip size, this necessarily coincides with reduced trip frequency
(holding consumption fixed).31
     In the data, a large proportion of spending is accounted for by products which have only limited
bulk savings potential (for example, it may not be possible to purchase a pack size more than 1.5
times the standard pack size, leading to households paying the same unit price even though the
amount purchased has increased). This means potential bulk savings would be overstated if we
were to estimate the relationship between pack size and price without further adjustments, as the
relationship at higher pack sizes would be based only on products for which extreme pack sizes are
available.
     We therefore aggregate the data to pack size group × product, and then make sure the dataset
is balanced (i.e. every product has a non-missing price for each pack size group). For products
where large pack sizes are not available, we assume the household obtains the unit price associated
with the largest available pack size. We compute total expenditure for each product and use this to
weight our regressions. We estimate the following relationship for different values of ,

                                                 Price = a0 + a1 e-Units ,                                           (18)

and choose  to maximize the within R-squared. This yields ^ = 1.80. The estimates of a0 and
                                   ^ 0 = 0.84 and a
a1 from the same specification are a              ^ 1 = 0.88 respectively. The results are shown in
Appendix Table B.1. For the model, we normalize the price of the standard pack size to one, and
the price of other pack sizes reflect percentage deviations from the standard pack size. We therefore
                                      ^0
                                      a                      ^1
                                                             a
calibrate  and  using  =          ^0 +a
                                  a   ^ 1 e-^   and  =   ^0 +a
                                                         a   ^ 1 e-^ .   Figure 8 compares the bulk discount function
we use in the model with the corresponding relationship in the data.
     We calibrate C and 0 jointly to match the average monthly spending and inventory in the NCP.
The average monthly spending on goods covered by Nielsen is $393, the average level of household
inventory is $1,133. Because it is not in general possible to match both quantities exactly, we use
values of the parameters that minimize the sum of squared percentage deviations between the
model and the data. The corresponding model values are monthly spending of $397 and average
inventory of $1,123.
     As discussed above, the quantity units in the model are normalized so that the price per unit
in the absence of any deals or bulk discounts is $1. The calibrated value of C is 465 units. The
calibrated value of x is 24%. This means the discount price is observed about once every 4 trips. To
calibrate x, we use the deal flag from the NCP, which is equal to one for purchases where a coupon
was used, or where the household considered the item to be on sale. We estimate the following
relationship using the NCP:

                  Deal & Coupon Shareh,t =  +  1 Inventory Ratioh,t +  2 Tripsh,t +                 h,t              (19)
  31 Ifhouseholds did not scale their purchases of all products in the same way, this raises the possibility that they run
out of some items before the next trip. For simplicity, we choose to abstract from this.



                                                              28
                                                               Figure 8 ­ Bulk Calibration




                                       1.1
                     Price (Relative to Second Quintile)
                        .9      .95    .85 1     1.05




                                                           1        2                 3                 4    5
                                                               Units in Pack (Relative to Second Quintile)

                                                                             Data              Model


       Notes: The solid line shows the average per unit price relative to the second pack size quintile (for the same
       product), weighted by spending, using the NCP over 2013 and 2014. The dashed line shows the relative price
       we assume in the model: Price =  + e-    ^ Units , where  = 0.85,  = 0.89, and  = 1.80.




We then set x equal to the predicted deal and coupon share for a household with an inventory ratio
                  1
equal to 0.5 × Trips , where Tripsh,t is the number of trips made by household h in year t. This is the
                              h,t
average inventory ratio a household would have if they did not engage in strategic deal shopping.
      We calibrate perishable depreciation 1 and the storable share s0 by combining USDA infor-
mation on product storage with information on households' purchases from the NCP. We define
perishable goods (l = 1) as products which have expiration dates of less than one month. Using the
USDA information, we manually assign a time to expiry for each Nielsen product module.
      We assume exponential product depreciation and calibrate  such that the average expiry time,
1
,   matches the expiry time given by the USDA for the relevant set of products. The average time to
expiry for perishable goods is 0.347 months, giving 1 = 2.88. Given an average expenditure share
of storable goods in the NCP of 76.9%, we set s1 = 0.769.32

5.9    Model Fit
We assess the fit of the model by looking at statistics we do not directly target in the calibration: the
relationship between the inventory ratio and % deal savings, the relationship between the inventory
ratio and % bulk savings, and the number of days between trips.
      We compute the percentage savings obtained by buying in bulk, or taking advantage of deals.
Comparing Figure 9(a) with Figures 6(c), we can see that the model generates a similar level of bulk
savings to the data and also a weak relationship with the inventory ratio. Figure 9(b) shows the
  32 One way to think about this assumption is that the expiry time for a product has a Poisson distribution with parameter

. While this means there is some chance that items will last a lot longer than the average expiry time, it does still capture
the high cost of storing perishable items and generates a trip frequency consistent with the data.


                                                                               29
                                     Figure 9 ­ Model Fit: Deal and Bulk Savings (%)


           15




                                                                                     15
       % Savings




                                                                                 % Savings
          10




                                                                                    10
           5




                                                                                     5
                   0   .05         .1            .15   .2             .25                    0   .05         .1            .15   .2   .25
                                    Inventory Ratio                                                           Inventory Ratio

                             (a) Bulk Savings (%)                                                      (b) Deal Savings (%)
        Notes: We evaluate bulk and deal savings in the model for different values of I    ¯. The variation in average
        inventory levels on the x-axis is therefore generated by a relaxation of the working capital constraint.




relationship between deal savings and the inventory ratio in the model. Consistent with the data,
there is a stronger relationship between deal savings and the inventory ratio (see Figures 4(a) and
5(a)). The overall level of deal savings is also comparable. Combining deal and coupon savings in
the data leads to total savings of just over 15% at high inventory ratios, which is a little higher than
the model but broadly comparable.
      The optimal trip interval in the model of just over one week is also consistent with the data. The
median time between trips to the same grocery retailer in the NCP is 7 days.

6      Financial Returns to Household Inventory Investment
                                                                         ¯) of supplying consump-
Solving the optimization problem (8) yields the average monthly cost V ( I
tion flow C. To compute the return to household working capital, we compute this cost at each level
of household working capital I¯.
                                                                   ¯), providing a net return measure
      In principle, we can then compute the marginal return as V ( I
which incorporates not just the price paid in store (as in Section 4) but also shopping trip fixed
costs and depreciation costs. In practice, because ml is discrete, the cost function is not smooth.
                                      ¯0 )-V ( I
                                    V(I        ¯1 )
Consequently, the marginal return       ¯ ¯
                                                                     ¯1 - I
                                                    may be zero when I    ¯0 is small, but substantial
                                                            I1 - I0
when the increment is increased. It therefore makes sense to consider a somewhat larger increment.
In the tables below we use an increment of 5 per cent of annual spending. We multiply by 12 to
convert monthly to annual returns.33
                                                                         ¯ affects inventory and
      Table 6 shows how increasing the maximum household working capital I
cash holdings, as well as the different sources of savings households are able to achieve. When the
amount of funds allocated to household working capital is low, the household is restricted in its
ability to take advantage of deals. This is because stockpiling products well in advance of when
    33 We
        assume that the working capital investment remains fixed at I   ¯ throughout the year. Given that the marginal
                         ¯, it is not appropriate to assume the proceeds can be reinvested at the same rate of return. To
return is diminishing in I
the extent that monthly returns are invested elsewhere and earn a positive return, the annual return will be larger than
what we assume.

                                                                            30
                    Table 6 ­ Financial Returns to Household Inventory Investment

        Working          Min. Inv.      Max. Cash         % Savings:        Interval          
                                                                                             m0     Net Return
      Capital Ratio        ($)             ($)           Deal Bulk           (Months)                  (%)
           0.05            133.52          104.30         9.46    10.94         0.25           4        72.30
           0.10            370.96          101.54        12.66    11.05         0.25           8        21.85
           0.15            604.66          106.25        13.48    11.69         0.27          11        6.89
           0.20            839.45          107.53        13.86    11.86         0.27          14        1.42
           0.25           1069.60          107.46        14.03    11.86         0.27          17        0.00
           0.30           1069.60          107.46        14.03    11.86         0.27          17        0.00
      Notes: Working capital ratio is the ratio of household working capital in $ to average annual spending in the
      data ($393 × 12 = $4,716). Maximum cash is the cash held immediately prior to a shopping trip. This is also
      the same as the total price paid in store in $, l Pl · Sl . Immediately following a trip, cash in the model is
      equal to zero (because there are no other motives to hold cash, such as precautionary or speculative motives).
      Average cash holding in the model for purchases of goods covered by Nielsen is therefore approximately half
      of the maximum holding, and the maximum cash holding is equal spending per trip. Minimum inventory is
      the inventory level immediately prior to a shopping trip. The maximum level of inventory is equal to the sum
      of minimum inventory and maximum cash and is reached immediately after a shopping trip. Deal savings
      are % savings of annual spending due to buying an item on sale. Bulk savings are % savings of annual
      spending due to buying a larger pack size. Interval  is the optimal length of time between trips measured
      in months. m0   is the optimal deal shopping strategy for the most storable goods, subject to the household
      working capital constraint. The net return incorporates not only in-store savings but also depreciation and
      trip fixed costs.


they are needed (i.e. a large ml ) is working capital intensive. Low levels of household working
capital investment therefore constrain households to choose a low value for ml (conditional on the
fixed trip cost being non-trivial).
    As the household working capital investment is increased, households choose progressively
higher values of m0 .34 Under a deal-focused strategy households tend to shop more frequently,
which reduces their trip size and tends to weigh on their bulk savings. With a deal-focused shop-
ping strategy households make small and frequent trips on which they buy only a subset of their
consumption bundle. They purchase only goods that are on sale, or goods for which inventory has
been run down to zero.
    At the same time, an increase in working capital also allows households to spend more per
trip, increasing the trip interval and reducing trip fixed costs all else fixed. This force works in
the opposite direction, pushing the trip interval up and raising bulk savings. Given the parameter
                                                                                            and
values we use here, increasing the trip interval does not exert much downward pressure on m0
deal savings. This is because the storable good has very low holding costs, and the perishable good
                                          ¯ we consider. Consequently we see the optimal trip interval
is not worth stockpiling at the levels of I
increase slightly with working capital.
   In general, model outcomes such as the marginal return, minimum inventory, trip interval and
                                            ¯. As discussed above, the cost function is non-smooth
percentage savings need not be monotonic in I
because ml is discrete. Furthermore, relaxing the constraint may have either a positive or negative
effect on inventory and savings of each type. The household may use additional working capital
to increase bulk savings and reduce fixed costs, or it may use it to increase deal savings. If the
  34 Because                                                                              is always equal to zero for the
           of the high depreciation costs associated with stockpiling perishable items, m1
parameter values we consider here.


                                                           31
                                                                      Figure 10 ­ Stock Market Participation by Education




                   Share With Stocks or Stock Mutual Funds (Direct)
                     0         .1         .2       .3        .4




                                                                      0                   .1                      .2              .3
                                                                                  Ratio of Financial Assets to Annual Income

                                                                                      < High School                High School
                                                                                      Undergraduate                Postgraduate


     Notes: This figure is constructed using the SCF over 2010, 2013 and 2016. Financial assets include checking
     accounts, savings accounts, CDs, mutual funds, bonds, stocks and money market funds. Measures of partici-
     pation are based on directly held stocks or stock mutual funds, and do not include retirement accounts. We
     use the education of the spouse with the highest level of attainment. Each point corresponds to a quartile.
     The figure excludes households with a ratio of financial assets exceeding 50 per cent of annual income.




household chooses to use the additional funds to make larger trips, this simultaneously makes it
more costly to buy items several trips in advance and can therefore lead to a reduction in minimum
inventory. Alternatively, if the household uses the additional funds to buy items on sale well in
advance, this tends to put downward pressure on trip size due to depreciation costs and reduces
bulk savings.
   At low levels of household working capital investment, the marginal return to additional invest-
ment is very high. We compute marginal returns using a working capital increment of 5% of annual
spending. When household working capital is equal to 5% of annual spending, the marginal re-
turn is 72%. The marginal return gradually diminishes and reaches zero when household working
capital is around three times monthly spending.
   We obtain qualitatively similar results when using a more conservative value of inventory to
calibrate the model. Table B.2 shows the results using an average inventory level of $721. As
discussed in Section 3.1, this is the average value of inventories we obtain when aggregating to
Nielsen departments rather than product groups when computing inventories.
   Figure 10 shows that the model's prediction is consistent with the data of more educated house-
holds. It shows that direct stock market participation (direct holdings of stocks and stock mutual
funds) is closely related to the value of net financial assets. These educated households come closest
to the rational, optimizing agents in the model. They likely also understand that they can obtain
a substantial return premium from investing in risky financial assets and how to best achieve such
expected excess returns. For these households, we see that stock market participation rates are

                                                                                                  32
indeed nearly zero at low levels of financial assets, where the returns from inventory management
dominate stock returns. Once assets exceed around one month's income and the marginal return
from inventory management decreases, participation in the stock market increases sharply.
    The level of cash holdings predicted by the model should of course not match the level of
cash holdings observed in the SCF since the model only captures one motive for holding cash
(optimal inventory management) and leaves out other motives such as precautionary liquidity or
speculative motives to take advantage to temporary investment opportunities. Furthermore, our
model probably also applies to other goods not covered by the Nielsen data which also require
additional cash holdings.
    Households with less education tend to have a low level of direct stock market participation
even at a high level of financial assets. As discussed in the introduction, such behavior can be
rational in light of previous studies that have shown that households with low education tend
to earn low returns on their stock market investments conditional on participation. For example,
these low returns may be driven by under-diversification, local bias, excessive trading, or paying
high management fees. Investing in household inventory offers these household an alternative
investment opportunity with reasonably high returns at no or only low risk. Moreover, households
can implement this investment themselves, without any need to delegate to a financial advisor,
because they have a lot of experience with shopping.

7    Application: Household Inventory Management During a Pandemic
During the COVID-19 outbreak in 2020, household spending and shopping habits were impacted
dramatically. COVID-19 was first seen in late 2019 in Wuhan, China, before spreading worldwide
over the next several months. In the United States, the first case was identified on January 21, 2020,
but was soon followed by increasing case loads across all regions of the country. With cases and
death tolls mounting, various state and federal officials declared states of emergency and began to
restrict international as well as domestic travel.
    In particular, a number of states began to announce variants of "shelter-in-place" policies along-
side restrictions on "non-essential" business activities. Many retail stores were to be closed to foot
traffic and most restaurants were to only serve takeout or delivery food rather than allowing in-store
dining. Even in locations where such policies were not put in place by local governments, many
households began to adjust their daily routines to minimize the possibility of contracting COVID-19.
    In the context of our model, we interpret the circumstances of and policy responses to this pan-
demic as an unexpected increase in the fixed cost of shopping. Using our model, we can illustrate
the impact that this change would have on the shopping habits of American households.35
    We perform two counterfactuals with our model. First, we look at the same outcomes for house-
holds as trip fixed costs increase. Second, we investigate the impact of a high trip fixed cost of $100
on the shopping habits of households who have varying levels of household working capital. We
display our results of these experiments in tables taking the same form as our main model results
   35 While online purchasing and delivery services saw increased usage during this period, the majority of dollars spent

at retailers were done in-person. Our model examines only the in-person shopping response of these changes in trip
fixed costs.


                                                           33
                                     Table 7 ­ Effect of Shopping Trip Fixed Cost

          Fixed Cost           Min. Inv.          Max. Cash             % Savings:                 Interval              
                                                                                                                        m0
              ($)                ($)                 ($)               Deal    Bulk                 (Months)
             1.00               1006.25              100.97            14.15         11.15             0.26              17
             2.00               1022.08              102.57            14.12         11.34             0.26              17
             4.00               1053.76              105.82            14.06         11.69             0.27              17
             8.00               1125.08              113.32            13.93         12.37             0.28              17
            16.00               1154.43              126.45            13.67         13.17             0.31              16
            32.00               1346.22              151.11            13.28         13.97             0.37              16
            64.00               1521.79              195.07            12.57         14.48             0.45              15
            128.00              1733.60              263.81            11.57         14.67             0.56              14
          Notes: The fixed costs in the first column are the cost of making a trip to the store in $. To isolate the effect of
          different fixed costs on inventory management, we supply the household with enough working capital such
          that constraint (9) is not binding and hence the implied net marginal return is zero in all rows. The remaining
          columns are described in Table 6.


in Table 6.
     In Table 7, we allow fixed costs to vary from $1 per trip to $128 per trip (doubling with each
increment). For comparison, our baseline value for a trip fixed cost was $4.85. As fixed costs
increase, households tend to increase the trip interval ­ a fixed cost of $2­$4 yields a household
shopping around once per week while a trip cost of $128 means that the household only visits the
store around twice per month. The fact that the non-storable good share in our model is fixed at
normal levels restricts the extent to which households can increase the trip interval. In practice,
allowing for substitution away from these perishable products when trip fixed costs rise would
allow for even larger reductions in trip frequency.
     As trip intervals increase, the size of the shopping trip must increase to maintain levels of
consumption over the longer intra-trip period. We find that the amount spent per trip (i.e. maximum
cash holdings in Column 3 of Table 7) more than doubles in our range of fixed costs. Since it becomes
optimal for households to increase purchase quantities, bulk savings also increase. In contrast, at
low trip frequencies substantially more working capital is required to stock up on storable goods.
Consequently, deal savings decline by about 20% in the range of fixed costs we analyze.36
     The relationship between fixed costs and inventory is in general non-monotonic and reflects
two competing forces. First, with low fixed costs, households tend to make many small trips, buy
only a subset of goods each trip and maintain a sizeable baseline level of inventory. As fixed costs
                                                                                      . All else fixed,
increase, trip frequency declines and depreciation costs rise. This tends to reduce m0
this would lead to a reduction in inventory; however, the lower trip frequency works to offset this.
                                                                                                   .
When trips are less frequent, a higher level of inventory is required to support a given value of m0
                                                                    is modest in this case.
Because the storable good has low holding costs, the reduction in m0
     Figure 11 illustrates the relationship between number of trips, inventory ratio, and savings when
the variation in number of trips is generated by variation in the fixed cost k. Figure 11(a) illustrates
the non-monotonic relationship between the inventory ratio and the number of trips discussed
  36 If
      the storable good were somewhat less storable than we assume, it is possible that deal savings may fall to zero as
fewer trips make depreciation costs prohibitive. In our case this does not happen, because even with a trip interval as
long as a month depreciation costs are still sufficiently low to justify stocking up when goods are on sale.

                                                                  34
       Figure 11 ­ Relationship between Inventory Ratio, Deal Savings and Number of Trips


             .35




                                                                                 14
                                                                                 13.5
                     .3
      Inventory Ratio




                                                                                     13
                                                                             % Savings
                                                                            12.5
    .25




                                                                                 12
                                                                                 11.5
             .2




                          20   25        30           35     40   45                      20   25       30           35     40   45
                                           Number of Trips                                                Number of Trips

                                    (a) Inventory Ratio                                             (b) Deal Savings %
        Notes: We evaluate the inventory ratio and % savings in the model for different values of k. Working capital
        is set sufficiently high that the constraint does not bind. Number of trips is computed as 12
                                                                                                    . Variation in the
        number of trips is generated by variation in trip fixed costs.



                                                                increases.
above. The upward jumps in Figure 11(a) occur at points where m0
   Figure 11 highlights why it is important to control for the number of trips a household makes
when analyzing the relationship between inventory and savings using the NCP. In our model, vari-
ation in the inventory ratio generated by fixed costs is negatively related to deal savings (whereas
variation generated by working capital is positively related to deal savings). Controlling for house-
hold trip frequency allows us to control for differences in the fixed cost of shopping across house-
holds and focus on the working capital channel.
   Baker, Farrokhnia, Meyer, Pagel and Yannelis (2020) found some evidence for this sort of stock-
piling behavior that might indicate higher levels of fixed costs. They use transaction-level financial
data to highlight changes in household behavior as the COVID-19 pandemic began to spread in
the United States. They show that in mid-March 2020, as shelter-in-place policies began to be an-
nounced, household spending rose substantially as they stockpiled retail and grocery goods. In
locations with higher numbers of COVID-19 cases and earlier shelter-in-place policies (making re-
tail trips more costly), spending increased by more than in other locations. In subsequent weeks,
spending declined to record low levels as households ran down purchases and were unable to shop
at many of their typical retail outlets.
   We examine further variation in this setting in Table 8. Here we test the behavior of households
who hold different levels of household working capital given elevated trip fixed costs of $100. Given
the large expenditure share of highly storable goods in the NCP, high trip fixed costs increase the
returns to working capital. With a longer interval between trips, households need a substantial
amount of working capital to cover the high costs associated with large trips, as well as stock up on
storable goods in response to deals. Table 8 shows that at low levels of working capital households
devote their resources to covering the cost of large trips, and forgo deal savings. At higher levels
of working capital, households can afford to both maintain a large trip size and take advantage of




                                                                       35
                Table 8 ­ Model Results with High Shopping Trip Fixed Cost (k = $100)

          Working          Min. Inv.      Max. Cash     % Savings:       Interval         
                                                                                         m0     Net Return
        Capital Ratio        ($)             ($)       Deal Bulk          (Months)                 (%)
              0.05            29.50          208.44    3.05     14.44        0.44          1       163.72
              0.10            254.81         220.96    8.28     14.56        0.48          4        48.97
              0.15            483.32         228.17    9.93     14.60        0.50          6        22.59
              0.20            726.95         224.64   10.97     14.59        0.49          8        10.05
              0.25            894.69         238.01   11.13     14.63        0.52          9         8.29
              0.30           1174.26         237.17   11.57     14.63        0.52         11        2.91
        Notes: See the description in Table 6.


deal savings.37
      Again, Baker et al. (2020) find some evidence to support this result. They find that households
possessing higher levels of income and liquidity in the weeks leading up to shelter-in-place orders
tended to stock up to a greater extent than households with lower levels of financial assets.
      Overall, we find that our model predicts significant changes to household shopping behavior
when trip fixed costs increase substantially. Moreover, "out-of-sample" evidence from the onset of
the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States is consistent with our model's prediction of increased
trip costs during this period. Therefore, the level of household working capital is a significant driver
of households' shopping behavior.

8      Conclusion
We study how households can obtain substantial financial returns from strategic shopping behavior
and optimally managing inventories of consumer goods. American households tend to hold sub-
stantial amounts of non-financial assets and rationally choose to maintain some amount of liquid
savings not for precautionary motives but in support of this inventory management role. Such in-
ventories are missing from traditional consumer finance data such as the SCF, which might explain
why household working capital has been largely ignored by the literature.
      Our findings are highly relevant for understanding the ability of households to support con-
sumption smoothing after shocks to income and spending. We demonstrate that households earn
high returns from inventory management through several channels at low levels of inventory, but
these returns decline rapidly as inventory levels increase. At low levels of inventory, the marginal
return to investment in inventory strongly dominates stock market returns and it can even dominate
some forms of borrowing costs such as credit card interest rates and fees.
      Finally, we apply our findings to study how government regulations and quarantines can affect
households' strategic shopping behavior and inventory management.

References
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino, "Perception of House Price Risk and
    Homeownership," NBER Working Paper No. 25090, 2020.
    37 This
         result is dependent on households consuming a highly storable good. In the absence of such goods, high fixed
costs lead households to set m = 0 regardless of the level of working capital.

                                                         36
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, "Life-Cycle Prices and Production," American Economic Review, 2007,
  97 (5), 1533­1559.
Anagol, Santosh, Shawn Cole, and Shayak Sarkar, "Understanding the Advice of Commissions-
  Motivated Agents: Evidence from the Indian Life Insurance Market," Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2017, 99 (1), 1­15.
Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and Stephen
  Weinberg, "The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evalu-
  ation," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2001, 15 (3), 47­68.
Arrow, Kenneth J., Theodore Harris, and Jacob Marschak, "Optimal Inventory Policy," Economet-
  rica, 1951, pp. 250­272.
Athreya, Kartik, Felicia Ionescu, and Urvi Neelakantan, "Stock Market Participation: The Role of
  Human Capital," University of Pennsylvania Working Paper, 2015.
Baker, Scott R., Robert A Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel, and Constantine Yan-
  nelis, "How Does Household Spending Respond to an Epidemic? Consumption During the
  2020 COVID-19 Pandemic," NBER Working Paper No. 26949, 2020.
  , Stephanie Johnson, and Lorenz Kueng, "Shopping for Lower Sales Tax Rates," American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Richard H. Thaler, "Individual Preferences, Monetary Gam-
  bles, and Stock Market Participation: A Case for Narrow Framing," American Economic Review,
  2006, 96 (4), 1069­1090.
Bartmann, Dieter and Martin J. Beckmann, Inventory Control: Models and Methods, Springer-Verlag,
  1992.
Benzoni, Luca, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein, "Portfolio Choice over the Life-
  Cycle when the Stock and Labor Markets Are Cointegrated," Journal of Finance, 2007, 62 (5),
  2123­2167.
Bergstresser, Daniel, John M.R. Chalmers, and Peter Tufano, "Assessing the Costs and Benefits of
  Brokers in the Mutual Fund Industry," Review of Financial Studies, 2008, 22 (10), 4129­4156.
Bertaut, Carol C. and Martha Starr, "Household Portfolios in the United States," FEDS Working
  Paper No. 2000-26, 2000.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, "Behavioral Household
  Finance," in Douglas B. Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson, eds., Handbook of
  Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations, Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2018, pp. 177­276.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, Petter Lundborg, and Kaveh Majlesi, "Learning to Take Risks?
  The Effect of Education on Risk-Taking in Financial Markets," Review of Finance, 2018, 22 (3),
  951­975.
Boizot, Christine, Jean-Marc Robin, and Michael Visser, "The Demand for Food Products: An
  Analysis of Interpurchase Times and Purchased Quantities," Economic Journal, April 2001, 111
  (470), 391­419.
Bonaparte, Yosef, George M Korniotis, and Alok Kumar, "Income Hedging and Portfolio Deci-
  sions," Journal of Financial Economics, 2014, 113 (2), 300­324.


                                                   37
Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, "Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence and Price
  Implications," American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (3), 691­723.
Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, "Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare
  Costs of Household Investment Mistakes," Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 115 (5), 707­747.
Chetty, Raj and Adam Szeidl, "Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences," Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 831­877.
Chevalier, Judith A., Anil K. Kashyap, and Peter E. Rossi, "Why Don't Prices Rise During Periods
  of Peak Demand? Evidence from Scanner Data," American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 15­37.
Cocco, Joao F., Francisco J. Gomes, and Pascal J. Maenhout, "Consumption and Portfolio Choice
  over the Life Cycle," Review of Financial Studies, 2005, 18 (2), 491­533.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Gee Hee Hong, "The Cyclicality of Sales, Regular
  and Effective Prices: Business Cycle and Policy Implications," American Economic Review, 2015,
  105 (3), 993­1029.
Cole, Shawn, Anna Paulson, and Gauri Kartini Shastry, "Smart Money? The Effect of Education
  on Financial Outcomes," Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27 (7), 2022­2051.
Davis, Steven J. and Paul. Willen, "Occupation-Level Income Shocks and Asset Returns: Their
  Covariance and Implications for Portfolio Choice," Quarterly Journal of Finance, 2014, 3, 1­53.
Einav, Liran, Ephraim Leibtag, and Aviv Nevo, "Recording Discrepancies in Nielsen Homescan
  Data: Are they Present and Do They Matter?," QME, 2010, 8 (2), 207­239.
Epstein, Larry G. and Martin Schneider, "Ambiguity and Asset Markets," Annual Review of Finan-
  cial Economics, 2010, 2 (1), 315­346.
Fisman, Raymond and Inessa Love, "Trade Credit, Financial Intermediary Development, and In-
  dustry Growth," Journal of Finance, 2003, 58 (1), 353­374.
Food Safety and Inspection Service FoodKeeper Data, United States Department of Agriculture
  2020. Available at https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/fsis-foodkeeper-data (accessed July 7, 2020).
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, "Money Doctors," Journal of Finance, 2015,
  70 (1), 91­114.
Griffith, Rachel, Ephraim Leibtag, Andrew Leicester, and Aviv Nevo, "Consumer Shopping Be-
  havior: How Much do Consumers Save?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2009, 23 (2), 99­120.
Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju, and Juhani Linnainmaa, "IQ and Stock Market Participation,"
  Journal of Finance, 2011, 66 (6), 2121­2164.
Grossman, Sanford and Guy Laroque, "Asset Pricing and Optimal Portfolio Choice in the Presence
  of Illiquid Durable Consumption Goods," Econometrica, 1990, 58 (1), 25­51.
Guiso, Luigi and Paolo Sodini, "Household Finance: An Emerging Field," in George M. Con-
  stantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene M. Stulz, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Vol. 2,
  Elsevier, 2013, pp. 1397­1532.
  and Tullio Jappelli, "Awareness and Stock Market Participation," Review of Finance, 2005, 9 (4),
  537­567.
  , Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, "Trusting the Stock Market," Journal of Finance, 2008, 63 (6),
  2557­2600.


                                                   38
Haliassos, Michael and Alexander Michaelides, "Portfolio Choice and Liquidity Constraints," In-
  ternational Economic Review, 2003, 44 (1), 143­177.
  and Carol C. Bertaut, "Why do so Few Hold Stocks?," Economic Journal, 1995, 105 (432), 1110­
  1129.
Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas, "Portfolio Choice and Asset Prices: The Importance of En-
  trepreneurial Risk," Journal of Finance, 2000, 55 (3), 1163­1198.
Hendel, Igal and Aviv Nevo, "Intertemporal Price Discrimination in Storable Goods Markets,"
  American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (7), 2722­2751.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein, "Social Interaction and Stock-Market
  Participation," Journal of Finance, 2004, 59 (1), 137­163.
Hurd, Michael, Maarten Van Rooij, and Joachim Winter, "Stock Market Expectations of Dutch
  Households," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2011, 26 (3), 416­436.
Jappelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri, "The Consumption Response to Income Changes," Annual
  Review of Economics, 2010, 2.
  , Luigi Guiso, and Michael Haliassos, Household Portfolios, MIT Press, 2002.
Kaplan, Greg and Guido Menzio, "Shopping Externalities and Self-Fulfilling Unemployment Fluc-
  tuations," Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (3), 771­825.
  and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, "Inflation at the Household Level," Journal of Monetary Economics,
  2017, 91 (C), 19­38.
Kaustia, Markku and Samuli Knüpfer, "Peer Performance and Stock Market Entry," Journal of
  Financial Economics, 2012, 104 (2), 321­338.
Kézdi, Gábor and Robert J. Willis, "Stock Market Expectations and Portfolio Choice of American
  Households," University of Michigan Working Paper, 2009.
Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, "A Debt Puzzle," in Philippe Aghion,
  Roman Frydman, Joseph Stiglitz, and Michael Woodford, eds., Knowledge, Information, and Expec-
  tations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, Princeton University Press, 2003,
  chapter 11, pp. 228­266.
Linnainmaa, Juhani T., Brian Melzer, and Alessandro Previtero, "The Misguided Beliefs of Finan-
  cial Advisors," Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Luttmer, Erzo G.J., "What Level of Fixed Costs Can Reconcile Consumption and Stock Returns?,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (5), 969­997.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, "Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect
  Risk-Taking?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (1), 373­416.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Stephen P. Zeldes, "The Consumption of Stockholders and Non-
  Stockholders," Journal of Financial Economics, 1991, 29 (1), 97­112.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, Markus Noeth, and Antoinette Schoar, "The Market for Financial Advice:
  An Audit Study," NBER Working Paper no. 17929, 2012.
Nevo, Aviv and Arlene Wong, "The Elasticity of Substitution between Time and Market Goods:
  Evidence from the Great Recession," International Economic Review, 2019, 60 (1), 25­51.



                                                   39
Nielsen Company Consumer Panel, Kilts Center for Marketing at the University of Chicago
  Booth School of Business 2004­2014.         Available at https://www.chicagobooth.edu/research/
  kilts/datasets/nielsen (accessed December 2, 2015).
Nielsen Company Retail MSR Scanner Data, Kilts Center for Marketing at the University of
  Chicago Booth School of Business 2006­2014.           Available at https://www.chicagobooth.edu/
  research/kilts/datasets/nielsen (accessed December 2, 2015).
Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan, "Trade Credit: Theories and Evidence," Review of
  Financial Studies, 1997, 10 (3), 661­691.
Rooij, Maarten Van, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie, "Financial Literacy and Stock Market
  Participation," Journal of Financial Economics, 2011, 101 (2), 449­472.
Roussanov, Nikolai, "Human Capital Investment and Portfolio Choice over the Life-Cycle," Uni-
  versity of Pennsylvania Working Paper, 2004.
Samphantharak, Krislert and Robert M. Townsend, Households as Corporate Firms: An Analysis of
  Household Finance Using Integrated Household Surveys and Corporate Financial Accounting, Cambridge
  University Press, 2010.
Stroebel, Johannes and Joseph Vavra, "House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail Prices," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2019, 127 (3), 1391­1436.
Survey of Consumer Finances, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 1983­2016. Avail-
  able at https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scfindex.htm (accessed September 20, 2017).
Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette, "Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of Intertempo-
  ral Substitution," Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110 (4), 825­853.
Yang, S. Alex and John R. Birge, "Trade Credit, Risk Sharing, and Inventory Financing Portfolios,"
  Management Science, 2018, 64 (8), 3667­3689.
Zinman, Jonathan, "Household Debt: Facts, Puzzles, Theories, and Policies," Annual Review of
  Economics, 2015, 7 (1), 251­276.




                                                   40
                                               Online Appendix

           Financial Returns to Household Inventory Management

                     Scott R. Baker            Stephanie Johnson               Lorenz Kueng



A   Appendix Figures

                                Figure A.1 ­ Retailer Deal Concentration




                    (a) Ranked Weeks                                           (b) Calendar Weeks
    Notes: We compute the share of deal sales for each retailer in each week using the deal flag in the NCP
    (which includes both coupon and non-coupon deals), and then divide by the retailer's average deal share
    over the year. A.1(a) plots the average across retailers by ranked weeks (so week 1 is the week with the lowest
    deal share). A.1(b) plots the average by calendar week. We restrict the sample to large retailers with more
    than 1000 separate items sold each week to NCP households.




                                  Figure A.2 ­ Store Deal Concentration




                   (a) Ranked Months                                          (b) Calendar Months
    Notes: We compute the share of deal sales for each store in each month using the deal flag in the NCP (which
    includes both coupon and non-coupon deals), and then divide by the store's average deal share over the
    year. A.2(a) plots the average across stores by ranked month (so month 1 is the month with the lowest deal
    share). A.2(b) plots the average by calendar month. We restrict the sample to large stores with more than 500
    separate items sold each month to NCP households.



                                                          41
                                                                       Figure A.3 ­ Quantity Purchased Around Move Date




              Log Monthly Quantity Relative to 6 Months Before Move
               -.4            -.2                0              .2




                                                                               -10             -5            0                5            10
                                                                                                     Months before move


Notes: This figure shows the change in log quantity purchased around the time a household moves. For
households who move to a new 3-digit Zip Code in a given year we identify the month of the move by
searching for a break in the share of trips made in the household's new 3-digit Zip Code (rather than their
old 3-digit Zip Code). The figure plots estimates of  s from the following specification and a 95 per cent
confidence interval:
                                                                          12
         log Qi,t =                                                                   s Movedi,t-s +  More than year priori,t +  More than year afteri,t
                                                                      s=-12,s =-6

                                                                      + Month FE + Household FE + ZIP3 FE +          i ,t ,

where log Qi,t is the log quantity purchased in ounces by household i in month t and Movedi,t is an indicator
equal to 1 if household i moved in month t. More than year priori,t is an indicator equal to 1 if household i
moved more than one year after month t, and More than year afteri,t is an indicator equal to 1 if household
i moved more than one year before month t. The sample is restricted to households who moved to a new
3-digit Zip Code exactly once. Standard errors are clustered by household.




                                                                                                          42
                                                                      Figure A.4 ­ Coupon Use Around Move Date




              Coupon Share Relative to 6 Months Before Move (pp)
              -.01         -.005            0            .005




                                                                       -10               -5            0                    5        10
                                                                                               Months before move


Notes: This figure shows how the probability of using a coupon changes around the time a household moves.
For households who move to a new 3-digit Zip Code in a given year we identify the month of the move by
searching for a break in the share of trips made in the household's new 3-digit Zip Code (rather than their
old 3-digit Zip Code). The figure plots estimates of  s from the following specification and a 95 per cent
confidence interval:
                                                                       12
       Couponu,i,t =                                                              s Movedi,t-s +  More than year priori,t +  More than year afteri,t
                                                                   s=-12,s =-6

                                                                   + Month FE + Store × Household FE +         u ,i , t ,

where Couponu,i,t is an indicator equal to one if a coupon was used for product u purchased by household i
in month t and Movedi,t is an indicator equal to 1 if household i moved in month t. More than year priori,t
is an indicator equal to 1 if household i moved more than one year after month t, and More than year afteri,t
is an indicator equal to 1 if household i had moved more than one year before month t. The sample is
restricted to households who moved to a new 3-digit Zip Code exactly once. Standard errors are clustered
by household.




                                                                                                    43
Figure A.5 ­ In-store Savings and Inventory under Alternative Inventory Assumption




                             32
              Annual Savings (% of Spending)
                   28        26  30




                                                               10                  15                20               25               30
                                                                                  Annual Avg. Inventory (% of Spending)
                                                  Slope Estimate = 0.2806


Notes: This figure uses the NCP over 2013 and 2014 to illustrate the relationship between in-store savings and
average inventory as a percentage of spending. Average inventory is computed using Nielsen "departments".
Each point on the charts represent deciles of households, controlling for the number of shopping trips a
household makes each year. The savings measure reflects in-store savings only and does not incorporate
holding costs or trip fixed costs. The red dotted line shows predicted values from the following regression
specification:

                                                      Annual Savings       Annual Avg. Inventory
                                                                       = +                       + Tripsi + i .
                                                     Annual Spending i       Annual Spending i



                                                                              Figure A.6 ­ Product Life
                                                        .6
                                                 Share of Spending
                                               .2       0      .4




                                                                     <1   1   2      3    4   5        6   7   8   9   10   11   12+
                                                                                          Product Life (Months)


Notes: We assign a product life measured in months to each product module and compute the share of
spending on products in each monthly bin using the NCP. For food and beverage items this is based on the
FSIS data. The category < 1 includes products with a life of less than 1 month; category z includes products
with a life of more than z months and less than z + 1 months; category 12+ includes products with a life of
12 months or more.


                                                                                                  44
B   Appendix Tables

                                       Table B.1 ­ Bulk Calibration

                                                                                           (1)
                 e-Units                                                                0.88***
                                                                                         (0.05)
                 Constant                                                               0.84***
                                                                                         (0.01)
                 Number of Observations                                                2,639,411
                Notes: This table shows estimates of 0 and 1 from regression specification (18).
                Standard errors are clustered by product module. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.



                   Table B.2 ­ Returns under Alternative Inventory Assumption

      Working          Min. Inv.     Max. Cash         % Savings:        Interval          
                                                                                          m0     Net Return
    Capital Ratio        ($)            ($)           Deal Bulk           (Months)                  (%)
         0.05            132.71         102.84         9.46    11.43         0.25          4          63.03
         0.10            370.19         100.55        12.66    11.52         0.25          8          12.87
         0.15            596.30         104.03        13.51    11.95         0.26         11          0.81
         0.20            669.33         103.98        13.68    11.95         0.26         12          0.00
         0.25            669.33         103.98        13.68    11.95         0.26         12          0.00
         0.30            669.33         103.98        13.68    11.95         0.26         12          0.00
    Notes: This table shows results when the model is calibrated to match average inventory of $721. This is the
    average inventory obtained when we use Nielsen "departments" rather than "product groups" to compute
    inventories. See the description in Table 6.




                                                        45
