                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       DOES VOTE TRADING IMPROVE WELFARE?

                                       Alessandra Casella
                                         Antonin Macé

                                      Working Paper 27743
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27743


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




When citing this paper, please use the following: Casella, A, Macé, A. 2020. "Does Vote Trading
Improve Welfare?" Annu. Rev. Econ. 13: Submitted. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
economics-081720-114422. We are grateful to the institutions that, throughout the years, have
supported the works discussed in this survey, in particular the National Science Foundation,
through its grants SES-00214013 and SES-0617934, the Agence Nationale de la Recherche,
through its grants ANR-17-CE26-0003 and ANR-17-EURE-001, the Guggenheim Foundation,
the Institute for Advanced Studies, the Straus Institute at the NYU Law School, and finally the
Alliance Program at Columbia and Université Paris 1 that made our collaboration possible. We
are also very grateful to the colleagues, friends, and students who have worked with us, in
particular Tom Palfrey, whose collaboration shaped both specific papers and broad ideas, Jean
François Laslier, who brought us together and whose teachings and moral compass helped to
keep us straight, and Rafael Treibich for fruitful discussions and in particular comments on this
survey which opened new perspectives. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alessandra Casella and Antonin Macé. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Vote Trading Improve Welfare?
Alessandra Casella and Antonin Macé
NBER Working Paper No. 27743
August 2020
JEL No. D6,D7,D71,D72

                                           ABSTRACT

Voters have strong incentives to increase their influence by trading votes, a practice indeed
believed to be common. But is vote trading welfare-improving or welfare-decreasing? We review
the theoretical literature and, when available, its related experimental tests. We begin with the
analysis of logrolling ­ the exchange of votes for votes, considering both explicit vote exchanges
and implicit vote trades engineered by bundling issues in a single bill. We then focus on vote
markets, where votes can be traded against a numeraire. We cover competitive markets, strategic
market games, decentralized bargaining, and more centralized mechanisms, such as quadratic
voting, where votes can be bought at a quadratic cost. We conclude with procedures allowing
voters to shift votes across decisions ­ to trade votes with oneself only ­ such as storable votes or
a modified form of quadratic voting. We find that vote trading and vote markets are typically
inefficient; more encouraging results are obtained by allowing voters to allocate votes across
decisions.


Alessandra Casella
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118 Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ac186@columbia.edu

Antonin Macé
Paris School of Economics
48 boulevard Jourdan
75014 Paris
antonin.mace@gmail.com
1     Introduction
Voting is a fundamental procedure for discovering collective preferences, cod-
ified in democratic political institutions, but in fact used, more or less for-
mally, in all associations of people with an interest in consensual group action.
The observation that voting lends itself to deals and trade is as common as
the act of voting itself. Exchanging favors by supporting each other's favorite
proposals or extracting immediate compensation in return for voting as a fel-
low group member desires are behaviors that do not surprise us. They may
be described as unsavory but they are essential to the practice of politics:
    "Logrolling is [..] the most characteristic legislative process... It is com-
promise, [..] in the practical form with which every legislator who gets results
through government is acquainted. It is trading. It is the adjustment of in-
terests. ..There never was a time in the history of the American Congress
when legislation was conducted in any other way."
    Bentley (1908), The Process of Government, (pp. 370­371)
    Given the prominence of vote trading in all groups' decision-making, it
is very surprising how little we know and understand about it. Collecting
rigorous data is difficult, but the theory itself remains underdeveloped to this
day. The problem has attracted prominent scholars and some indeed have
put vote trading at the center of politics, as Arthur Bentley advocated more
than a century ago, but disagreements about both the mechanics and the
effects of vote trading have never been fully resolved. Are trades of votes
for votes different from trades of votes for more flexible compensation, like
money or favors? Are trades most commonly decentralized, voter-to-voter,
or are they coordinated by group leaders or others? Are they mostly one-
to-one, or do they involve larger coalitions? Most fundamentally, are vote
trades beneficial or welfare reducing?
    It is not difficult to see why the answer to this last, crucial question
is not a priori clear. Vote trades allow a voter to modulate her influence,
increasing it on her highest priorities by acquiring additional votes, at the
cost of reducing it on less important issues by give one's votes away. If voters
differ on their priorities, the reallocation of voting power resulting from their
trades should be beneficial. The difficulty, however, is that a vote trade
affects all voters, not only those directly trading. The externalities will be
both positive and negative, and there is no immediate reason why the net
effect should be positive.

                                       2
    Research thrives on questions whose answer is not obvious. Why has
vote trading remained relatively unexplored? One possible reason is that
the difficulty here is deeper, and has to do with the very nature of the good
traded ­ a vote. Imagine, as a fully abstract exercise, an egalitarian society
where no-one is budget constrained and votes can be bought and sold on
a market in exchange for a numeraire. The value of a vote is not in the
consumption utility it provides; it is in the influence it grants its holder. But
such influence does not depend only on the number of votes the voter holds;
given the voting rule, it depends on the full distribution of votes among
all other voters. As a result, standard economic concepts like competitive
equilibrium or the core fail: in a market for votes, competitive equilibrium
does not exist and the core is empty. The intuitive parallel between a vote
and a tradable economic good is misleading.
    As we will show in what follows, progress has been made in recent works,
in part by defining alternative equilibrium concepts or focusing on the stabil-
ity of the system, in part by proposing and studying alternative institutions.
The overall message invites to be humble: neither logrolling (trading votes
for votes) nor markets for votes (trading votes for a numeraire) are found to
have properties that are both positive and robust: welfare gains relative to
no-trade require strong and typically special assumptions. Other institutions,
allowing voters to reallocate a given total budget of votes across multiple de-
cisions without trading with others, seem more promising­both the theory
and the existing experiments suggest gains, without requiring fine-tuning the
design to the details of the environment. A realistic goal is a modest but re-
liable improvement over majority rule. It is with this objective in mind that
practically implementable schemes, inspired by but crucially different from
vote trading, are most likely to be successful.
    We highlight results that we believe can be useful going forward but of
course the survey is limited and neglects important related topics. First,
because we consider the lack of a common theoretical approach the first
challenge to understanding vote trading, we focus exclusively on theoretical
contributions, and, when they exist, on their experimental tests, neglecting
the empirical literature on vote trading.1 Second, the survey does not discuss
   1
     In the absence of direct measures of vote trading, the empirical literature is partic-
ularly creative in drawing insights from the data that can be observed. Cohen & Malloy
(2014) and Guerrero & Matter (2016) and the references cited there are good entry points
for the interested reader.



                                            3
the rich, related work on selling votes to candidates or lobbyists.2
    The survey is organized in three parts. The first part, Section 2, discusses
logrolling, or trading votes in exchange for other votes; the second part,
Section 3, discusses trading votes for a numeraire; finally Section 4 discusses
what voters can achieve when allowed to shift their own votes across different
decisions, in a sense trading with themselves.


2       Trading votes for votes - logrolling
We begin our discussion of vote trading with its most intuitive form: the
exchange of votes, or logrolling. Studies of vote trading multiplied in the
60's and 70's, originally triggered by Buchanan & Tullock (1962)'s Calculus
of Consent. Buchanan and Tullock reacted to Arrow (1951)'s Social Choice
and Individual Values by offering a different analysis of majority voting.
Building on Condorcet's work, Arrow had highlighted that an alternative
that is majority preferred to each of the others (the Condorcet winner) may
not exist, and that in such a case majority voting generates cycles and in-
determinacies. Buchanan and Tullock argued that voters in reality face not
a single decision but multiple decisions, and disagreement on priorities leads
them naturally to vote trading: "The existence of a logrolling process is cen-
tral to our general analysis of simple majority voting " (p. 133). Noting that
over multiple decisions, the Condorcet winner is defined over the combined
result of the multiple decisions at stake, they stated that vote trading is not
only common, it is the means through which voters overcome the limitations
of majority voting. In articles that predate the book (Tullock, 1959, 1961)
and in a single-authored appendix to Calculus of Consent,3 Tullock makes
two statements, precise enough to be formally analyzed. First, if a Condorcet
winner exists, vote trading will reach it: "The problem which puzzled Con-
dorcet, Carroll, Laplace, and Black was [..] finding a system of voting which
would lead to [..] the genuine will of a majority of the group.[..] [L]ogrolling
eliminates the basic problem." (p. 332­333). Second, if a Condorcet winner
does not exist, vote trading will prevent the development of majority cy-
cles: "If logrolling is the norm, [...] then the problem of the cyclical majority
    2
      Classic references are Myerson (1993), Groseclose & Snyder Jr (1996), Dal Bo (2007),
Dekel et al. (2008) and Dekel et al. (2009). See also Faliszewski & Rothe (2016) for a
survey on vote-buying in the computer science literature.
    3
      Tullock, "Theoretical Forerunners", Appendix 2 to the Calculus of Consent.


                                            4
vanishes." (p. 336).
    These arguments, of great originality and influence, were supported by
suggestive models that combined a striving for rigor with very effective story
telling. The models however were too informal in their assumptions and
definitions to provide definite support for the conjectures they proposed.
It was the beginning of a very large literature that focused primarily on
logrolling and alternatively took issue or supported Buchanan and Tullock's
positions. The number of articles that followed in a relatively short window
of time was very large. We can refer here only to very few, which did deliver
lasting results.4 We distinguish two forms of vote trading: explicit trades­
explicit exchanges of votes on one issue for votes on a different issue, and
implicit trades­the bundling of different issues in a single vote, such that
either all issues pass or all fail.

2.1    Explicit logrolling
In a response to Coleman (1966), who was writing in support of Buchanan
and Tullock's position, Park (1967) made two important contributions. The
goal was to analyze the claim that vote trading resolved majority cycles.
Park's first contribution was to formalize the question precisely, clarifying
the meaning of stability. The model Park suggested remains very relevant
and because clarity will help our discussion, we paraphrase it below.5
     Consider a committee C = {1, ..., N } of N (odd) voters who must approve
or reject each of K independent binary proposals. Committee members have
separable preferences represented by a profile of values, z , where zik is the
utility i experiences if k passes, positive if i is in favor of k and negative if
i is opposed.6 It is convenient to describe the model in terms of cardinal
intensities, but its logic depends exclusively on ordinal rankings over the full
set of 2K possible outcomes (taking into account all possible combinations
of proposals passing or failing). Any change in numerical values that keep
all ordinal rankings identical is irrelevant. Separability, on the other hand,
is an important assumption because it restricts the set of admissible pro-
files of ordinal preferences over the set of outcomes. It will be maintained
   4
     Among those we do not discuss, see for example Wilson (1969), Miller (1977a),
Mueller et al. (1972) and Schwartz (1975).
   5
     We borrow, with few modifications, from the description of the similar model in
Casella & Palfrey (2019).
   6
     The value of any proposal failing is normalized to 0.


                                         5
throughout Section 2.7 Proposals are voted upon one-by-one, and each pro-
posal k is decided through simple majority voting. Before voting takes place,
                                                      k
committee members can trade votes. Call vi              the votes held by voter i over
                         1       K
proposal k , vi = (vi , ..., vi ) the profile of votes held by i over all proposals,
and v = (v1 , ..., vi , ..., vN ) a profile of vote holdings for all voters and propos-
als. At the initial vote allocation, denoted by v0 , all voters hold 1 vote on
each issue, or v0i = (1, ..., 1) for all i. Let V denote the set of feasible vote
allocations.8
    Given a feasible vote allocation v , when voting takes place on proposal k
each voter has a dominant strategy to cast all votes in favor of the proposal
if her proposal's value is positive (zik > 0), and against the proposal if her
proposal's value is negative (zik < 0). We indicate by P(v ) the outcome of
the vote if voting occurs at allocation v , i.e. the set of proposals that receive
at least (N + 1)/2 favorable votes and therefore pass. Finally, we define ui (v )
as the utility of voter i if voting occurs at v : ui (v ) = kP(v) zik .
    The focus is on the existence and properties of vote allocations that hold
no incentives for trading. Define:
Definition 1 A coalition of voters S  C , is said to block v if there exists
a feasible vote allocation v  V such that vi = vi and ui (v ) > ui (v ) for all
i  S , and vj = vj for all j / S.
Definition 2 A vote allocation v  V is stable if there exists no coalition
of voters who can block v .
    Park's question is the relationship between a vote allocation that delivers
the Condorcet winner, if it exists, and stability. Here he made an important
observation, which we consider Parks' second contribution. Because it is
instrumental to a number of subsequent results, we report it here as a lemma:
   Lemma 1 (Condorcet Winner).9 If the Condorcet winner exists, it
can only be P(v0 ), the outcome corresponding to the pre-trade vote allocation.
   7
      Non-separable preferences on a combinatorial domain are an important topic in vot-
ing, as reviewed by Lang & Xia (2016). Logrolling with non-separable preferences has
been investigated in Miller (1977b), Schwartz (1981) and more recently in computer sci-
ence by Grandi et al. (2019). In that paper, voters hold lexicographic preferences and
can make binding side-payments promises to other voters. The authors show that these
side-payments help sustain efficient outcomes.
    8               k         k                     k
      v  V  i vi      = i v0   i = N for all k and vi  0 for all i, k .
    9
      The lemma is implied by Park's results. It was later made precise and derived inde-
pendently by Kadane (1972).

                                           6
    The logic is simple. Take any outcome such that m  {1, .., K } issues
are decided against the majority, while the remaining K - m follow the
majority's preference. Consider any issue k decided against the majority.
Because preferences are separable, resolving that issue in favor of the majority
while keeping all other decisions unchanged must be majority preferred to
the initial outcome. But since this is true for any m  {1, .., K }, it follows
that the only possible Condorcet winner is outcome P(v0 ), where all issues
are decided as the majority prefers. The reasoning is very intuitive but also
very useful. Because P(v0 ) is the pre-vote trade outcome, introducing vote
trading cannot help to reach the Condorcet winner.10
    Park proceeds to argue that only the vote allocation yielding the Con-
dorcet winner is stable because any other is, by definition, blocked by a
majority of voters. But the reasoning here depends on the timing and en-
forcement of the trading contracts. These are important details that Park's
analysis left unspecified.
    Defining precisely the process through which vote trades take place was
one important contribution of Riker & Brams (1973)'s classic paper. Riker
and Brams follow a suggestion by Mueller (1967) and suppose that vote trades
are fully enforceable­each trade is a physical exchange of ballots, with each
ballot specialized by proposal. Trading can then be analyzed as a dynamic
process of successive vote exchanges. Riker and Brams make two further
assumptions: trades are between pairs of voters only, and traders are myopic­
that is, traders evaluate the payoff from the trade as if voting took place
immediately after the trade (an assumption incorporated in the definition
of stability formulated above).11 Vote trading is thus defined as a sequence
of pair-wise trades yielding myopic strict gains to both traders. Casella &
Palfrey (2019) formalize Riker and Brams' process by representing it as an
algorithm:
     A family of vote-trading algorithms: Start from any vote allocation
v0 . If there is no pair-wise strictly welfare-improving trade, stop. If there is
one such trade, execute it. If there are multiple, choose one according to rule
   10
      Of course it could be that vote trading takes the vote allocation back to its pre-trade
realization.
   11
      Especially when combined with non-enforceable trades, the effort to consider forward-
looking behavior was a source of confusion in the early literature. It is often unclear
whether trades are not taking place because forward-looking voters anticipate that they
would be undone, or they do take place but are irrelevant because they are undone in the
future. Note that this muddles the equilibrium concept.


                                             7
R. Continue in this fashion until no further improving trade exists.
    Rule R specifies how the algorithm selects among multiple possible trades
and distinguishes individual algorithms in the family.
    Having phrased vote trades so precisely, Riker and Brams identified one
of their crucial properties:
    Lemma 2 (Pivotal vote). In any trade executed under an algorithm in
the family, both sides of the trade must include a pivotal vote.
    The requirement that the trade be strictly improving for both voters
makes the observation immediate: it must be that the trade changes the
outcome on at least two proposals, and thus at least two pivotal votes, one
initially held by each voter, must be changing hands. It is an essential ad-
dition to Buchanan and Tullock's initial insight: vote trades cannot reflect
preferences alone but are necessarily constrained by the "power" of the votes
an individual holds, and the correct measure of power is the vote's pivotal-
ity.12
    Armed with these precise definitions, Riker and Brams study specific
examples. They proposed the scenario reported in Table 1 below, with K = 6
and N = 3. Each column is a proposal (X, Y, W, Z, T, and V ) and each row
a voter (1, 2, and 3). Each cell {k, i} reports zik , the value attached by voter
i to proposal k passing.

           Table 1: Voter preferences in Riker and Brams' example

                            X      Y      W      Z      T      V
                       1    3      3      2      -4     -4     2
                       2    2      -4     -4     2      3      3
                       3    -4     2      3      3      2      -4


   Absent trade, each proposal passes and ui (v0 ) = 2 for each voter. How-
ever, any two voters have a strict payoff-improving trade. Consider the fol-
lowing sequence of trades (corresponding to a specific R in the definition of
the algorithm): 2 gives her X vote to 3, in exchange for 3's Y vote (note that
both votes are pivotal). After the trade, both X and Y would fail; ui (v1 ) = 4
   12
      Coleman (1966) already noted that the value associated with a proposal had to reflect
the distribution of power over it, but did not take the explicit step to pivotality.


                                            8
for i = 2, 3, and u1 (v1 ) = -4. But further payoff-improving trades are pos-
sible: voter 1 gives a W vote to 2, in exchange for a Z vote, leading both
proposals to fail: u2 (v2 ) = 6, ui (v2 ) = -2 for i = 1, 3. Finally, voters 1 and
3 trade votes on proposals T and V , reaching vote allocation v3 such that
P(v3 ) = ­all proposals fail­and ui (v3 ) = 0 for each voter. Note that at v3
trade stops: there is no further pair-wise improving trade.
    Although each individual trade is profitable for the voters involved, the
final outcome is Pareto inferior to the pre-trade outcome: everyone is worse-
off. Riker and Brams' article was extremely influential because it provided
a transparent counter-example to Buchanan and Tullock's optimistic view
of vote trading. Because vote trades cause externalities to those individuals
who are not part of the trades, there can be no presumption that trade will
improve welfare. It remains one of few undisputed conclusions about vote
trading, and we phrase it as a formal result:
   Result (Lack of Pareto optimality). Individually rational pair-wise
vote-trading can deliver Pareto inferior outcomes.
    Buchanan and Tullock's conjectures about logrolling and the Condorcet
winner remained open.13 Does vote trading always converge to the Condorcet
winner when it exists? And when it does not exist, does vote trading converge
to a stable allocation? Does trading converge when exchanges are not pair-
wise but occur within coalitions of arbitrary size? Both Riker and Brams
and Ferejohn (1974) conjectured that allowing coalitions imperils stability.
Ferejohn concluded that even when exchanges are limited to pair-wise trades,
there is no logical connection between the Condorcet winner and the stability
of a vote allocation.14 Ferejohn (1974) is an unpublished but highly cited
note, striving to create some order in the existing literature. Written after
the large production of works on vote trading in the 60's and early 70's,
the note ends with sobering words: "[W]e really know very little theoretically
about vote trading. We cannot be sure about when it will occur, or how often,
or what sort of bargains will be made. We don't know if it has any desirable
normative or efficiency properties." (Ferejohn, 1974, p. 25).
    The frustration these words reflected effectively stopped theoretical re-
search on trades of votes for votes until very recently. Casella & Palfrey
(2019) goes back to the conceptual tools proposed by the early authors and
  13
    Note that there is no Condorcet winner in Riker and Brams' example.
  14
    Contradicting Park, as well as Bernholz (1973, 1974), Koehler (1975), Kadane (1972),
Schwartz (1977, 1981).

                                           9
closes the loop between the definition of stability proposed by Park and the
dynamic process of trade suggested by Riker and Brams. The first question
to be addressed concerns the stability of the system: as in Riker and Brams'
example in Table 1, a trade of votes changes the vote allocation and typi-
cally creates the possibility of new trades, which themselves then generate
incentives for further trading, etc.. Could the result be an infinite cycle?
    In fact, the system has a built-in bias towards stability. It is easy to
see it in the example: note that each trade requires a voter to give away a
vote on a proposal to which the voter attributes an absolute value of 2 and
acquire a vote on a proposal with absolute value of 4. Because trades must
be strictly welfare-improving, the vote that is traded away must be pivotal
on a proposal whose resolution matters less to the trader than the resolution
of the proposal whose pivotal vote is instead acquired. Thus in each trade a
voter must accumulate votes on higher (absolute) value proposals. But that
means that for any given realizations of values, a voter can only be part of
a finite number of trades, and since the number of voters is finite, the total
number of trades must be finite.
    As stated, this simple intuition is not robust to straightforward gener-
alizations of the allowed trades­it is not robust to coalitional trades, or to
voters adding to their trades non-pivotal votes15 . Yet, with the appropriate
qualifications, the intuition can be extended. In the general case, it is not
true that all sequences of trades must converge to a stable vote allocations,
but it is true that there always is one sequence that does. We can phrase the
conclusion precisely:
   Result (Stability of vote trading). Extend the vote-trading algorithms
to blocking coalitions of arbitrary size. For any number of voters N , any
number of proposals K , any (separable) preferences z , there is always a rule
R (hence a sequence of trades) that converges to a stable vote allocation.
Such allocation must deliver a Pareto optimal outcome.
    The result contradicts the earlier belief that coalitional trades must induce
instability, and answers one of Buchanan and Tullock's claims: vote trading­
as formalized here­does not always eliminate the possibility of cycles, but
there is always a sequence of trades that does converge to a vote allocation
from which no further trade takes place and such that majority delivers an
   15
      Such trades do not change outcomes and thus have no effects on utility. As a result,
voters could give away votes on high value proposals in exchange for votes on low value
ones.


                                           10
unambiguous outcome. Moreover, as no restrictions are imposed on trading
coalitions, any Pareto-inferior outcome would be blocked by the coalition of
the whole. Thus any outcome reached from a stable vote allocation must be
Pareto optimal: vote trading can always reach a Pareto optimal outcome.16
    However, as Ferejohn had seen, the result has little to do with the ex-
istence or not of a Condorcet winner. The indeterminacy that is ruled out
concerns cycles of never-ending trades, not majoritarian cycles over multi-
ple alternatives, and with myopic traders and enforceable trades there is no
logical connection between the two types of instability.
    The lack of such a connection is stressed by the second of Casella and Pal-
frey's results. In partial rebuttal of Buchanan and Tullock's first conjecture,
vote trading need not reach the Condorcet winner when one exists. It does
if K = 2 or N = 3, but need not do so in general: the Condorcet winner can
exist and yet vote trading can deliver a different outcome. Yet, the rebuttal
is only partial because one aspect of the question is left open. Suppose a
Condorcet winner exists. Is it the case that it can always be implemented
by a stable vote allocations reached by vote trading? Within the precise
assumptions of this model, the answer is not known, but we will return to
the question below.
    Following the simple logic of the vote trading algorithms allowed some
progress in a complex problem. But does such a logic have any predictive
power? In a companion paper, Casella & Palfrey (2018b) study the question
in a lab experiment. Although controlled lab experiments should presumably
be privileged tools for studying a question of difficult empirical documenta-
tion, experiments on vote trading are in fact very few. The pioneering study
is McKelvey & Ordeshook (1980) which focused primarily on alternative co-
operative solution concepts, anticipating in spirit some of the experiments on
vote trading with social preferences that will be discussed below. Casella &
Palfrey (2018a) study instead the dynamics of vote trading, implementing in
   16
     Vote allocation v3 in Riker and Brams' example above is stable relative to pair-
wise trading (and Pareto inferior to no-trade), but is not stable relative to unconstrained
coalitional trading because the coalition of the whole can trade back to the initial allocation
and induce a strict gain for all its members. This full sequence of trades is thus a non-
converging cycle. On the other hand, suppose that after trading on (X, Y ), voters 2 and
3 were to trade on (W, V ). The final vote allocation is now stable because there is no
additional trade, either pair-wise or involving all three voters, that can benefit all parties
to the trade. Casella & Palfrey (2019) shows that restricting coalitions to be pair-wise
guarantees that all sequences of trades must converge to a stable vote allocation (but
allows for the possibility that the final outcome be Pareto inferior).


                                              11
the lab a scenario that mimics the model discussed here. The experimental
data suggest that stability is indeed useful in thinking about convergence
of vote allocations: more than two thirds of all vote allocations at which
trading stops are stable. In addition, the incentives driving trades seem to
mirror the theory well: averaging over participants assigned the same pref-
erences, all those in voter roles predicted to acquire votes do so, and all
those in voter roles predicted to give away votes do so, over all treatments
and over all proposals. On the other hand, the precise dynamics of the vote
trades observed in the lab are less well described by the model: although
myopic strictly improving trades are observed and, according to statistical
tests, appear intentional, a large fraction of trades involves non-pivotal votes
and has no effect on payoffs. Participants tend to accumulate votes on high
value proposals, even when the votes acquired do not change outcomes. It is
tempting to interpret such behavior as prudential behavior, and thus as an
invitation to question the assumption of myopia adopted in the theoretical
approach.
    Indeed, returning to the theory, it is natural to ask whether vote trad-
ing would have better properties if voters were forward-looking. Introducing
forward-looking behavior in a model of vote trading is not trivial, because
any individual future trade has the potential to influence the profitability of
any current trade and affect the whole dynamic path. One possible strategy
is to borrow from the literature on farsightedness in cooperative game the-
ory.17 Casella & Palfrey (2018a) propose extending the notion of stability by
exploiting the concept of farsighted core (F-core) :

Definition 3 A vote allocation v is farsightedly-dominated (F-dominated)
by v = v if there exists a chain of coalitional trades that leads from v to v
and such that all parties to any trade strictly prefer v to the vote allocation
at which they trade. A vote allocation v belongs to the F-core if there is no
v that F-dominates v .

   Coalitional stability as defined earlier corresponds to the myopic core.
The extension to the F-core is then quite natural. Note the change in the
blocking requirement: under myopia, all members of a trading coalition must
  17
     See Chwe (1994), Mauleon et al. (2011), Ray & Vohra (2015), Dutta & Vohra (2017)
and the references therein. However, none of these models can be adapted directly to
the problem, both because of the externalities involved, and because the opportunities for
trade depend on the vote allocation.


                                           12
prefer the outcome corresponding to the vote allocation reached via their
trade; under farsightedness, this needs not hold, but all must prefer the final
vote allocation reached through the full sequence of trades.
    Given the initial vote allocation v0 , vote trading is said to converge to
farsighted stability if either v0 is itself in the F-core, and no farsighted vote
trade takes place, or there exists a farsighted chain of coalitional trades that
leads from v0 to some allocation in the F-core. Farsightedness is extremely
demanding, and improbable in real applications.18 From a theoretical point
of view, however, we would expect it to lead to better outcomes. In fact the
opposite is true. First, examples show that the earlier stability result is no
longer guaranteed: there exist scenarios such that neither v0 nor any vote
allocation that F-dominates v0 are in the F-core. While a sequence of trades
that leads from the initial vote allocation to a myopically stable allocation
always exists, no trading path to a farsightedly stable allocation may exist.
Second, with farsightedness, vote trading becomes inconsistent with deliver-
ing the Condorcet winner. We know that the Condorcet winner can only be
the outcome corresponding to v0 , P(v0 ); but with farsightedness, vote trad-
ing cannot lead to any allocation v such that P(v ) = P(v0 ), because v cannot
F-dominate v0 if P(v ) = P(v0 ). Farsightedness thus provides a negative an-
swer to the question we left open earlier: the Condorcet winner may exist
and yet it may be that no vote allocation delivering it is in the set of far-
sightedly stable allocations reachable from v0 . These conclusions depend on
the specific notion of farsightedness, and other concepts should be proposed
and studied. As a first pass, though, the results are not encouraging.
    On the whole, then, the message of the theoretical literature as it stands
now is mixed at best: stability may be reached, although even this becomes
doubtful with farsightedness, but, contra Buchanan and Tullock, the problem
of delivering an outcome that is a sincere mirror of the will of the majority
is not solved by vote trading.

2.2     Implicit logrolling and bundling
Besides explicit vote-for-vote trading, vote exchanges over multiple issues
may occur implicitly, as recognized originally by Buchanan & Tullock (1962).19
   18
      The notion of farsightedness described here is soundly rejected by the experimental
data in Casella & Palfrey (2018b).
   19
      See also Tullock (1970) and Haefele (1971) for early discussions. Tullock proposes a
model where multiple policy decisions are consolidated in a single bill, and voters' pref-


                                           13
To fix ideas, consider a simple environment with N voters and K = N pro-
posals, denoted by k1 , . . . , kN , where each proposal ki is strongly favored by
voter i. Voter i receives positive utility ziki = z H > 0 if proposal ki is ap-
                                    k
proved, but negative utility zi j = z L < 0 from any other proposal passing.
In this environment, each individual proposal would be rejected by a major-
ity. However, if z H > (n - 1)|z L |, all voters would be better-off if all were
approved.20
    The Pareto-superior outcome where all proposals are approved can arise
from repeated interactions among the voters, as is usually the case in legis-
latures or international organizations. In the model of Carrubba & Volden
(2000), each period of a repeated game features K sequential votes, with the
full set of proposals being decided, proposal-by-proposal. As usual in these
games, the superior outcome can be reached on the equilibrium path if voters
are sufficiently patient, when the myopic incentive to vote against another
voter's issue is dominated by the threat of having one's own issues turned
down in the subsequent periods.21
    Implicit vote exchanges could also be the result of social preferences.
Fischbacher & Schudy (2014, 2020) study whether norms of trust and reci-
procity can sustain deliberate votes against one own's interest, if issues are
voted upon sequentially and votes are transparently recorded. Reciprocating
voters approve other voters' issues if these voters have approved the recipro-
cating voters' issues in the past. Trusting voters approve other voters' issues,
anticipating that these voters will reciprocate. In the lab, cooperation among
voters is partial, in the sense that issues voted upon earlier (in the sequence
of issues) are approved at a higher rate than later ones. In turn, this pattern
can be strategically exploited by voters or agenda setters.22
erences can be described spatially. Haefele studies the interesting case when implicit
logrolling over multiple issues takes place through the election of a representative.
   20
      Kadane (1972) considers the opposite but analogous environment where each proposal
is approved by a majority, but has a sufficiently strong opponent to yield a net loss. He
observes that in such a case, it is easier to pass proposals when voted upon one-by one,
rather than as a joint bundle.
   21
      To be precise, in the paper, the number of proposals voted upon at each period
corresponds to the size of a minimal winning coalition, but this does not change the
nature of the argument.
   22
      In Fischbacher & Schudy (2014), if given the choice, voters favoring the first issues
prefer to vote sequentially issue-by-issue rather than over the whole bundle. In Fischbacher
& Schudy (2020), agenda setters choose to put their preferred issues at the beginning of
the sequence of issues voted upon.


                                            14
    More surprisingly, in rich dynamic scenarios with multiple votes, some
voters may offer their votes without receiving anything in exchange. Hortala-
Vallve (2011) considers a model with three farsighted legislators voting on two
issues, so that four outcomes (each issue passing or failing) are possible. In a
dynamic game, each period's status quo is an outcome, which is confronted to
another randomly chosen outcome, and next period's status quo is decided by
legislators' vote. In the leading example, the first issue is favored by voter 1
only, the second issue is favored by voter 2 only, while voter 3 disapproves the
second issue more than the first.23 The key result consists of an equilibrium
where the first issue is approved but not the second one, although both voters
2 and 3 would be myopically inclined to reject the first issue. The result relies
on the seemingly generous behavior of voter 3, who approves of the first issue
without apparently receiving anything in exchange, but in fact preventing the
occurrence of the outcome where both issues are approved.
    A more direct form of implicit vote trading is achieved by bundling, when
an agenda setter proposes a bundle of proposals to be voted upon in one sin-
gle vote. Either all proposals in the bundle fail, or all pass. In the simple
environment considered above, any bundle of at least (n + 1)/2 proposals,
each favored by a different voter, would be approved at a majority. Bundling
can then function as a form of vote trading. It can, however, also serve other
purposes. Imagine an agenda setter, adding to such bundle one additional
proposal disliked by the voters, who all incur a disutility - in case of ap-
proval. If  is small enough, the joint bundle continues to be approved by a
majority. The additional proposal would not have been approved after any
explicit vote exchange; rather, it is imposed on the voters by the agenda
setter.24
    This example raises the question, addressed by C^     amara & Eguia (2017),
of how to bundle issues optimally, from the point of view of an agenda setter
intent on passing a maximal number of proposals against the preferences of
a majority of the voters. Consider again the example with three voters and
three issues, with each issue ki , for i  {1, 2, 3}, only favored by voter i, and
with z H = 3 and z L = -2. The agenda setter has complete information
on voters' preferences. If issues are voted upon separately, each is turned
down by a majority of two against one. If all issues are bundled together,
   23
      Note that the example departs from the environment described above because of the
asymmetry in voter 3's preferences.
   24
      This form of agenda power is notably prevalent in corporate governance, as discussed
in Bebchuk & Kamar (2009) and Cox et al. (2015).


                                           15
each voter incurs a loss of -1 in case of approval, so that the bundle too
is rejected by all. Instead, the agenda setter can profitably bundle together
issues 1 and 2 together, while leaving issue 3 separate. A majority consisting
of voters 1 and 2 then approves the bundle of issues 1 and 2, while turning
down issue 3.
    In fact, C^
              amara & Eguia (2017) show that the agenda setter can do even
better if allowed to simultaneously bundle and slice issues. For instance,
issue 1 could be sliced into two issues, each one favored by voter 1 only, and
with utilities z H = 3 and z L = -2 for the first slice and z H = 3(1 - )
and z L = -2(1 - ) for the second slice, for some   (0, 1). In the example
above, the agenda setter can have all three issues approved by appropriately
slicing and bundling. For example, she can propose as a first bill a bundle
of one-half of issues 1 and 2 (approved by voters 1 and 2); as a second bill
a bundle of one-half of issues 1 and 3 (approved by voters 1 and 3), and as
a third bill a bundle of one-half of issues 2 and 3 (approved by voter 2 and
3). The agenda setter succeeds in having all issues passed, while all voters
are worse-off than if voting took place issue-by-issue (with no logrolling),
as in the earlier example of Riker & Brams (1973). The approach leverages
results from Bayesian persuasion (Alonso & C^   amara, 2016). It is particularly
ingenuous and at the same time opens new, realistic questions about the
actual composition of bills in legislatures. We emphasize it here:
   Result (Optimal bundling). A strategic agenda setter able to slice
and bundle issues may achieve voting outcomes that make all voters strictly
worse-off.
    In the paper, C^amara and Eguia characterize the optimal slicing and
bundling policy by the agenda setter for a broad set of preferences and show
that the optimal agenda always makes a majority of voters weakly worse-
off.25
   25
     The general model relies on the following assumptions: (i) the bundle of all issues
would be rejected; (ii) at least one bill can pass, and (iii) voters have strict preferences. The
result follows because if a majority of voters were strictly better-off, the agenda setter could
profitably modify the agenda by adding some issue slices to at least one bill. Adapting
Alonso & C^  amara (2016), one obtains that a majority of voters is strictly worse-off if any
optimal agenda contains at least two bills that are expected to pass.




                                               16
3     Buying and selling votes for a numeraire
As suggested, for example, by Coleman (1966), exchanges of votes could be
theorized in a manner quite different from logrolling, as resulting from pur-
chases and sales via a numeraire. The analysis starts from ignoring ethical
and philosophical objections­the skewed results that would follow the in-
equality of budgets, and the deeply disturbing explicit link between political
and economic voice. Even in an abstract world of full equality, there are
reasons to be concerned. The problem lies in the nature of votes: the utility
that can be derived from a vote depends not on holding the vote itself, as
is the case for a private good, but on the influence the vote can confer on
the final decision. Thus, for any given decision rule, the value of the vote
depends on the distribution of the votes among all others voters. It is a
particular form of externality that threatens not only the welfare properties
of the market but its very functioning.
    In the discussion that follows, there are N (odd) voters, a single binary
decision (K = 1), and preferences are described in terms of cardinal inten-
sities. Welfare is measured in terms of utilitarian efficiency, and thus relies
on the cardinal representation. We again use the notation z = (zi )1iN to
indicate the profile of preferences, and we denote by xi = |zi | the value or
intensity of voter i. Absent any trade, the outcome preferred by the majority
would be implemented. Instead, we suppose that votes can be bought and
sold for a numeraire, a private good that functions as means of exchange.
Voters are risk-neutral, and a voter i receiving a net transfer ti in the market
derives utility ui = ti + zi if the proposal passes and ui = ti otherwise.

3.1    Coordinated vote markets
One route to overcome the difficulties posed by vote markets is to assume
that transactions are explicitly coordinated by a third party. In Philipson &
Snyder (1996), a floor manager sets prices, receives buying and selling offers
from the voters, and concludes trades. The identity of minority and majority
voters is common knowledge, so that, if trade occurs, members of the minor-
ity buy while members of the majority sell. Philipson and Snyder assume
that the floor manager enacts trades only if all majority voters offer to sell
their votes. The veto granted to all majority voters prevent some beneficial




                                      17
trades to occur,26 but ensures that at any equilibrium where vote trading
occurs, the trade is Pareto-improving. A similar approach, again concluding
in support of a vote market, is taken by Koford (1982), where trade is coor-
dinated by two benevolent party leaders who cooperate in maximizing their
members' surplus. In both studies, the strong assumptions highlight that
guaranteeing welfare gains from vote markets requires unusual restrictions.
What happens when such restrictions are dropped? A natural starting point
is the competitive market, the foundation of the economic theory of private
exchange.

3.2     Competitive equilibrium
Consider then a competitive market for votes: a market where all transactions
take place at the posted market price, all traders take the price as given, and
each voter is free to approach and trade with whomever he chooses.
    To see why such a market for votes can be problematic, consider the
example described by Casella et al. (2012). There are two alternatives, A
and B , and three voters, Ann, Alex, and Bob, each with one vote, choosing
between A and B by majority voting. Ann and Alex both prefer A to B
and derive utilities of 12 and 10, respectively, from A and 0 from B ; Bob,
with more extreme preferences, derives utility of 30 from B and of 0 from
A. Thus the majority prefers A but utilitarian efficiency favors B . It is
natural to suppose that if Bob could buy Ann and Alex' votes for a price,
the problem would be solved. For example, if Bob bought both votes for a
price of 13, the outcome would be a Pareto improvement over no trade. But
Bob will never demand two votes because one would be redundant: at any
price below 30, Bob demands one vote. At any price above 12, both Ann
and Alex offer to sell, and there is excess supply. At any price below 10,
no-one sells. Consider then any price between 10 and 12: Alex is happy to
sell, and her vote is pivotal. But if Alex sells, Ann's vote is worthless, and
thus Ann is also willing to sell at any positive price: again there is excess
supply. Because demands are interdependent, there is no price at which the
market clears.
  26
     Philipson and Snyder further assume that if trade occurs, the revenue collected from
the minority is divided equally among majority members. It follows that trade may occur
at equilibrium if and only if im xi > M maxiM xi (Proposition 1, p.251). Thus, if
z = (-4, -4, 1, 1, 5), so that m = 2 and M = 3, it is optimal for the minority to prevail,
but equilibrium trades cannot achieve this outcome.


                                           18
     The non-existence of equilibrium in a decentralized market for votes is
a general and robust problem, identified by the early literature (Coleman,
1967, Ferejohn, 1974, Shubik & Van der Heyden, 1978), and reiterated in
more recent studies (Weiss, 1988, Piketty, 1994, Philipson & Snyder, 1996,
Kultti & Salonen, 2005).27 We can state it succinctly. Suppose, in line with
the example above, that each voter's preferred alternative (the sign of each
zi ) is known, while intensities (xi = |zi |) may or may not be known. Voters
are divided into a majority of M voters, who share the same sign of zi , and
a remaining minority of m = N - M < M voters, who share the opposite
sign.28 Call p the market price of a vote, and ui (d, p) the utility of voter i
for a net demand vector d and a price p (where di = -1 if i sells his vote).29
Then:
   Result (Non-existence of competitive equilibrium). If N > 2, for
any z such that M  m > 0, there is no price p and demand vector d = (di)
such that
                                                                      N
          (i)   di      arg max ui (di , d-i , p)   and       (ii)         di = 0.
                             di
                                                                     i=1


    The logic is identical to the example above and we do not repeat the proof
here. Because the problem comes from the discontinuity in the value of a vote
at pivotality, intuition suggests that equilibrium can be recovered by inserting
randomness and "smoothing" the problem. Thus a natural suggestion is to
drop the assumption that the direction of preferences is known. However,
introducing uncertainty over preferences will not help: there cannot be a
purchase of two votes because one would be redundant, and there cannot be
a purchase of a single vote because the person who is not trading would hold
a useless vote, and thus would offer to sell it for any price. The problem has
not changed.
    Casella et al. (2012) re-establish the existence of competitive equilibrium
by allowing traders to express mixed demands­i.e. to randomize between
   27
      Weiss (1988) studies coalitional agreements over the choice of a tax rate for financing
a public good. He found that the core of the game is generically empty, a result with
similar flavor to the non-existence of equilibrium in competitive vote markets.
   28
      We sometimes abuse notation and write M or m for the sets of majority and minority
voters.
   29
      Note that individual demand depends not only on the price, but also on the demands
of others, contrary to private good markets. We will return to this point below.

                                               19
buying and selling.30 The equilibrium price clears the market in expecta-
tion: the price must be such that expected supply equals expected demand.
Ex post market clearing is achieved via a rationing rule. The equilibrium
concept, called ex ante equilibrium by the authors, imposes the discipline of
market balance while allowing individual randomizations: market clearing is
violated ex post, but the violations must be non systematic and unexpected.31

Definition 4 Given a rationing rule R, an ex ante competitive equilibrium
is a vector of probabilistic net demands   and a price p such that:
                                                                         N
                                                                               
        (i)   i      arg max ui (i , - i , p , R)    and       (ii) E[         i ] = 0.
                          i
                                                                         i=1

    In the model proposed in the paper, both intensity and direction of pref-
erences are private information but each voter is equally likely to be in favor
of either alternative. The authors construct an ex ante equilibrium for an
arbitrary finite number of voters, arbitrary intensities, and two plausible ra-
tioning rules.32 In equilibrium, all voters with the exception of the two with
highest values offer to sell their votes; the voter with highest value demands
(N - 1)/2 votes, i.e. a majority of votes and full decision power; the voter
with second highest value randomizes between selling her vote and demand-
ing (N - 1)/2 votes. The price is always such as to keep the second highest
value voter at indifference between the two actions, and her mixing proba-
bility guarantees expected market clearing.33
    The equilibrium has two important features. First, in equilibrium the
market comes to approximate an all-pay auction for power: the only indi-
viduals bidding to purchase are the two with highest values, with the second
highest at her indifference point. The result mirrors votes' special characteris-
tics: utility derives not from owning votes, but from owning power. Thinking
   30
       Formally, a probabilistic net demand i is a probability distribution on the set of all
possible demands: {di  Z | di  -1}.
    31
       Kultti & Salonen (2005) also propose allowing for probabilistic demands, but do not
require balance between expected demand and expected supply.
    32
       Under rationing-by-voter, each voter with outstanding demand is considered in ran-
dom order, and the order is satisfied only if it can be satisfied in full. Under rationing-by-
vote, each vote offered for sale is randomly assigned to any voter with unsatisfied demand.
    33
       If the two highest values are very close, the highest value voter as well mixes between
selling and demanding a majority. The range of values for which this occurs is always very
small and disappears as N becomes large.


                                              20
of votes as economic goods exchanged on a market is thus misleading, and
the equilibrium forces us to recognize and clarify the confusion. Second, in
any equilibrium with trade, there is always one individual holding a major-
ity of votes: the market delivers dictatorship, a single voter controlling the
decision. The market does redistribute votes towards those who value them
most, but the redistribution is extreme. As a result, the welfare properties
of the market are less promising. In particular, when the number of voters
is large, and individual values are uncorrelated with the direction of prefer-
                                                                           MR
ences, as they are in this model, the following result must hold. Call WN
                                                        VM
ex ante expected utility under majority rule, and WN ex ante expected
utility with the vote market, both evaluated before individual valuations are
realized. Denote by FN (x) the joint probability distribution of the vector of
valuations.34 Then:
    Result (Welfare in a market for votes). Consider a sequence of
vote markets, indexed by the size of the electorate N . For any sequence of
distribution functions {FN }, there exists a finite N such that if N > N ,
   MR       VM
WN     > WN    .
    Under the assumptions of the model, if the number of voters is large
enough, a market for votes is counter-productive.
    But how robust is the conclusion? One particular concern is the strong
symmetry of the scenario: any voter is equally likely to favor either alterna-
tive. Potential welfare gains from a vote market are usually discussed when
there is a well-identified minority which majority voting consigns to the los-
ing side of the decision, the opposite M and m groups discussed earlier, or in
the model of Philipson & Snyder (1996). Does ex ante equilibrium exist in
such a case? Casella & Turban (2014) find that the answer is positive. The
article characterizes an ex ante equilibrium where the highest value voter
on each of the two sides randomizes between selling her own vote and de-
manding a majority; all others sell their vote. The model has a number of
unexpected implications. First, to counter selling by "weak" allies, in equi-
librium votes are actively purchased from voters on the buyer's own side.
Second, in general, market exchanges result in supermajorities, even though
the equilibrium price is positive. Third, belonging to the minority makes
the active buyer more aggressive than the buyer belonging to the majority:
   34
      Valuations need not be i.i.d. When they are not, the result requires a strictly positive
lower bound of the valuations' support.



                                             21
the probability of demanding votes can be higher at lower intensity of pref-
erences. As long as there is trade, the side controlling the final outcome
is simply the side whose highest value individual sees her demand satisfied,
regardless of the relative size of the two groups. The relatively aggressive
demand of the highest value minority voter translates into a relatively high
frequency of minority victories. The result can be made precise. Call N (m)
the ex ante expected frequency of minority victories with market trading,
      
and N    (m) = P( im xi > iM xi ) the corresponding frequency under ex
ante efficiency. Assume that intensities xi are independently drawn from the
same distribution F . Then
   Result (Minority victories in a market for votes). For any N , for
                                           
any M  m > 0, and any F , N (m) > N          (m): the minority is expected to
win strictly more frequently than is ex ante efficient
    The result becomes even stronger when the market is large. Suppose
m = N for any N , with   (0, 1/2), and consider a sequence of markets
indexed by N . Then limN  N (m) = 1/2 for any  and any F : in the
limit, the minority is expected to win half of the time, regardless of its share
of the electorate.35 Not too surprisingly, the outcome is undesirable: the
superiority of simple majority voting to the market of votes, stated earlier
for the symmetric case, is confirmed in the presence of a known minority.
    The notion of ex ante equilibrium in a market for votes finds experi-
mental support both in Casella et al. (2012) and in Casella et al. (2014).
The experiment described in the latter paper studies a minority of size 2,
and a majority of size 3, trading votes either via a decentralized market or
through one-to-one bargaining by the two group leaders.36 When the leaders
bargain, the majority leader "owns" the decision, and Myerson & Satterth-
waite (1983)'s prediction applies: the theory predicts too little trade, or too
few minority victories, relative to the first best, but welfare gains relative
to majority rule. When trade is decentralized, on the other hand, ex ante
equilibrium predicts too many minority victories and, with the experimental
parameters, an efficiency loss relative to majority voting. All predictions are
strongly supported by the experimental data.
   35
      In fact, the result is stronger: the expected frequency of minority victories converges
to 1/2 for all value realizations, except on a set with zero probability (N (m)-   1/2).
                                                                                 a.s.
   36
      Contrary to Koford (1982), where leaders cooperate, here leaders bargain non-
cooperatively.



                                             22
3.3     Strategic market games
In an ex ante competitive equilibrium, agents' net demand depends not only
on the price but also on others' demands. The approach is used in the
analysis of competitive equilibria with externalities (Arrow & Hahn, 1971,
pp.132-36) but moves away from the traditional competitive model, where
the price contains all relevant information, and introduces aspects of a game.
Xefteris & Ziros (2017, 2018) follow this alternative route and study vote
markets as strategic market games (Shapley & Shubik, 1977): traders do not
take the price as given, but strategically approach one another with offers to
trade for money.
    A second important assumption addresses the problem of equilibrium ex-
istence: the political system is described as "power-sharing" in the sense that
the outcome of a vote between two options depends linearly on the number
of votes received by each. More precisely, if preferences over a proposal are
described by z , and the proposal receives a fraction   (0, 1) of the votes,
then voter i receiving a transfer ti derives utility ui = ti + zi . Technically,
the assumption removes the discontinuity of the outcome at  = 1/2, and
thus the discontinuity in the value of a vote at pivotality.
    Under either complete (Xefteris & Ziros, 2018) or incomplete (Xefteris
& Ziros, 2017) information about preferences, an equilibrium exists where
all voters are trading - on each side, voters with lower valuations sell their
votes while voters with higher valuation buy votes. The welfare properties of
this full-trade equilibrium depend on the informational environment. Under
complete information, the results are surprisingly similar to Casella & Turban
(2014). As in that model, in equilibrium there are only two buyers - the voter
with the highest valuation on each side. The linearity of the outcome function
translates in equilibrium vote shares that are asymptotically proportional to
these two buyers valuations. As a consequence, welfare can be significantly
far from the utilitarian optimum, and may be inferior to the situation without
vote trading.
    Xefteris & Ziros (2017) consider instead a model of incomplete informa-
tion, where preferences (zi ) are drawn independently from the same distri-
bution.37 In stark contrast to Casella et al. (2012), they obtain a strong and
positive welfare result:
   37
      The model further assumes that all voters interested in buying have to bid the same
amount of the numeraire. The implication is that all buyers buy the same amount of
votes.


                                           23
    Result (Efficiency of trade in a power-sharing system). Under
any symmetric equilibrium of the strategic market game with power sharing,
all voters are weakly better off than under no trade.
    The finding reflects both the linearity of the outcome function and the
symmetry of the model: from the point of view of any voter, not trading
is always an available option and delivers in expectation the same utility as
when trade is forbidden, because any favorable trade is as likely as any equiv-
alent unfavorable trade. Thus in expectation trading exerts no externality
on non-traders, and this is why trade only leads to Pareto-improvements,
exactly as in a traditional exchange economy. The symmetry assumption is
shared by Casella et al. (2012), but the importance of pivotality in this latter
model leads to the opposite result.
    Tsakas et al. (2020) test these predictions in the lab, both the positive
welfare results under power-sharing systems and, in the same strategic market
game setting, the negative results under majority rule. Both predictions are
confirmed by the experimental data. However, the observed welfare gains
under power-sharing are not as universal as the theory suggests, and some
voters experience welfare losses in the long run.

3.4    Decentralized bargaining
Another possible and highly intuitive model for the study of vote trades
studies agreements that result from decentralized bargaining. The model
adopts the focus on strategic interactions of market games, but abandons
the attention given to general equilibrium effects. A noticeable example of
this approach is Iaryczower & Oliveros (2016). The article analyzes a com-
plete information model of sequential, decentralized bargaining with three
farsighted legislators voting on a binary decision. At each period, a pair of
voters is randomly matched, allowing one voter (the proposer) to make a buy
or sell offer of votes to the second voter.
    The Markov perfect equilibria of the game reveal unexpected qualitative
features. First, there are situations in which some legislators act as inter-
mediaries, buying votes from one legislator only to resell them to a third
one, even when the first and the third legislators would not trade directly.
Second, the status of these political intermediaries is different from those
of intermediaries in traditional exchange economies: a political middleman
must have a stake in the final decision, and rather than extracting surplus


                                      24
from both parties he interacts with, he is actually transferring some of his
own surplus. The monetary expense the middleman incurs when acquiring
votes is compensated in part by the monetary receipts when reselling them,
but also, crucially, by the policy benefit he derives from passing the power
to enact the policy to the third legislator.

3.5     Vote-buying mechanisms: Quadratic voting
Finally, another perspective, closer to mechanism design, is brought by a
literature on vote-buying mechanisms.38 The idea is that votes are not ini-
tially held, but rather acquired by the voters from the election organizer at
a cost, before the voting stage. By shaping the cost function appropriately,
the designer can influence how preferences are aggregated.
    The most common and most promising cost function is quadratic: a
voter i can acquire an amount vi  R+ at cost c(vi ) = (vi )2 . Voters then
vote on a binary decision, and each receives a rebate corresponding of the
average of others' payments. The purchase decision trades off the benefit and
the cost of acquiring votes. As long as the expected probability of shifting
the decision by acquiring vi votes is linearly increasing, at rate of marginal
pivotality p, a voter maximizes pvi xi - c(vi ), and with quadratic costs the first
order condition yields vi = ( 2p
                               
                                 )xi . Votes are then proportional to preference
intensities, and one immediately obtains the following sufficient condition:
   Result (Utilitarian efficiency of quadratic voting). If the marginal
pivotality p is constant and identical across voters and if the cost function is
quadratic, the collective decision maximizes utilitarian welfare.
    The bulk of the work in these models consists in describing conditions
under which the assumption of constant marginal pivotality is satisfied, or, if
not, in showing that the exceptions are rare enough not to undo the welfare
results. In Goeree & Zhang (2017), preferences zi are independently drawn
from a standard normal distribution. The authors show that in a large
electorate there exists an approximate equilibrium such that everyone votes
proportionally to one's own preference intensity, and marginal pivotality is
approximately constant. To understand the result, suppose that all voters
  38
     See Tideman & Plassmann (2017) for an overview of the link between vote-buying
mechanisms and the larger mechanism design literature. A first mechanism with a
quadratic cost function, designed for the funding of public goods, is proposed by Hyl-
land & Zeckhauser (1979).


                                         25
but i buy an amount of votes proportional to their value, vj = N xj , for
some constant N .39 Then, voter i chooses vi so as to maximizes his utility
ui (vi ), which can be decomposed into three terms: the expected benefit from
the collective decision, the cost of acquiring votes, and the rebate:
                                                                                1
  ui (vi ) = -xi 1{zi <0} + xi P(vi + N                  zj > 0) - c(vi ) +                 c(vj ).
                                                j =i
                                                                              N -1   j =i

Since the sum of i.i.d. normally distributed variables also follows a Gaus-
sian distribution, we obtain, denoting by  the c.d.f. of a standard normal
distribution:

                                     j =i (-zj )     v                              v
P(vi + N             zj > 0) = P                 <  i                     =        i                  .
              j =i
                                       N -1        N N - 1                        N N - 1

            vi               1            vi
As (        
             N -1
                  )   N      2
                                 +                   , it follows that
        N                            N    2 (N -1)

                                                     1
                       ui (vi )   + (                           )vi xi - c(vi )
                                          N     2 (N - 1)

for some constant  ,40 so that the assumption of constant marginal piv-
otality is approximately satisfied. The first order condition yields vi =
                                                     1
(     1       )xi . Thus, setting N = (  1         ) 2 , the result is an ap-
 2N     2 (N -1)                                          2   2 (N -1)
proximate Bayes-Nash equilibrium for large electorates where voters vote in
proportion to their values.41 Utilitarian efficiency then follows immediately,
because the side with higher total value will hold more votes.
   Beyond utilitarian efficiency, it is notable that, if the cost function scaling
parameter  does not depend on N , the number of votes bought by any voter
vanishes as the electorate gets large.
   Lalley & Weyl (2019) consider more general models, where preferences are
independently drawn from an arbitrary bounded distribution, whose mean
   39
      We sketch here the argument of Goeree & Zhang (2017) for an arbitrary normalization
of the cost function (the parameter ), and thus introduce the proportionality parameter
N .
   40
      We have  = -xi 1{zi <0} + N 1  -1
                                                        1
                                          j =i c(vj ) + 2 .
                                1
   41
      With N = (  1           ) 2 , we obtain N =           1      . Note that the approxi-
                   2 2 (N -1)                          2N 2 (N -1)
                                                                           
mation of the function  is valid whenever  << N as this implies N N - 1 N 
.

                                                26
may be null or not. This latter case is more complicated as some voters
with extreme preferences do not vote, even approximately, in proportion to
their intensities. Yet, such voters must be sufficiently rare not to compromise
the mechanism's asymptotic efficiency.42 Eguia & Xefteris (2018) make the
broader point that any welfare function of the form iN sign(zi )|zi | can
be implemented by a family of cost-functions including c(vi ) = (vi )1+1/ .
    In a subsequent paper, Eguia et al. (2019) generalize the model further,
by considering an election over multiple alternatives (as opposed to a Yes/No
decision). Voters purchase votes at a quadratic cost, that they can use to
vote in favor or against any alternative. In a setting of complete information,
the optimality result remains.
    Goeree & Zhang (2017) bring the mechanism to the lab and confirm that
it leads to significant welfare gains relative to majority voting, mostly for
voters with moderate intensities, benefiting from redistribution. Interest-
ingly, moderates bid too high and extremists bid too low, suggesting that
participants pay more attention to the cost of bidding than to the gain from
pivotality. The experiment includes an endogenous choice of institution once
subjects have gained enough experience: 90% of the groups prefer the vote-
buying mechanism to majority rule.
    Yet, the properties of quadratic voting in a real-world setting seem diffi-
cult to ascertain with precision, in particular for large elections. First, even
if voters perceive their marginal pivotality to be constant, their estimates
may well vary significantly across voters, which would threaten the utilitar-
ian efficiency of the collective decision. Second, the quadratic cost creates
transparent incentives for collusion in vote-buying, which may hinder the
public trust in the system.43 Third, calibrating the cost function correctly
is not trivial. If the cost is high (for instance, if  is constant and not too
small), the equilibrium purchases of votes will be very low in a large pop-
ulation, so that actual purchases might be driven by considerations other
than pivotality (Kaplow    & Kominers, 2017). If the cost is low, (for instance,
if  is decreasing as 1/ N ), some voters will spend significant amounts of
  42
      These results are complemented by Chandar & Weyl (2019), who study exact
quadratic vote-buying in finite populations, where optimality need not hold. The mecha-
nism generally dominates standard majority voting, and when it does not, welfare losses
remain limited.
   43
      Weyl (2017) establishes a number of precise and sophisticated conjectures on the
robustness of quadratic voting to collusion, and concludes that the mechanism is less
fragile than the VCG mechanism.


                                          27
numeraire to purchase votes, which threatens the democratic legitimacy of
the mechanism, and even its utilitarian efficiency once wealth inequalities are
accounted for (Laurence & Sher, 2017).
    Vote-buying mechanisms are reminiscent of costly voting models, where
voters incur a cost, possibly individualized, to participate in an election be-
tween two alternatives. The models have a long tradition and a straightfor-
ward intuition: suppose that each voter draws, independently and from the
same distribution, a random cost linked to the act of voting. Participation
will then be higher among people who attach higher value to the election:
the redistribution of votes towards higher intensity voters occurs automati-
cally, and improves utilitarian efficiency. Among the earliest contributions,
Palfrey & Rosenthal (1983, 1985) made precise the strategic problem of a
voter facing voting costs; in the context of political competition, Ledyard
(1984) argued that costly voting leads candidates to locate at the utilitarian
optimal policy, rather than at the median policy. The recent literature has
focused on the stochastic properties of the distributions of the voting costs,
of the preference intensities, and of the number of supporters on each side as
determining the welfare properties of voluntary voting. A very useful entry
into the current state of the literature is Krishna & Morgan (2015) who show
that, in large binary elections, the equilibrium outcomes with heterogeneous
voting costs are utilitarian efficient, when elections are held under majority
rule.44


4        Storing and distributing votes
Buchanan and Tullock's discussion of majority voting started from the obser-
vation that committees are typically involved in multiple decisions, and thus
committee members have the opportunity to trade votes over different issues.
In fact, once we recognize that each voter votes over many decisions, trading
off votes over one issue for extra votes over another does not require inter-
personal trading. If the voting rule allows it, a voter can just as well "trade
votes with oneself", or shift the voter's own voting weight across the different
decisions. The logic is similar to logrolling, and as in the case of logrolling,
the allocation of votes across decisions avoids the difficulties posed by mar-
    44
     Among other contributions, see Borgers (2004), Krasa & Polborn (2009) and Taylor
& Yildirim (2010). Levine & Palfrey (2007) test several predictions of the theory in the
lab.


                                          28
kets for votes­in particular the differences in wealth among voters over which
the rule designer has no control. The idea is proposed, in passing, in Mueller
(1973), as an alternative to markets for votes. Mueller suggests endowing
each voter with 1,000 points, to be divided over multiple binary decisions.
Each decision is resolved according to the majority of total points cast on the
decision. Mueller posits that each voter evaluates the impact of her votes on
the probability of her favorite outcome prevailing through an arbitrary posi-
tive and concave function, equal across all decisions. The importance of the
precise shape of such a function leads him to conclude against the scheme.45
    More recently, the same intuitive scheme was proposed by Casella (2005)
(summarized and extended in Casella (2012)) under the name of Storable
Votes, and, independently, by Hortala-Vallve (2012). In these works, the im-
pact of cumulating votes on the probability of winning is captured precisely
by the change in the probability of being pivotal. The term Storable Votes
(SV) implies a temporal dimension­votes not cast on early elections can be
`stored" for future use. Time is relevant in a number of possible applica-
tions, but not necessary to the logic of the scheme. We thus present it in
the same set-up used in Section 2 when discussing logrolling. A committee
of N voters takes K binary decisions, and voters hold separable preferences
summarized by the profile z = {zik }. On each issue k , xk     k
                                                         i = |zi | denotes voter
i's preference intensity on that issue. We depart from the model of Section
2 however by assuming explicitly that preferences are private information,
and by anchoring the welfare discussion on utilitarian efficiency, and thus
on the cardinal representation of preferences. The stochastic properties of
individual valuations zik are central to the model. In the simplest case, indi-
vidual preferences zik are drawn, independently across individuals and across
proposals from a probability distribution F (zik ).46 Each proposal is decided
according to the majority of votes cast, with ties resolved randomly. As be-
fore, we indicate by P the set of proposals that pass. The voter's objective
is to maximize total utility kP zik .
    Under majority voting, each voter has one vote to cast on each proposal.
Under SV, in the most intuitive formulation each voter is again endowed with
  45
      In these terms, the conclusion is actually due to Laine (1977) who reevaluates
Mueller's analysis.
   46
      To highlight the main intuition, we present the model under these assumptions.
Casella (2012) discusses results when the distributions of values vary across proposals,
or when either direction of preferences alone or both direction and intensities are corre-
lated within subgroups.


                                           29
K total votes, but is free to distribute them as desired over the K proposals.
In general, on any one decision different voters will cast a different number
of votes. And yet, all voters are treated equally and all have the same total
number of votes.
     Because each decision is binary, voting in the direction of sincere pref-
erences is always weakly dominant. The interesting question is how to dis-
tribute the votes. The number of votes cast signals the intensity of the voter's
preferences on the issue, and because the expense of such votes comes at the
cost of votes on other issues, there is an intuitive sense in which the vot-
ing system induces incentive compatibility. The intuition is made precise in
Jackson & Sonnenschein (2007): across problems as diverse as voting, bar-
gaining, or the allocation of indivisible objects, linking decisions can work to
overcome incentive constraints and achieve full efficiency in the absence of
transfers.47
     Yet, outside the delicate mechanism specified by Jackson & Sonnenschein
(2007), it is difficult to translate this intuition into designing a fully efficient
voting rule because the decision of where to cast votes depends not only on
the relative values attributed to winning the different issues, but also, as
Mueller had remarked, on the probability that the vote makes a difference,
i.e. on pivotality. Thus the number of votes a voter is willing to cast depends
both on the voter's priorities and on the expectation of how many other votes
are cast and in which direction. Beyond restricted scenarios, SV cannot make
claims to full efficiency. It is instead designed to yield welfare improvements
over majority voting, while remaining simple to implement.
     SV changes the outcome of a decision, relative to simple majority rule,
only if the minority casts on that decision more votes than the majority does.
Minority victories become possible, but typically the minority will only win
decisions that are both felt intensely by its members and weakly by the oppo-
site larger group, the decisions that utilitarian criteria suggest the minority
should win. SV thus protects minorities with intense preferences. However,
   47
     The result in Jackson and Sonnenschein is of great intellectual beauty but is not
meant for practical implementation. It holds in the limit, as the number of linked decisions
                                            k
approaches infinity, as long as the values zi are independent across both individuals and
                                                 k
decisions, and as long as the distributions Fi (zi ) are identical across all k . The planner
requires agents to declare their values under the constraint that the distribution of each
agent's declared values replicates the theoretical distribution. The mechanism is part of
the literature on optimal mechanisms without transfers. Classic references are McAfee
(1992) and Pesendorfer (2000).



                                             30
when the division between majority and minority remains constant across
issues, a strong case can then be made for majority rule's lack of legitimacy,
regardless of intensity: voters who are consistently on the minority side are
effectively disenfranchised by majority rule. SV is also appropriate, in fact
possibly particularly so, in such situations.48
    In its protection of minorities, SV calls to mind existing semi-proportional
voting systems. A natural parallel is Cumulative Voting (CV), actively used
in the US in local and corporate elections (Sawyer & MacRae, 1962, Bhagat
& Brickley, 1984, Guinier, 1995). Under CV, voters electing a commission of
S members are each endowed with S votes and are able to cumulate as many
of these votes as desired on as few candidates as desired. SV differs from
CV because SV applies to multiple decisions, each of which has only two
possible outcomes, while CV applies to a single election choosing multiple
representatives from a larger set of candidates.49
    Casella (2012) reviews numerous works on SV, both theoretical and ex-
perimental, mostly applied to small size committees. Here we summarize the
system's properties when N , the number of voters, is large, and valuations
are independent across voters and proposals, drawing on Casella & Gelman
(2008). In this environment, it is generally optimal for a voter to cumulate
all votes on the single decision the voter considers most important.50 It is
thus sufficient for the rule designer to endow each voter with a single "bonus
vote" to be cast freely. To elicit some expression of voters' preferences be-
yond their first priority, it is then desirable to complement the bonus vote
with K "regular" votes­to be cast one on each proposal. The weight of the
  48
      Note that logrolling cannot help: a voter who is on the losing side of every issue
has no valuable vote to give away. Casella et al. (2017) discuss, both theoretically and
experimentally, how SV can grant a systematic minority a positive chance of prevailing
occasionally. In their model there are no differences in cardinal intensities (x = 1 always)
and occasional minority victories are defended as a goal in themselves. Lackner (2020)
introduces an alternative class of mechanisms where a voter's current votes are weighted
according to the voter's success in previous decisions. The mechanisms ensure a fair
distribution of influence when voters vote sincerely.
   49
      CV has the explicit goal of giving representation to the minority. For example, it is
easy to see that a cohesive minority that constitutes more than 1/(S + 1) of the electorate
and concentrates all its votes on a single candidate can guarantee itself one seat. CV is
quite different from SV. It would correspond to SV only if each candidate could compete
for one seat only, and each open seat were reserved for the winner between two specific
candidates, one from the majority and one from the minority party.
   50
      See Casella & Gelman (2008), section 7.1.1. As shown by Eguia & Xefteris (2018) in
the case of a centralized market for vote, linear costs lead to bunching.


                                            31
bonus vote, relative to a regular vote, can be set to B > 0, where B is a
choice variable for the designer. The modified design reflects SV's pragmatic
inspiration and, if B is not large, moves the voting scheme towards majority
voting. Overturning the majority's choice is possible but not easy.
    With large N and independent values, realized preferences on each issue
will converge to the theoretical distribution F . As N increases, the proba-
                                                                         z
bility of approval of proposal k by any random voter converges to 0 dF (z )
with probability 1, and thus is known ex ante, if the distribution F is pinned
down. As a result, also known ex ante with probability approaching 1, are
the majority voting outcomes and their efficiency properties. As pointed out
by the literature, a better assumption is that the probability of approval for
each proposal is stochastic (Good & Mayer, 1975, Margolis, 1977, Chamber-
lain & Rothschild, 1981, Gelman et al., 2002). Suppose that ex ante each
voter i has probability k of being in favor of proposal k (zik > 0), and 1 - k
of being against (zik < 0). The probability k is distributed according to a
distribution H defined over the support [0, 1], and each realized k , with
k = 1, .., K , is an independent draw from H . To rule out any expected
bias in favor or against the proposal, H is assumed to be symmetric around
1/2. In addition, to rule out systematic expected biases in intensities that
depend either on the direction of preferences or on specific proposals, condi-
tional on being in favor or against, the distribution of intensities (xk     k
                                                                       i = |zi |)
is assumed to be identical both across individuals, for given proposal, and
across proposals. It is denoted by Q(x).
    Casella and Gelman evaluate the welfare impact of SV, relative to ma-
jority voting. They construct the measure:
                                      SV    R
                                     WN  - WN
                              N =     MR    R
                                                                             (1)
                                     WN  - WN
          MR
where WN     is, as before, a voter's ex ante expected utility under majority
           R
voting, WN is a floor, given by expected utility under random decision mak-
                                                                SV
ing (when any proposal passes with probability 1/2), and WN        is ex ante
expected utility under SV. They conclude that for any weight of the bonus
vote B , SV outperforms majority:
    Result (Storable Votes in a large electorate). For all B > 0, for all
distributions H ( ) and Q(x), and for all K > 1, the measure N converges
and limN  N =  > 1: SV increases expected welfare relative to majority
voting.

                                       32
    In equilibrium, voters cast their bonus vote on the proposal to which they
attach the highest intensity, and thus it is towards that proposal that they
shift the probability of being on the winning side. As a result, expected
utility increases. The assumptions on H and Q impose symmetry on the
problem, an approach well-suited to a constitutional stage, preceding differ-
ent decisions. When asymmetries are allowed, the result in general depends
on the shape of the distributions, and thus the question is empirical, best
studied in field experiments and surveys. We return to this point below.
    We have argued earlier, with Casella and Gelman, that in a large elec-
torate SV is best designed as a single additional bonus vote added to multiple
regular votes because, if all votes can be moved freely across decisions, each
voter would bunch them all on a single decision. As we learned from Eguia
& Xefteris (2018), one alternative is to move away from the one-to-one trans-
formation of votes shifted across decisions, towards convex costs. Quadratic
Voting (QV) can be adapted to the problem on hand. With multiple bi-
nary decisions, QV could be implemented by paying for votes in an artificial
currency, "voices", which can be translated into votes at a quadratic cost.
Casting v k votes on proposal k requires spending (v k )2 voices on k . By build-
ing on the voters' own rankings of the different decisions, QV becomes similar
to SV, but with a quadratic cost. Relative to the original QV formulation,
"QV with voices" has the advantage that the voters' valuations are elicited
from trading-off different decisions, as opposed to trading-off one public de-
cision and private consumption, and thus no money is involved (Posner &
Weyl, 2015, Lalley & Weyl, 2018).
    There is no rigorous analysis of the equilibrium properties of QV in mul-
tiple elections. However, a simple model shows that in large electorates the
outcome could approach efficiency if voters ignore the complex impact on
pivotality of casting different numbers of votes. We know from Lalley &
Weyl (2019) that the marginal impact of a vote in general is not constant,
but the deviations may be too subtle for voters to take into account.
    Consider the following scenario.51 As at the start of this section, indi-
vidual valuations zik are independently drawn from the known probability
distribution F (zik ). Each voter is endowed with a budget of voices yi equal
to 1 to allocate across proposals. On each proposal, voices are transformed
  51
     The model, more transparent than Lalley & Weyl (2018) originates in a quick sketch
due to Glen Weyl. Its discussion is borrowed from the online appendix to Casella &
Sanchez (2019).



                                          33
into a number of votes equal to the square root of the dedicated voices: if
 k                                                          k
vi denotes the votes cast on proposal k by voter i, and yi    the correspond-
                  k
ing voices, then vi = yi   k
                             , or K   (
                                  k=1 i v k 2
                                           )  = K
                                                    y
                                                k=1 i
                                                      k
                                                        = 1.  Both voices and
votes are fully divisible, and voters vote sincerely. Each voter i faces the
constrained maximization problem:
                                 K                                 K
       max(-xk
             i 1{zi
                  k <0}      +         pk   k k
                                        i (vi )xi )   subject to           k 2
                                                                         (vi ) = 1,
        vi
                                 k=1                               k=1

where pk     k
         i (vi ) is the probability that proposal k is decided as i prefers when
          k
i casts vi  votes. Recall that x = |z | denotes absolute values, or intensities.
    Assume:
                                    pk     k
                                      i (vi )
                                         k
                                              = ci                            (2)
                                      vi
In words, the marginal impact of each vote is constant, across proposals
and for any number of votes cast. Then for each proposal k , the first order
                   k    c i xk
condition yields: vi = 2   i
                             i
                                where i is the Lagrange multiplier linked to the
budget constraint. Substituting the budget constraint K            k 2
                                                             k=1 (vi ) = 1, one
obtains 2ci
            i
              =    K
                     1
                      (xk )2
                               and thus:
                   k=1   i


                                  k               1
                                 vi =                       xk
                                                             i.                       (3)
                                                K     k 2
                                                k=1 (xi )

    The optimal number of votes cast on each proposal equals the voter's in-
tensity, normalized by the Euclidean norm of the voter's intensities across all
proposals. If such norms are similar across voters or if each individual's norm
is used to normalize cardinal values in the welfare criterion, then utilitarian
efficiency follows immediately. The number of votes cast in each proposal is
proportional to the voter's intensity, and thus each proposal is won by the
side with higher total intensities.
    The assumption that voices and votes are divisible eliminates uninterest-
ing integer constraints and recommends endowing voters with a large number
of voices; the requirement that intensity norms be equal across voters sug-
gests asking voters to distribute their voices over a large number of issues.
In practical implementations, both ingredients could be confusing for voters.
But the more substantive approximation is equation 2, the assumption of
constant marginal impact of additional votes, which we know from Lalley &

                                               34
Weyl (2019) will not hold in general even asymptotically at large N . Yet,
here practical considerations may help: what matters are the voters' beliefs,
and if voters miss the subtleties of pivotality and behave as if marginal ef-
fects were constant, then the desirable properties of QV may well be realized.
In short:
     Result (QV over multiple issues). If voices and votes are divisible,
K is large, and each voter i believes that pk       k    k
                                                i (vi )/vi = ci for all k and all
 k
vi , then QV with voices yields utilitarian efficiency.
    Note that, even QV with voices provides opportunities for collusion. Con-
sider two voters having the same preferred positions on two issues, but differ-
ent ranking of intensities: the first voter finds the first issue more important
and wishes to spend 4 voices on it but 0 voices on issue 2, while the oppo-
site is true for the second voter. Then, the pair can profitably exchange by
having each voter spending 1 voice per issue: the outcome is the same, but
they both spare 2 voices to be spent on other issues. We see that the logic is
very similar to logrolling, but, to our knowledge, the precise analysis of this
interaction remains open.
    At the end, beyond the theoretical exercises, the answers to the questions
we care about are empirical: What shapes do the distributions of valuations
take? How do voters think about pivotality? Are voters able to use effec-
tively a voting rule like QV with voices? To begin addressing these questions
outside the controlled environment of the lab, Casella & Sanchez (2019) ran
an incentivized survey on Mechanical Turk, asking approximately 600 Cal-
ifornia residents to vote, using either SV or a simplified version of QV, on
four propositions that were being prepared for popular vote in the 2016 Cal-
ifornia ballot.52 The first part of the survey elicited participants' direction
of preferences and asked them to distribute 100 "importance points" among
the four propositions. The points allocated could then be combined into a
measure of utilitarian welfare reflecting voting outcomes.
   52
      In the SV sample, subjects were granted one extra vote, in addition to four regular
votes (or B = 1). In the QV sample, subjects were asked to choose one of four different
classes of votes: four blue votes, each of weight 1, three green vote, each of weight 1.2;
two yellow votes, each of weight 1.5; or a single red vote of weight 2. Votes could not be
cumulated, and thus a person choosing green/yellow/red votes could cast votes on only
three/two/one propositions. Note that the simple four-class classification respects the
convex cost of concentrating votes: the decline in total voting weight is increasing with
concentration, and increasing at an increasing rate.



                                           35
    Because the two voting systems rely on the single budget constraint tying
the different voting decisions, the survey data correspond to two data points
only, one for SV and one for QV. To estimate the probability of minority
victories, as well as the efficiency properties of the two schemes, the authors
bootstrapped the data, generating two samples of 10,000 joint elections each
(i.e. 10,000 instances of voting on all four propositions), one for SV and one
for QV.
    Both systems perform well. Both result in non-negligible minority victo-
ries: depending on details of the bootstrapping procedure, between 30% and
40% of simulations in both samples have at least one proposition won by the
minority side. And while making minority victories possible, both systems
consistently raise the measure of total welfare, appropriating at least 80%
and as much as 99% of the available surplus. QV appears more sensitive to
minority preferences than SV, inducing more minority victories and appropri-
ating a larger share of the surplus. However, when the scope for improvement
over majority voting is small, such sensitivity has a cost and induces frequent
inefficient minority victories. SV is simpler, a strong argument in its favor,
but its performance is less consistent across plausible subjects' behaviors.


5     Concluding remarks
Sixty years after Buchanan & Tullock (1962)'s seminal analysis, the optimism
that characterizes their work on vote markets is difficult to share. Recent
works have overcome technical difficulties: even though traditional equilib-
rium concepts generally fail in vote markets, researchers have found that
these markets may generate stable outcomes ­ stable vote allocations un-
der logrolling and ex ante competitive equilibrium, or strategic market game
equilibrium when votes are exchanged against a numeraire. But the technical
advances have helped to show that final outcomes may be far from desirable
­ the Condorcet winner need not be reached via logrolling, and the utilitarian
efficiency of vote markets is generally inferior to simple majority rule.
    Nevertheless, theoretical analyses of vote markets have been useful in
advancing a research agenda aiming at improving collective decision rules.
When one public decision is at stake, quadratic voting ­ making voters pay
for their votes at a quadratic cost ­ can theoretically achieve utilitarian effi-
ciency. Yet, the theoretical promise relies most blatantly (but not exclusively)
on the assumption that inequalities in resources are not binding and evokes


                                       36
what we believe is justified repugnance associated to trade-offs between po-
litical influence and private wealth.53 We thus view as most encouraging the
mechanisms that only allow voters to trade with themselves, when several
decisions are to be voted upon. Both storable votes and a modified form of
quadratic voting fulfill this role, while varying in the precise details of their
implementation.
     We highlight a few promising directions for further research. First, all
the analyses we discuss rely on the assumption of private values. There is
however a long tradition considering collective decisions as the aggregation of
private information in a setting of common values, dating back to Condorcet
(1785). This perspective opens new questions on vote trading: would trade
channel votes to better informed individuals, thereby improving information
aggregation?54 How would the previous analyses evolve if voters' preferences
have both private and common values components?55
     Second, most of the welfare results we presented refer either to the Con-
dorcet winner or to utilitarian welfare. The welfare criterion must be linked
to the broader objectives of the researcher, and more generally, of society. For
example, if protection of the minority is a goal, identifying and enacting the
Condorcet winner is the wrong normative criterion: when voters are divided
into two groups of different sizes with systematically opposed preferences,
the Condorcet winner simply selects the majority-preferred alternative on
each issue. Utilitarian welfare can give some voice to minority interests, by
weighting preference intensities or when utilities over multiple decisions are
non-separable (Koriyama et al., 2013). Nevertheless, if the explicit goal is
to grant groups more balanced chances of prevailing in policy choices when
multiple decisions are at stake, a normative criterion derived directly from
fairness objectives becomes the appropriate reference point. Such concerns
are at the heart of recent works by computer scientists, on multi-winner elec-
tions (Aziz et al., 2017) and participatory budgeting (Freeman et al., 2019)
  53
      Walzer (1983)'s fundamental reminder that domains of influence should remain sep-
arate is very relevant here.
   54
      Focusing on corporate finance, a setting where the common values assumption fits
well, Christoffersen et al. (2007) argues that vote trading does occur (with prices close to
0) and achieves vote reallocation from less informed to more informed traders. Es¨  o et al.
(2015) propose a first model where the information aggregation argument is rigorously
identified.
   55
      In an unpublished manuscript, Piketty (1994) highlight the fragility of information
aggregation under vote trading in the presence of extremist private value voters.



                                            37
in particular. We believe that they will also be relevant for the analysis of
vote trading.
    Finally, beyond theoretical analyses and lab experiments, further work is
needed to understand better how the mechanisms we favor might work in
real-world settings, and in which environments they should be preferred to
standard majority voting. The Mechanical Turk study on storable votes and
quadratic voting with voices finds that both schemes outperform majority
voting. Yet one important question is left open. In those data, majority
voting delivers good results as well, appropriating between 72% and 95% of
surplus, depending on the simulations. Do the welfare gains produced by
either of the new schemes justify abandoning majority rule­a transparent,
legitimate system voters understand well? It is a question in political philos-
ophy and well beyond the scope of this survey, but a question that reformers
of voting systems will need to address.


Disclosure statement
The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or fi-
nancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this
review.


Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the institutions that, throughout the years, have sup-
ported the works discussed in this survey, in particular the National Sci-
ence Foundation, through its grants SES-00214013 and SES-0617934, the
Agence Nationale de la Recherche, through its grants ANR-17-CE26-0003
and ANR-17-EURE-001, the Guggenheim Foundation, the Institute for Ad-
vanced Studies, the Straus Institute at the NYU Law School, and finally the
Alliance Program at Columbia and Universit´    e Paris 1 that made our collab-
oration possible. We are also very grateful to the colleagues, friends, and
students who have worked with us, in particular Tom Palfrey, whose collab-
oration shaped both specific papers and broad ideas, Jean Fran¸     cois Laslier,
who brought us together and whose teachings and moral compass helped to
keep us straight, and Rafael Treibich for fruitful discussions and in particular
comments on this survey which opened new perspectives.


                                       38
References
Alonso R, C^
           amara O. 2016. Persuading voters. American Economic Review
  106:3590­3605

Arrow K, Hahn F. 1971. General competitive analysis. San Francisco: Holder
  Day

Arrow KJ. 1951. Social choice and individual values. New York: Wiley

Aziz H, Brill M, Conitzer V, Elkind E, Freeman R, Walsh T. 2017. Justi-
  fied representation in approval-based committee voting. Social Choice and
  Welfare 48:461­485

Bebchuk LA, Kamar E. 2009. Bundling and entrenchment. Harvard Law
  Review 123:1549

Bentley AF. 1908. The process of government: A study of social pressures.
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Bernholz P. 1973. Logrolling, Arrow paradox and cyclical majorities. Public
  Choice 15:87­95

Bernholz P. 1974. Logrolling, Arrow paradox and decision rules ­ a general-
  ization. Kyklos 27:49­62

Bhagat S, Brickley JA. 1984. Cumulative voting: The value of minority share-
  holder voting rights. The Journal of Law and Economics 27:339­365

Borgers T. 2004. Costly voting. American Economic Review 94:57­66

Buchanan JM, Tullock G. 1962. The calculus of consent. University of Michi-
  gan press Ann Arbor

C^
 amara O, Eguia JX. 2017. Slicing and bundling. The Journal of Politics
  79:1460­1464

Carrubba CJ, Volden C. 2000. Coalitional politics and logrolling in legislative
  institutions. American Journal of Political Science 44:261­277

Casella A. 2005. Storable votes. Games and Economic Behavior 51:391­419


                                      39
Casella A. 2012. Storable votes: protecting the minority voice. Oxford Uni-
  versity Press

Casella A, Gelman A. 2008. A simple scheme to improve the efficiency of
  referenda. Journal of Public Economics 92:2240­2261

Casella A, Laslier JF, Mac´ e A. 2017. Democracy for polarized committees:
  The tale of Blotto's lieutenants. Games and Economic Behavior 106:239­
  259

Casella A, Llorente-Saguer A, Palfrey TR. 2012. Competitive equilibrium in
  markets for votes. Journal of Political Economy 120:593­658

Casella A, Palfrey T. 2018a. Trading votes for votes: A dynamic theory.
  Social Science Working Paper No. 1444, California Institute of Technology

Casella A, Palfrey T. 2019. Trading votes for votes. a dynamic theory. Econo-
  metrica 87:631­652

Casella A, Palfrey T, Turban S. 2014. Vote trading with and without party
  leaders. Journal of Public Economics 112:115­128

Casella A, Palfrey TR. 2018b. An experimental study of vote trading. Social
  Science Working Paper No. 1445, California Institute of Technology

Casella A, Sanchez L. 2019. Storable votes and quadratic voting. an experi-
  ment on four California propositions. NBER WP. No 25510

Casella A, Turban S. 2014. Democracy undone. systematic minority advan-
  tage in competitive vote markets. Games and Economic Behavior 88:47­70

Chamberlain G, Rothschild M. 1981. A note on the probability of casting a
 decisive vote. Journal of Economic Theory 25:152­162

Chandar B, Weyl EG. 2019. Quadratic voting in finite populations. Available
 at SSRN 2571026

Christoffersen SE, Geczy CC, Musto DK, Reed AV. 2007. Vote trading and
 information aggregation. The Journal of Finance 62:2897­2929

Chwe MSY. 1994. Farsighted coalitional stability. Journal of Economic The-
  ory 63:299­325

                                     40
Cohen L, Malloy CJ. 2014. Friends in high places. American Economic Jour-
  nal: Economic Policy 6:63­91

Coleman JS. 1966. The possibility of a social welfare function. The American
  Economic Review 56:1105­1122

Coleman JS. 1967. The possibility of a social welfare function: Reply. The
  American Economic Review 57:1311­1317

Condorcet JANdC. 1785. Essai sur l'application de l'analyse `  a la probabilit´
                                                                              e
  des d´
       ecisions rendues `
                        a la pluralit´
                                     e des voix. Paris, l'Imprimerie Royale

Cox JD, Ferri F, Honigsberg C, Thomas RS. 2015. Quieting the sharehold-
  ers' voice: Empirical evidence of pervasive bundling in proxy solicitations.
  Southern California Low Review 89:1179­1242

Dal Bo E. 2007. Bribing voters. American Journal of Political Science
 51:789­803

Dekel E, Jackson MO, Wolinsky A. 2008. Vote buying: General elections.
  Journal of Political Economy 116:351­380

Dekel E, Jackson MO, Wolinsky A. 2009. Vote buying: Legislatures and
  lobbying. Quantitative Journal of Political Science 4:103­128

Dutta B, Vohra R. 2017. Rational expectations and farsighted stability. The-
 oretical Economics 12:1191­1227

Eguia JX, Immorlica N, Ligett K, Weyl G, Xefteris D. 2019. Quadratic voting
  with multiple alternatives. Michigan State U. Dept. of Economics Working
  paper 2019-01

Eguia JX, Xefteris D. 2018. Implementation by vote-buying mechanisms.
  Available at SSRN 3138614

Es¨
  o P, Hansen S, White L. 2015. A theory of vote-trading and information
  aggregation. Tech. rep.

Faliszewski P, Rothe J. 2016. Control and bribery in voting. In Handbook
  of Computational Social Choice, eds. F Brandt, V Conitzer, U Endriss,
  J Lang, AD Procaccia, chap. 7. Cambridge University Press, 146­168


                                      41
Ferejohn JA. 1974. Sour notes on the theory of vote trading. Social Science
  Working Paper No 41, California Institute of Technology

Fischbacher U, Schudy S. 2014. Reciprocity and resistance to comprehensive
  reform. Public Choice 160:411­428

Fischbacher U, Schudy S. 2020. Agenda control and reciprocity in sequential
  voting decisions. Economic Inquiry

Freeman R, Pennock DM, Peters D, Wortman Vaughan J. 2019. Truthful ag-
  gregation of budget proposals, In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Conference
  on Economics and Computation, pp. 751­752

Gelman A, Katz JN, Tuerlinckx F. 2002. The mathematics and statistics of
 voting power. Statistical Science 17:420­435

Goeree JK, Zhang J. 2017. One man, one bid. Games and Economic Behavior
 101:151­171

Good IJ, Mayer LS. 1975. Estimating the efficacy of a vote. Behavioral Sci-
 ence 20:25­33

Grandi U, Grossi D, Turrini P. 2019. Negotiable votes. Journal of Artificial
  Intelligence Research 64:895­929

Groseclose T, Snyder Jr JM. 1996. Buying supermajorities. American Polit-
  ical Science Review 90:303­315

Guerrero OA, Matter U. 2016. Revealing the anatomy of vote trading. Sa¨
                                                                      id
 Business School WP 26

Guinier L. 1995. Tyranny of the majority: Fundamental fairness in represen-
 tative democracy. Free Press

Haefele ET. 1971. A utility theory of representative government. The Amer-
  ican Economic Review 61:350­367

Hortala-Vallve R. 2011. Generous legislators? A description of vote trading
  agreements. Quarterly Journal of Political Science 6:179­196

Hortala-Vallve R. 2012. Qualitative voting. Journal of Theoretical Politics
  24:526­554

                                    42
Hylland A, Zeckhauser R. 1979. A mechanism for selecting public goods when
 preferences must be elicited. Working paper, Kennedy School of Govern-
 ment, Harvard University

Iaryczower M, Oliveros S. 2016. Power brokers: Middlemen in legislative
  bargaining. Journal of Economic Theory 162:209­236

Jackson MO, Sonnenschein HF. 2007. Overcoming incentive constraints by
  linking decisions. Econometrica 75:241­257

Kadane JB. 1972. On division of the question. Public Choice 13:47­54

Kaplow L, Kominers SD. 2017. Who will vote quadratically? Voter turnout
 and votes cast under quadratic voting. Public Choice 172:125­149

Koehler DH. 1975. Vote trading and the voting paradox: A proof of logical
 equivalence. The American Political Science Review 69:954­960

Koford KJ. 1982. Centralized vote-trading. Public Choice 39:245­268

Koriyama Y, Laslier JF, Mac´
                           e A, Treibich R. 2013. Optimal apportionment.
 Journal of Political Economy 121:584­608

Krasa S, Polborn MK. 2009. Is mandatory voting better than voluntary vot-
  ing? Games and Economic Behavior 66:275­291

Krishna V, Morgan J. 2015. Majority rule and utilitarian welfare. American
  Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7:339­75

Kultti K, Salonen H. 2005. Market for votes. Homo Oeconomicus 23:323­332

Lackner M. 2020. Perpetual voting: Fairness in long-term decision making.
  AAAI2020

Laine CR. 1977. Strategy in point voting: A note. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 91:505­507

Lalley S, Weyl EG. 2019. Nash equilibria for quadratic voting. Available at
  SSRN 2488763

Lalley SP, Weyl EG. 2018. Quadratic voting: How mechanism design can
  radicalize democracy, In AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 108, pp. 33­37

                                    43
Lang J, Xia L. 2016. Voting in combinatorial domains. In Handbook of Com-
  putational Social Choice, eds. F Brandt, V Conitzer, U Endriss, J Lang,
  AD Procaccia, chap. 9. Cambridge University Press, 197­222

Laurence B, Sher I. 2017. Ethical considerations on quadratic voting. Public
  Choice 172:195­222

Ledyard JO. 1984. The pure theory of large two-candidate elections. Public
  Choice 44:7­41

Levine DK, Palfrey TR. 2007. The paradox of voter participation? A labo-
  ratory study. American Political Science Review 101:143­158

Margolis H. 1977. Probability of a tie election. Public Choice 31:135­138

Mauleon A, Vannetelbosch VJ, Vergote W. 2011. von Neumann­Morgenstern
 farsightedly stable sets in two-sided matching. Theoretical Economics
 6:499­521

McAfee RP. 1992. Amicable divorce: Dissolving a partnership with simple
 mechanisms. Journal of Economic Theory 56:266­293

McKelvey RD, Ordeshook PC. 1980. Vote trading: An experimental study.
 Public Choice 35:151­184

Miller NR. 1977a. Graph-theoretical approaches to the theory of voting.
 American Journal of Political Science 21:769­803

Miller NR. 1977b. Logrolling, vote trading, and the paradox of voting: A
 game-theoretical overview. Public Choice 30:51­75

Mueller DC. 1967. The possibility of a social welfare function: Comment.
 The American Economic Review 57:1304­1311

Mueller DC. 1973. Constitutional democracy and social welfare. The Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics 87:60­80

Mueller DC, Philpotts GC, Vanek J. 1972. The social gains from exchanging
 votes: A simulation approach. Public Choice 13:55­79

Myerson RB. 1993. Incentives to cultivate favored minorities under alterna-
 tive electoral systems. American Political Science Review 87:856­869

                                    44
Myerson RB, Satterthwaite MA. 1983. Efficient mechanisms for bilateral
 trading. Journal of Economic Theory 29:265­281

Palfrey TR, Rosenthal H. 1983. A strategic calculus of voting. Public Choice
  41:7­53

Palfrey TR, Rosenthal H. 1985. Voter participation and strategic uncertainty.
  The American Political Science Review 79:62­78

Park RE. 1967. The possibility of a social welfare function: Comment. The
  American Economic Review 57:1300­1304

Pesendorfer M. 2000. A study of collusion in first-price auctions. The Review
  of Economic Studies 67:381­411

Philipson TJ, Snyder JM. 1996. Equilibrium and efficiency in an organized
  vote market. Public Choice 89:245­265

Piketty T. 1994. Information aggregation through voting and vote-
  trading. unpublished, available at:          http://www. jourdan. ens.
  fr/piketty/fichiers/public/Piketty1994c. pdf

Posner EA, Weyl EG. 2015. Voting squared: Quadratic voting in democratic
  politics. Vanderbilt Law Review 68:441

Ray D, Vohra R. 2015. The farsighted stable set. Econometrica 83:977­1011

Riker WH, Brams SJ. 1973. The paradox of vote trading. The American
  Political Science Review 67:1235­1247

Sawyer J, MacRae D. 1962. Game theory and cumulative voting in Illinois:
  1902-1954. The American Political Science Review 56:936­946

Schwartz T. 1975. Vote trading and pareto efficiency. Public Choice 24:101­
  109

Schwartz T. 1977. Collective choice, separation of issues and vote trading.
  American Political Science Review 71:999­1010

Schwartz T. 1981. The universal-instability theorem. Public Choice 37:487­
  501


                                     45
Shapley L, Shubik M. 1977. Trade using one commodity as a means of pay-
  ment. Journal of Political Economy 85:937­968

Shubik M, Van der Heyden L. 1978. Logrolling and budget allocation games.
  International Journal of Game Theory 7:151­162

Taylor CR, Yildirim H. 2010. A unified analysis of rational voting with private
  values and group-specific costs. Games and Economic Behavior 70:457­471

Tideman N, Plassmann F. 2017. Efficient collective decision-making,
  marginal cost pricing, and quadratic voting. Public Choice 172:45­73

Tsakas N, Xefteris D, Ziros N. 2020. Vote trading in power-sharing systems:
  A laboratory investigation. Available at SSRN 3261141

Tullock G. 1959. Problems of majority voting. Journal of Political Economy
  67:571­579

Tullock G. 1961. Problems of majority voting: reply to a traditionalist. Jour-
  nal of Political Economy 69:200­203

Tullock G. 1970. A simple algebraic logrolling model. The American Eco-
  nomic Review 60:419­426

Walzer M. 1983. Spheres of justice: A defense of pluralism and equality. Basic
 Books: New York

Weiss JH. 1988. Is vote-selling desirable? Public Choice 59:177­194

Weyl EG. 2017. The robustness of quadratic voting. Public Choice 172:75­
 107

Wilson R. 1969. An axiomatic model of logrolling. The American Economic
 Review 59:331­341

Xefteris D, Ziros N. 2017. Strategic vote trading in power sharing systems.
  American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 9:76­94

Xefteris D, Ziros N. 2018. Strategic vote trading under complete information.
  Journal of Mathematical Economics 78:52­58



                                      46
