                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE ON SHOCK-DEPENDENT EXCHANGE RATE
                            PASS-THROUGH

                                         Kristin Forbes
                                          Ida Hjortsoe
                                       Tsvetelina Nenova

                                      Working Paper 27746
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27746


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




The authors would like to thank Ines Nicole Lee for excellent research assistance. The authors are
also grateful to Philippe Martin and Robert Kollmann for insightful discussions and to Ambrogio
Cesa-Bianchi, Roland Meeks, Marek Raczko and participants at conferences and seminars at the
Bank of England, European Central Bank, International Monetary Fund, and Riksbank, for
helpful comments. Further thanks for input from Linda Tesar and two anonymous referees. The
views in this paper do not represent the official views of the Bank of England or its Monetary
Policy Committee. Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kristin Forbes, Ida Hjortsoe, and Tsvetelina Nenova. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Evidence on Shock-Dependent Exchange Rate Pass-Through
Kristin Forbes, Ida Hjortsoe, and Tsvetelina Nenova
NBER Working Paper No. 27746
August 2020
JEL No. E31,E37,E52,F47

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyse the economic conditions (the "shocks") behind currency movements and show how
that analysis can help address a range of questions, focusing on exchange rate pass-through to
prices. We build on a methodology previously developed for the United Kingdom and adapt this
framework so that it can be applied to a diverse sample of countries using widely available data.
The paper provides three examples of how this enriched methodology can be used to provide
insights on pass-through and other questions. First, it shows that exchange rate movements
caused by monetary policy shocks consistently correspond to significantly higher pass-through
than those caused by demand shocks in a cross-section of countries, confirming earlier results for
the UK. Second, it shows that the underlying shocks (especially monetary policy shocks) are
particularly important for understanding the time-series dimension of pass-through, while the
standard structural variables highlighted in previous literature are most important for the cross-
section dimension. Finally, the paper explores how the methodology can be used to shed light on
the effects of monetary policy and the debate on "currency wars": it shows that the role of
monetary policy shocks in driving the exchange rate has increased moderately since the global
financial crisis in advanced economies.

Kristin Forbes                                  Tsvetelina Nenova
MIT Sloan School of Management                  London Business School
100 Main Street, E62-416                        London, UK
Cambridge, MA 02142                             tsvetelina.nenova@gmail.com
and CEPR
and also NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu

Ida Hjortsoe
Bank of England
London, UK
ida.hjortsoe@bankofengland.co.uk
  I.        Introduction

    Exchange rate movements affect a wide range of economic variables--from the ability of a
company to service its debt or compete internationally, to a country's inflation rate and GDP growth.
Therefore, understanding how any exchange rate fluctuation affects these economic variables is
critically important for modelling macroeconomic dynamics, economic forecasting, and setting
monetary policy. Estimating the impact of exchange rate movements, however, is not
straightforward. For example, the pass-through from exchange rate movements to prices (ERPT) not
only varies substantially across countries and over longer time spans (the focus of most empirical
work), but also over shorter periods within countries. This paper shows that in order to understand
the impact of exchange rate movements on inflation and other variables, it is important to explicitly
model and incorporate the economic conditions driving exchange rate movements (i.e., the shocks).
It builds on a SVAR framework that was previously developed to explicitly model the role of the
shocks behind exchange rate movements for the UK, but adapts the framework so that it can be
applied using widely available data for a range of diverse countries. Then it provides several
examples of how this framework can be used to improve our understanding of inflation dynamics for
a range of countries, as well as to provide insights on other important economic developments.

    To motivate this analysis, the paper begins by estimating pass-through to consumer prices using
a standard reduced-form model, based on the seminal work in Campa and Goldberg (2005, 2010),
recently updated in Burstein and Gopinath (2014). We focus on a sample of 26 small open
economies with flexible exchange rates that will also form the basis for the subsequent analysis. The
reduced-form estimates of pass-through confirm earlier work highlighting substantial variation
across countries. A large empirical literature has focused on explaining these meaningful differences
in pass-through across countries by examining structural economic characteristics (including policy
regimes). Our reduced form estimates, however, also show substantial variation in pass-through
over time within countries--a variation which has received less attention. Pass-through increases
over time in some countries, decreases in others, and shows sharp, short-lived movements during
some periods in others.

    Could this variation in pass-through across time (and possibly across countries), partly reflect the
role of economic conditions ­ the underlying structural shocks behind exchange rate movements? If
so, this would support the theoretical literature showing that firms adjust their prices and mark-ups
differently after different shocks. This would also imply that the shocks leading to an exchange rate
movement can be important in determining the effects on pricing, inflation, and other economic



                                                   1
variables. 1 Although this point is generally understood and has been incorporated in some recent
empirical work focussing on an individual country or region, it is usually not explicitly incorporated in
empirical papers estimating pass-through and there has been no analysis of the importance of these
underlying economic shocks relative to other determinants of pass-through. The limited number of
papers that have made some attempt to model the underlying shocks include: Shambaugh (2008),
which was the first paper to identify a set of shocks to exchange rates for several countries through
long-run restrictions, and more recently Forbes, Hjortsoe and Nenova (2018), which develops a more
extensive SVAR framework to study shock-dependent exchange rate pass-through in the UK. 2
Comunale and Kunovac (2017) and Corbo and Di Casola (2018) also apply this latter SVAR framework
to selected euro area economies and Sweden, respectively. These SVAR studies all find evidence for
the specific country (or region) on which they focus, supporting theoretical work that a given
exchange rate movement can be associated with very different price dynamics depending on the
underlying shock. None of these papers, however, assesses the relative importance of these shocks
for understanding pass-through relative to the importance of the structural variables that are
generally the focus of this literature. These frameworks also rely on specific identifying assumptions
or country-specific data, which make them difficult to apply to a cross-section of countries.

    Do these insights for this limited set of countries apply to a larger and more diverse sample--
including emerging markets and countries outside of Europe? Are there empirical regularities across
countries in terms of which shocks behind exchange rate movements correspond to larger (or
smaller) degrees of pass-through? And how important is the role of these shocks in explaining pass-
through relative to the role of the structural variables on which the literature has focused?
Answering these questions is more complicated than simply applying the framework used for the UK
and European countries to other nations as some of the data used in earlier work is not widely
available, and some of the underlying model assumptions may not apply to other countries. This
paper therefore attempts to answer these questions by modifying the SVAR framework developed
for the UK in Forbes, Hjortsoe and Nenova (2018) so that it can be applied to a sample of 26 diverse


1 This literature includes Bils (1987), Dornbusch (1987), Krugman (1987), Klein (1990), Rotemberg and Woodford (1999),
and more recently Corsetti et al. (2009) and Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2015). Nakamura and Steinsson (2013) discuss the link
between the micro and macro literature. For discussion of the implications for pass-through, see Burstein and Gopinath
(2014), Campa and Goldberg (2005) and Ito and Sato (2008).
2 The shock-based approach in Shambaugh (2008) did not receive the attention it deserved, and its insights were not

incorporated in subsequent research and estimation of pass-through. The framework developed in Forbes et al. (2018)
improves on Shambaugh (2008) in three ways: (1) uses different shocks that are more closely linked to the theoretical
literature and more straightforward to interpret for empirical analysis; (2) uses advances in SVAR methodology to better
identify these richer shocks behind exchange rate fluctuations and better mitigate concerns with weak identification in
SVAR models with long-run restrictions; and (3) considers the effects of these shocks on a broader set of variables--
including interest rates and foreign export prices. These improvements link the empirical model more closely to the
theoretical literature and make the framework more applicable and usable for forecasting key economic outcomes such as
inflation.

                                                             2
economies. This large country sample also allows us to address additional questions--such as a
comparison of the role of the underlying shocks, relative to standard structural variables, for
understanding variations in pass-through across countries and over time.

    Our estimates show how different shocks correspond to different degrees of pass-through
across the diverse sample, and although certain types of shocks (particularly global shocks) have
dissimilar effects across countries, there are certain empirical regularities and consistent findings.
For example, monetary policy shocks correspond to a positive correlation between exchange rate
and price responses in all countries, and generate larger pass-through effects than the other shocks
in most countries. In contrast, domestic demand shocks correspond to a negative response of prices
even alongside an exchange rate depreciation, and generate less pass-through than monetary policy
shocks in all countries. We also find substantial variation in the importance of different shocks
driving exchange rate movements across countries, and especially over time within individual
countries. The nature of the shocks driving exchange rate movements can therefore be important in
explaining differences in pass-through across countries, and especially over time within countries.

    To better highlight the magnitudes and importance of explicitly controlling for the shocks when
estimating pass-through, especially in comparison to previous literature which tends to focus on
slow-moving structural determinants, we then estimate a series of cross-sectional and panel
regressions and apply the results to individual countries. We explore how important our shock-based
framework is for explaining differences in the impact of exchange rate movements on prices in both
the cross-section and time-series dimension, including when simultaneously controlling for
structural country characteristics previously highlighted in the literature (such as the volatility of
inflation and trade openness). 3

    The results suggest that the prevalence of different shocks can help explain the variation in pass-
through across individual countries, but is more important for understanding the variation in pass-
through over time within individual countries. More specifically, in the cross-section, the role of the
shocks fluctuates based on the specification and can be insignificant when simultaneously
controlling for structural characteristics. In contrast, in the time-series, the role of the shocks
(especially monetary policy shocks) is consistently significant across a range of specifications, even
when controlling for a range of structural characteristics (which also continue to be important). The




3See Campa and Goldberg (2005, 2010), Gopinath et al. (2010), Gopinath (2015), Devereux et al. (2015), Gagnon and Ihrig
(2004), Choudri and Hakura (2006), Caselli and Roitman (2016), Carriere-Swallow et al. (2016) and Amiti et al. (2016).

                                                           3
underlying shocks, as well as structural characteristics, are both significant and economically
meaningful for understanding changes in pass-through over time.

    This shock-based framework used to estimate the effects of exchange rate movements on prices
can also be useful to explore a range of other issues. The last section of the paper provides one
example: to assess if monetary policy played a greater role in driving exchange rate volatility
following the Global Financial Crisis. Over the last decade, many countries have relied heavily on
monetary policy to support growth, including the use of unconventional tools. Has this greater
reliance on monetary policy caused more volatility in exchange rate movements than in the past?
The shock-based analysis suggests that for advanced economies (but not emerging markets),
monetary policy has driven a moderately larger share of exchange rate movements than during a
comparable period before the crisis. This increased role of monetary policy for exchange rates,
however, does not appear to be larger for countries around the effective lower bound (ELB) on
interest rates that used unconventional monetary policies (even though these countries had a larger
increase in exchange rate volatility). These results provide mixed support for the increased concerns
around "currency wars". Monetary policy may have played a greater role in driving exchange rate
movements since the crisis and thereby generated increased spillovers, but it is not clear that this
has led to higher exchange rate volatility or that unconventional monetary tools are aggravating
these concerns.

    The paper concludes that understanding the economic conditions behind exchange rate
movements can be important for addressing a range of questions. Models assessing pass-through
should not only consider the structure of the economy, but also explicitly account for the shocks
underlying exchange rate movements. Central banks, or any institution attempting to forecast
inflation, should avoid using historic "rules of thumb" to predict how a given exchange-rate
movement will pass-through into inflation, and instead directly incorporate the shocks underlying
the exchange rate movement into their models. 4 The importance of this framework for setting
monetary policy has begun to be discussed (as pointed out in Coeuré (2017), Bank of England (2015)
and Forbes (2015)), but this paper demonstrates its importance for a broad set of countries and
shows how this modelling framework can be applied more generally. The contribution of monetary
policy to exchange rate movements, and how that role may have changed since the crisis, is
important for understanding the political sensitivities around "currency wars" and the associated
potential for increased volatility in exchange rates and resultant spillovers.



4 See "Using rules of thumb for exchange rate pass-through could be misleading" by Forbes, Hjortsoe and Nenova,

voxeu.org, 12 February 2016.

                                                           4
      The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section II reports reduced-form estimates of pass-
through across countries and over time. Section III describes the generalized SVAR model to
estimate shock-based determinants of exchange rate pass-through. Section IV reports results on the
role of shocks and country structure in explaining differences in pass-through across countries and
over time. Section V examines if the role of monetary shocks in driving exchange rate movements
has changed since the crisis and what this implies for concerns about "currency wars". Section VI
concludes.




    II.        Estimates of Pass-through Across Countries and Over Time

      This section estimates pass-through coefficients for each country in our sample and for different
periods using a standard, reduced-form specification. It begins by discussing the sample, data, and
methodology. Then it reports estimates of the average rate of pass-through for each country over
the full sample, concluding with estimates that vary over time.

               a. Sample, data and methodology

          We focus on a sample of diverse countries from 1990-2015 that meet three criteria: have
flexible exchange rates, are "small open" economies, and have key data required for the analysis.

          First, countries in our sample must be classified as having a de facto floating exchange rate
throughout at least the ten years from 2006 to 2015, according to the IMF. 5 This yields a sample
duration of up to 26 years (1990-2015) for countries with a long history of floating exchange rates
(such as Australia and Japan) but no shorter than 10 years for countries which adopted floating
exchange rates more recently (such as Israel, Romania and Serbia).

          Second, countries must be "small open economies", in the sense their economic conditions
do not affect global variables. This requirement is necessary to satisfy the identification assumptions
for our SVAR model used to extract the shocks driving the exchange rate (discussed in Section III). In
our base case, this only involves excluding the United States from our sample, although we also
examine the impact of removing Japan. China and countries in the euro area were already excluded
as they do not meet the criterion of having flexible exchange rates.




5The de facto floating exchange rate regime categories in the IMF's classification are "floating" and "free floating". See the
IMF's 67th Annual Report on Exchange Rate Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions for 2015. Switzerland is the one
country in our sample that is not continuously classified as "floating" since 2006 due to the ceiling on the Swiss franc from
September 2011 to January 2015, but excluding it from the analysis does not impact the key results.

                                                              5
          The final requirement for our sample is that quarterly data on domestic consumer prices,
exchange rates, short-term interest rates and real GDP are available. The resulting sample of 26
countries includes 11 advanced economies (Australia, Canada, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Korea, New
Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom) and 15 economies we refer to as
"emerging" (Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ghana, India, Mexico, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania,
Serbia, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey and Uruguay). The data sources, definitions and periods used
for each country are listed in Appendix A.

          In order to obtain pass-through estimates for this sample of advanced and emerging
economies, we follow the standard methodology developed in Campa and Goldberg (2005, 2010),
and recently updated in Burstein and Gopinath (2014). More specifically, we estimate a distributed
lag regression of changes in domestic consumer prices on the following explanatory variables:
changes in the trade-weighted exchange rate (contemporaneous to four quarter lags), changes in
the trade-weighted export prices of trading partners (contemporaneous to fourth quarter lags), and
GDP growth (contemporaneous). The resulting country regressions can be expressed as:

          , =  + 4         4
                 =0 , ,- + =0  , ,- +  , +  , ,                                                                           (1)

where , is the quarterly log change in the domestic consumer price index (CPI) of country i in
period t; ,- is the quarterly log change in country i's trade-weighted exchange rate index in
period t-n; ,- is the quarterly log change in country i's trade-weighted world export prices in
period t-n; and , is the log change in country i's real GDP. 6

          Exchange rate pass-through in country i is captured by the sum of the coefficients on all lags
of the exchange rate, i.e. 4
                           =0  , . Equation (1) is estimated using OLS with Newey-West standard

errors robust to autocorrelation of lag order of up to eight quarters.

               b. Reduced-form estimates of pass-through

          Panel a) of Figure 1 shows the resulting estimates of "long-sample" pass-through for our
sample of advanced and emerging economies over the full sample period from 1990 through 2015
(or as long as possible for each country). The red diamonds show the point estimates from the
country-by-country estimates of equation (1), and the corresponding blue bars show the 95%
confidence bands. The black dashed line running across the graph shows the pass-through


6The last term is included to control for changes in domestic conditions which could affect prices directly rather than just
through the exchange rate. We also estimated 27 variations of Equation (1), including with no control for GDP growth and
different controls (such as short-term interest rates, oil prices and one to four lags of the dependent variable). The results
were generally stable and similar to the baseline. See Appendix B in Forbes et al. (2017).

                                                               6
coefficient estimated from a panel regression with the entire country sample and controlling for
country fixed effects, with the orange shading the corresponding confidence band from this panel
regression. Higher estimates imply greater pass-through, i.e. the more prices rise (fall) after a given
exchange rate depreciation (appreciation). The interpretation of the point estimates is
straightforward: a 0.1 coefficient means that a 1% increase in the exchange rate (1% depreciation)
corresponds to a 0.1% increase in the level of consumer prices.

          The figure shows that long sample pass-through varies substantially across countries, as well
as relative to the pass-through estimated for the full sample in the panel regression. It ranges from
around 0 in several countries to around 50% in Mexico and 70% in Turkey. The average rate of pass-
through for advanced economies is 5% (or 0.05), while the average for the emerging economies is
23% (or 0.23). For many countries the 95% confidence bands are small, indicating fairly precise
estimates, although for some countries with few data points the bands are substantially wider (such
as Poland and Romania). Comparing the country-specific to the panel estimates reveals that for a
majority of countries in our sample assuming a common pass-through coefficient across countries
would result in significantly different estimates than experienced in that country.

          Figure 1, panels b) and c) also depict the corresponding pass-through coefficients and 95%
confidence bands for each country over four 6-year periods: 1992-1997, 1998-2003, 2004-2009, and
2010-2015. The comparison with panel a) suggests that the long-sample estimates can miss
meaningful changes in pass-through over time within individual countries. 7 This supports results for
individual countries showing pass-through can change over time, such as for the UK in Forbes et al.
(2018), for Switzerland in Stulz (2007), for the euro area in Comunale and Kunovac (2017) and Coeuré
(2017), and for the United States from the 1980s to the 1990s. 8 In some countries (such as Japan,
Switzerland and the UK), pass-through has increased over the sample period, while in other
countries (such as Australia, Brazil, and Mexico), pass-through has decreased at some point. In some
countries, pass-through spikes in one period and then falls back (such as in Canada and Philippines).

          Data for emerging economies over the earlier periods is more limited, and some of the
sharpest increases in pass-through in emerging economies correspond to financial or currency crises.
To ensure that the focus on these arbitrary 6-year periods does not affect our results, we also
estimate equation (1) using 7-year, 8-year and 10-year periods. These time-varying estimates of


7 Despite the short sample periods of only 6 years, the differences in the estimated pass-through coefficients over these
short periods are statistically significant and economically meaningful in some cases but not always. More specifically, the
estimated pass-through coefficient for Japan, Korea, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Poland, Romania, South Africa, Turkey and
Uruguay differ significantly either between some of the six-year windows or relative to the "long sample" pass-through
estimate (or both).
8 See Marazzi et al. (2005) and Gust et al. (2010).



                                                              7
pass-through also highlight the diversity of experiences across countries, but do not change our main
results discussed below.

       The long-sample estimates in Figure 1 vary across countries from around 0% to 70%, with a
standard deviation of 17 percentage points. The time-variation in the 6-year pass-through estimates
for individual countries ranges from substantial (-5% to 14% for Japan) to very large (-12% to 49% for
Romania). The standard deviation for this time dimension ranges from 2 to 30 percentage points,
with an average of 9 percentage points. This confirms that there is meaningful variation in pass-
through both across countries and over time.



    III.       Measuring the Economic Conditions (the "Shocks")
               a. The SVAR model

           To understand whether the economic environment (i.e., the shocks) causing exchange rate
movements affects the extent of pass-through across countries and over time, we modify the SVAR
model developed in Forbes et al. (2018) for the United Kingdom so that it can be applied to a set of
diverse countries. We adapt the model in two ways. First, we focus on consumer prices instead of
import prices, due to the more limited data on import prices available for the broader sample of
countries, as well as because consumer prices are the primary focus for forecasts and monetary
policy. Second, we adjust the identification of shocks in order to better capture the different ways in
which shocks (and especially global shocks) can affect the diverse set of economies. 9 Building on
Section II, we continue to use quarterly data from 1990 (when available) to 2015.

           The resulting SVAR model identifies three domestic and three global shocks, each to:
monetary policy, demand and supply. The shocks are identified using a combination of standard sign
and zero restrictions, applied to domestic consumer prices, GDP, interest rates, exchange rates, and
foreign trade-weighted GDP, foreign consumer prices and foreign interest rates.

           Specifically, we assume that only domestic and global supply shocks affect the level of
output in the long run. This is consistent with the standard assumption that only changes in
technology can affect the productive capacity of an economy in the long run, and that prices will
adjust to ensure that markets clear. 10 We also assume that domestic shocks do not affect foreign



9 In particular, Forbes et al. (2018) only identifies global temporary and permanent shocks, while we add a third global
shock (for monetary policy). This greater diversity of global shocks is important when extending the model to diverse
countries to capture different monetary policy regimes and different effects of global commodity prices.
10 This identification restriction is based on work by Blanchard and Quah (1989) and Gali (1999) and is widely used in the

SVAR literature, including by Shambaugh (2008) and Erceg et al. (2005).

                                                             8
variables, either on impact or in the long run, which is the common "small open economy"
assumption made in the literature. 11 Instead, only global shocks may have an impact on foreign
variables. Next, we impose several short-run sign restrictions on domestic and global shocks. Supply
shocks are associated with a negative correlation between GDP and the CPI on impact. Demand
shocks are associated with a positive correlation between GDP and the CPI and a counter-cyclical
monetary policy response. Positive domestic demand shocks are also associated with an exchange
rate appreciation. Monetary policy shocks are identified such that a lower interest rate is associated
with a rise in GDP and the CPI, and a depreciation of the nominal exchange rate. 12 Further details on
methodology and identification are in Appendix B.

              b. Overview of SVAR results

         The SVAR estimates show that the response of consumer prices relative to that of the
exchange rate, conditional on the shock that drives both, varies meaningfully across shocks. The
average responses and ranges across countries are summarized in Figure 2. The shaded areas show
the confidence bands of these mean group estimates, and the orange lines plot the 10th and 90th
percentiles of the country-specific estimates. The graphs suggest not only different rates of pass-
through, but also different signs, based on why the exchange rate has moved. A 1% depreciation
caused by a domestic monetary policy shock (looser monetary policy) corresponds to an increase in
consumer prices of just over 0.3% on average across countries after 8 quarters. This is a
significantly 13 larger average effect than for a comparable depreciation caused by any other type of
shock. In contrast, the same depreciation caused by a domestic demand shock (weaker domestic
demand) occurs simultaneously with a decrease in consumer prices of about 0.3%. The mean group
estimate of this relative consumer price response after a domestic demand shock is significantly
lower than the average response associated with all other shocks, apart from global monetary policy
shocks. In addition, this negative effect occurs for all countries and is very different than the
standard assumption that a depreciation corresponds to higher prices. The other shocks causing
currency movements have somewhat smaller effects and their impact varies across countries, albeit
all usually have the typical positive sign. 14



11 See Liu et al. (2011) and Carrière-Swallow and Céspedes (2013).
12 For additional references and evidence on these assumptions, see the model and discussion in Forbes et al. (2018).
13 At the 95% confidence level as indicated by the 2 standard error confidence bands of the mean group estimates in Figure

2.
14 It is not surprising that global shocks have varied effects on different countries in our sample. Commodity and oil price

movements (which are correlated with global demand and supply shocks) are an important driver of the exchange rate for
some countries--but in some cases show positive correlations and in others negative, based on whether the country is a
commodity importer or exporter. We allow for these heterogenous effects in the model by imposing no restrictions on the
impact of global shocks on domestic prices, interest rates or the exchange rate in both the short and long run.

                                                             9
          The result that the median ratio between the responses of prices and the exchange rate
following domestic monetary policy shocks is higher than that following domestic demand shocks for
all countries in our sample 15 is noteworthy. Furthermore, the average relative response of prices
across countries (as captured by the mean group estimates in Figure 2) is significantly higher after a
domestic monetary policy shock than after a domestic demand shock. These two shocks are the
most important determinants of exchange rate movements on average across the countries and
years in our sample (explaining 44% of the forecast error variance after eight quarters). These
different patterns are not related to changes in foreign marginal costs, as the domestic shocks
behind the exchange rate movements should not affect the foreign economies (particularly foreign
consumer prices). Instead, these different degrees of pass-through reflect different responses by
firms and the other general equilibrium effects from these shocks. For example, if the exchange rate
depreciated due to a negative domestic demand shock, foreign exporters would face weaker
demand in the domestic market and slower growth in domestic prices and wages, providing less
incentive to increase prices in the domestic market (and thereby generating lower pass-through). In
contrast, if the exchange rate depreciated due to looser domestic monetary policy, demand
conditions in the domestic economy would improve, supporting domestic prices and wages,
providing more incentive to increase prices in the domestic market (and thereby generating higher
pass-through). These meaningful differences in the effects of domestic demand and monetary policy
shocks will feature in the empirical analysis below.

          Also noteworthy is that the importance of different shocks behind exchange rate
movements can vary meaningfully across countries as well as over time (see Appendix Figures B.1
and B.2). For example, in Iceland almost 50% of the exchange rate forecast error variance is
explained by domestic monetary policy shocks over the full period, while in Australia domestic
demand shocks play an unusually large role (explaining 30% of the variance). Consistent with
monetary policy shocks corresponding to higher pass-through, and demand shocks corresponding to
less, Iceland has the highest pass-through in the advanced economies (at 22%), and Australia one of
the lowest (at about 0%). Similarly, shifting to the time-series dimension, domestic monetary policy
shocks have recently played a greater role in explaining currency movements in Korea and Chile; this
has corresponded to greater pass-through in both countries (Figure 1, panels b) and c)), as would be
expected given the higher pass-through from monetary policy shocks.



15More precisely, the median pass-through for individual countries four quarters after the shock is negative for all
countries; the ratio remains negative eight quarters after the shock for all countries apart from Mexico (where pass-
through is negative at horizons of 1 to 7 quarters but switches sign in the eight quarter). At a horizon of eight quarters after
the shock, the effect is significantly negative at the 68% confidence level for 14 out of the 26 countries in our sample; four
quarters after the shock, the effect is significantly negative at the 68% confidence level for 19 of 26 countries.

                                                              10
     While these patterns and correlations are not a formal test of the determinants of pass-through,
they highlight how different shocks behind exchange rate movements could play a role in explaining
differences in pass-through across countries as well as over time.




 IV.           The Role of Shocks for Pass-Through

     This section assesses the role of different shocks (from Section III) and standard structural
variables in explaining the variation in pass-through (from Section II) across countries and then over
time. It discusses the methodology, applies this methodology to estimate a series of regressions, and
then uses these results to evaluate the role of the "shocks" and economic structure in pass-through.

          a. Methodology

          In order to build on previous work examining differences in pass-through across countries,
we follow the two-stage regression approach in Campa and Goldberg (2005). More specifically, we
regress the OLS estimates of exchange rate pass-through from Section II on the shock contributions
obtained in Section III plus country characteristics previously highlighted in the literature. When
examining the time-series variation, we include country fixed effects in order to control for any time-
invariant structural characteristics that could explain cross-country differences in pass-through.
Following Campa and Goldberg (2005), we estimate the regressions with weighted (or generalized)
least squares, using the inverse of the variance of the estimated pass-through coefficients as
weights. This reduces the importance of imprecisely estimated pass-through coefficients.

          The academic literature has highlighted a large number of "structural" variables that can
explain differences in pass-through across countries. These include a number of nominal measures
(such as the average inflation rate, inflation volatility, foreign-currency invoicing, and exchange rate
volatility), whether the country is an emerging market (which tend to have less well anchored
inflation expectations and a shorter history of independent central banks), and variables that
capture the economy's pattern of production in ways that can affect pass-through (such as trade
openness, the share of less differentiated goods in imports and domestic market regulation). 16 We
will call these "structural" variables to simplify discussion, although some are only loosely
"structural" and may reflect policy choices. Many of these variables are highly correlated, 17 so that



16 For evidence on the role of these variables to pass-through, see Gagnon and Ihrig (2004), Campa and Goldberg (2005),
Choudhri and Hakura (2006), Corsetti et al. (2008), Berger and Vavra (2015), Gopinath (2015), Amiti et al., (2016), Carriere-
Swallow et al. (2016), and Jasova et al. (2016).
17 See correlation matrix in Forbes et al. (2017), Appendix Table B.3.



                                                             11
when combined with the limited sample size, it is only possible to include a small number of these
controls simultaneously.

          Therefore, in the main specifications reported below, we focus on results that include
controls for inflation volatility (to capture nominal factors) and trade openness (measured by the
share of imports to GDP). These are the variables most often significant when combined with other
structural variables. Results with different combinations of a large set of control variables are
reported in Appendix C. None of the sensitivity tests change the key results discussed below
meaningfully.

          b. Regression Results: The role of shocks and structure in explaining pass-through

          We use this methodology to explore the role of the shock contributions and structural
variables in explaining the cross-sectional and then the time-series variation in pass-through. Table 1
begins by estimating the role of the six different "shock" measures in explaining the variation in
pass-through across countries (columns 1-6). The explanatory variables capturing shock
contributions come from the SVAR forecast error variance decomposition of the exchange rates in
our sample and are plotted in Appendix Figure B.1. The coefficients on the domestic shocks have the
expected signs (with positive pass-through after each of the shocks except for domestic demand, for
which the coefficient is negative). The coefficient for domestic demand shocks is also significant.

          Column 7 then includes two of these shock variables simultaneously (for domestic demand
and monetary policy 18) as well as two variables to capture the "structure" of the economy: a proxy
for nominal characteristics (inflation volatility) and for production patterns (trade openness). The
shock contributions become insignificant (although continue to have the expected signs), while the
volatility of inflation has a positive and significant relationship with pass-through. These results in
columns 1-7 are typical of a range of specifications with different control variables: the shock
variables can be significantly correlated with the extent of pass-through (especially demand shocks)
and generally have the expected sign, but their significance varies based on which other pass-
through determinants are included. The insignificance of some of the shocks (such as for domestic
supply or the global shocks) is not surprising given the heterogeneous relationship between these
shocks and pass-through across countries (as shown in Figure 2, pass-through can be either positive
or negative based on the country). The coefficient on inflation volatility is significant in almost all
specifications--even when other controls for nominal and structural variables are included.



18These two shocks are not only most often significant, but as discussed in Section III, explain the largest share of the
variance of exchange rate movements and have consistently different effects on pass-through across the sample.

                                                              12
         Next, we repeat this analysis in Columns 8-14, except now assess the role of the six shocks
and structural variables in explaining the variation in pass-through over time within countries,
focusing on the four 6-year periods reported in panels b) and c) of Figure 1. 19 The coefficients on the
shock variables continue to have the expected signs, and are more often significant. Demand shocks
continue to be associated with significantly lower pass-through, while monetary policy shocks are
now associated with significantly higher pass-through. Moreover, the coefficient on the monetary
policy shock continues to be significant when controls for the structural variables are simultaneously
included (column 14). This suggests that when monetary policy shocks explain a greater portion of
an exchange rate movement at a specific time, pass-through tends to be significantly higher. The
role of structural variables--such as inflation volatility and trade openness--are also consistently
significant, indicating a role for structural variables as well as shocks in explaining changes in pass-
through over time.

         To check the robustness of these results and better understand the time frame over which
the shocks seem to matter for pass-through, we perform a number of tests. We estimate the
regressions using: different specifications to obtain the reduced-form pass-through coefficients on
the left-hand side; different identification strategies and sign restrictions for the SVAR; excluding the
2008 crisis; different combinations of a larger set of structural variables; different measures of
monetary policy; different treatment of commodity importers and exporters; and adjustments for
VAT changes. All of these extensions are summarized in Appendix C and do not change the key
results discussed above.

         We also repeat the analysis for regressions with pass-through coefficients estimated over 7-,
8-, and 10-year windows, as well as with 6-year rolling windows, so that the results are not
influenced by different cut-off dates. 20 Inflation volatility remains significant in each of these
variants, while the significance of trade openness (as well as other structural variables included in
the sensitivity tests) fluctuates based on the window length. Among the shock-based variables, the
monetary policy shock remains significant in the regressions using changes in the rolling coefficients,
as well as for the non-overlapping 7- and 8-year periods. The only timing conventions in which shock
variables are no longer significant is the non-overlapping 10-year windows. This is not surprising as




19 The explanatory variables are also re-calculated to correspond to the 6-year windows over which the pass-through
coefficients are estimated. The shock contributions, for instance, are now calculated as the sum of squared contributions
of each shock to the historical decomposition of the exchange rate divided by the sums of squared contributions of all
shocks within each 6-year window. The structural control variables in the baseline specification in Table 1 are the standard
deviation of quarterly inflation and the average share of imports in GDP over the respective 6-year windows.
20 See Forbes et al. (2017) for a subset of these results.



                                                            13
this longer window is closer to the "long sample" pass-through estimates, for which the nature of
the shocks driving the exchange rate movement appears to be less important.

        Overall, these results suggest that the shocks behind an exchange rate movement, and
especially the prevalence of monetary policy shocks, are an important determinant of changes in
pass-through over time, even after controlling for structural variables. Exchange rate movements
caused by monetary policy shocks correspond to significantly higher rates of pass-through. Structural
variables also play a role in explaining pass-through over time, especially inflation volatility and trade
openness. In addition, the importance of the underlying shocks increases as the window over which
one estimates pass-through decreases. This suggests that the nature of the shocks behind an
exchange rate movement is more important for understanding short-term variations in pass-through
for a given country, while the structural variables appear to be more important in explaining pass-
through over longer periods and across countries.

        c. The Magnitudes: The role of shocks and structure in explaining pass-through

        To put these estimates in context, and better understand the relative importance of the
structural and shock variables, we use the estimates from Table 1 to calculate the contribution of
"shocks" and "structure" to pass-through for each country. We begin with the cross-section
dimension and then consider the time-series.

        To capture the role of the "shock" and "structure" variables in explaining differences
between each country's average rate of pass-through with sample averages, we apply the estimates
from Table 1 (column 7) to explain the difference between a country's "long-sample" pass through
and the average pass-through across the countries in our sample. Figure 3 shows the resulting
contribution of the different structure and shock variables. These comparisons suggest that although
the role of the shocks can be economically meaningful, it tends to be smaller than for the structural
variables. For example, consider the case of Australia. It has one of the lowest rates of pass-through
in the sample (Figure 1, panel a)). The contributions of demand shocks (which generate lower pass-
through and are more prevalent in Australia) and monetary policy shocks (which generate higher
pass-through and are less prevalent in Australia) to currency movements account for just under 4pp
of Australia's 15pp shortfall relative to average pass-through in the sample. In contrast, lower
inflation volatility (which corresponds to lower pass-through) accounts for almost 11pp of the
shortfall and therefore plays a greater role than the shocks in explaining Australia's lower pass-
through.




                                                   14
          Next, shifting to the time-series dimension, consider four countries with different geo-economic
characteristics and different patterns of pass-through over time: Australia, Sweden, Korea and
Mexico. We apply the estimated coefficients for each of the significant variables from Table 1,
Column 14 to illustrate the importance of shock and structural variables for the time variation of
pass-through within each country. 21 Figure 4 shows a meaningful role for both the prevalence of
monetary policy shocks and structural variables (proxied by inflation volatility and trade openness) in
explaining the differences in pass-through across the 6-year windows. In some periods, the
prevalence of monetary policy shocks can play an even more important role than the structural
variables in explaining these deviations in pass-through--such as in Sweden from 2004-2009, when
monetary policy shocks accounted for 2.7pp of the 4.2pp shortfall in pass-through relative to the
average for Sweden over the full period. This important role for the shock variables, however, is
more typical in advanced economies than in emerging markets. The results for Mexico are typical of
the latter group, with inflation volatility generally more important than monetary policy shocks in
explaining deviations in inflation over most periods. This is not surprising, as inflation volatility tends
to vary more over time for emerging markets than advanced economies.




     V.           Exchange Rate Volatility, Monetary Policy and Currency Wars

          The shock-based framework developed above for understanding exchange rate movements is
useful not only to understand how exchange rate movements pass through to inflation, but also a
range of other issues. This section provides a very different example of how this framework can be
applied--to explore if the role of monetary policy for exchange rate movements has changed since
the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). The analysis in Section III showed that monetary policy shocks have
been the most important driver of exchange rate movements--explaining 28% of the variation in
exchange rate movements in our sample over the full period from 1990-2015. The analysis also
showed, however, that the role of different shocks can vary over time within individual countries
(see Figure 4). If monetary policy is having a greater impact on exchange rates than in the past, this
could aggravate concerns around "currency wars" and provide insights useful for the policy debate
about the international spillovers from monetary policy.

          There are a number of reasons why the impact of monetary policy on the exchange rate could
have changed since the GFC. Changes in monetary policy (such as 25bp change in the policy rate)
could have a larger impact when rates are at today's low levels if it is the percent change in rates,


21   Including the impact of demand shocks has no meaningful impact as the relevant coefficient is almost 0.

                                                              15
rather than the change, which is important for relative returns and capital flows. This effect could be
aggravated in today's environment when there is less divergence in policy interest rates across
major financial centers (as shown in Jordà and Taylor, 2019). Tighter prudential and macroprudential
regulation, which have played an important role in reducing the volume of cross-border banking
flows, could have reduced liquidity so that changes in monetary policy have greater effects on
relative prices (i.e., the exchange rate). 22 When monetary policy is adjusted using unconventional
tools, potentially in conjunction with more conventional tools, it could also have different effects on
the exchange rate than the more traditional adjustments in just policy interest rates or reserve
levels. 23

     Whether monetary policy since the GFC (including unconventional monetary policy used at the
effective lower bound, or ELB) has had a larger effect on exchange rates than comparable
adjustments in monetary policy before the GFC is still an open question. This section uses the shock-
based framework developed in Section III in order to address three related questions. First, has
exchange rate volatility in different groups of countries changed since the crisis? Second, has the
role of monetary policy shocks in driving this exchange rate volatility changed since the crisis?
Finally, what does this imply for the debate on currency wars and global spillovers? Each portion of
the analysis explores whether the results vary between advanced economies and emerging markets,
as well as between countries which have had interest rates near their lower bounds (and often used
unconventional policy tools) relative to those which have not been constrained by the lower bound.
A better understanding of these issues will be more important in the future as the decline in the
global neutral interest rate suggests that countries are more likely to be constrained by the effective
lower bound and rely more heavily on unconventional policy tools in the future.

                a. Exchange rate volatility: Pre- and post-crisis

             In our sample of 26 advanced economies and emerging markets covering the period 1990q1-
2015q4 (discussed in Section II), the average absolute percent change in quarterly exchange rates is
2.84% (with a standard deviation of 3.44pp). Not surprisingly, exchange rate volatility is larger for
emerging markets (with an average absolute percent change of 3.23% and standard deviation of
3.86pp) compared to that for advanced economies (with an average percent change of 2.39% and
standard deviation of 2.81pp). Also not surprisingly, exchange rate volatility spiked during the peak

22
  See Forbes et al. (2017) and Ahnert et al. (2019) for evidence.
23
  Possible explanations are that unconventional policies work more through the term premium (and therefore
long-term securities) and/or are interpreted as a longer term commitment than conventional policy. See
Brainard (2017) for a summary of arguments, and see Neely (2015), Glick and Leduc (2015), Curcuru (2017),
Ferrari et al. (2017) and Hatzius et al. (2017) for analysis if the effects of unconventional monetary policy are
different than conventional policies.

                                                       16
of the GFC, with the average absolute percent change in quarterly exchange rates reaching 4.66% in
2008-2009 (with a standard deviation of 4.77pp). This volatility in exchange rates can have
significant effects on a range of economic variables.

        In order to test if exchange rate volatility has changed since the GFC, we exclude the years
immediately around the crisis and focus on two six-year windows: 2001q1-2006q4 (the "pre-crisis
window") and 2010q1-2015q4 (the "post-crisis window"). As shown in Figure 5, exchange rate
volatility (as measured by the average absolute percent change in quarterly exchange rates) has
fallen, from 2.93% pre-crisis to 2.39% post-crisis. A T-test shows that this fall in the magnitude of
average quarterly exchange rate movements between the pre-crisis and post-crisis periods is
significant at the 95% level. This reduction in volatility, however, is entirely driven by reduced
volatility in emerging markets. As shown in the middle of the figure, exchange rate volatility in
emerging markets has fallen significantly (from 3.68% to 2.65%), but remained constant across
periods at 2.04% for advanced economies.

        Does this stable volatility in exchange rates in advanced economies mask differences across
countries or groups of countries? For example, did countries with monetary policy interest rates
near the lower bound (ELB) experience an increase or decrease in volatility? To test this, we divide
the sample of advanced economies into those where interest rates were around the ELB at some
point in the period (defined as the policy interest rate falling to 0.5% or less) and those which were
not. The countries at the lower bound are: Canada, Israel, Japan, Sweden, Switzerland, and the
United Kingdom. The right side of Figure 5 suggests that exchange rate volatility has increased in the
post-crisis period for countries that were at the lower bound (from 1.74% to 2.01%), but decreased
for other advanced economies that were not at the lower bound (from 2.36% to 2.08%). Moreover,
this increase in exchange rate volatility for countries at the ELB in the post-crisis period is
moderately significant. If we estimate a panel regression of quarterly exchange rate volatility for
each of the groups of countries below, the post-crisis dummy for advanced economies near the ELB
is positive (and significant at the 88% level).

        These average differences, however, could be driven by sharp changes in one or two
countries--especially given the small sample. A closer look at changes in exchange rate volatility in
the pre- and post-crisis windows for each country suggest that these average results are not driven
by outliers. Of the six advanced economies at the lower bound, five experienced an increase in
exchange rate volatility in the post-crisis window (with Canada as the only exception). The increase
was sharpest in Switzerland, where volatility almost doubled. Of the five advanced economies not at



                                                    17
the lower bound, only one experienced an increase in exchange rate volatility of more than 0.1pp in
the post-crisis window (Australia).

              b. The role of monetary policy: Pre- and post-crisis

         How much of these changes in exchange rate volatility since the GFC is associated with
changes in the role of monetary policy on currency movements? And for advanced economies, what
can we learn from looking separately at countries constrained by the lower bound on interest rates?

         To shed light on these questions, we return to the analysis in Section III, which used the
SVAR framework to estimate the contributions of six different shocks (to domestic and global
monetary policy, demand and supply) to exchange rate movements for our sample of 26 countries
from 1990-2015. Then we calculate the average share of quarterly exchange rate movements driven
by each type of shock, over the same six-year windows used above: pre-crisis (2001q1-2006q4) and
post-crisis (2010q1-2015q4). Figure 6 shows the resulting estimates of the role of monetary shocks
for the different groups of countries in the two periods. It focuses on the large exchange rate
movements that are the most important for policymakers by weighting each quarterly movement
according to its magnitude.

         The graph shows some noteworthy patterns. Monetary policy shocks play an important role
in driving the exchange rate in both emerging economies and in advanced economies. This role of
monetary policy shocks in driving exchange rate movements is basically the same for emerging
markets in the pre-crisis period relative to the post-crisis period, but has increased moderately for
the advanced economies in our sample, particularly for those not near the ELB. In the pre-crisis
period, the different groups of countries considered did not experience a significantly different role
of monetary policy shocks in driving their exchange rates. In the post-crisis period, however, the
group of advanced economies that were not constrained by the lower bound experienced a
significantly higher proportion of exchange rate movements driven by monetary policy shocks. 24 This
result is consistent with monetary policy playing a greater role for exchange rate movements in
advanced economies since the crisis, especially in those countries not constrained by the lower
bound. 25



24 When estimating a panel regression of quarterly contributions of monetary policy shocks to exchange rate movements
for the pre-crisis period, and inserting a dummy for each group of countries considered subsequently, none of these are
found to be significant. But for the post-crisis period, the dummy for advanced economies not constrained by the lower
bound on interest rates is significant at the 95% level.
25 It is worth noting that some of these patterns change when giving equal weight to all quarterly exchange rate

movements, regardless of their size. In this case, the share of all exchange rate movements driven by monetary policy
shocks has increased more since the crisis, but this is driven by emerging markets and countries not at the ELB.

                                                           18
         These results are robust when we use different measures of monetary policy than the policy
rates, such as market-based forward rates at horizons of up to 1 year, or shadow short rates
extracted from the whole yield curve using affine term structure models (both of which should
better capture changes in unconventional monetary policy). 26 Using these shadow rates does not
imply a greater post-crisis role for monetary policy in the economies constrained by the ELB. These
sensitivity tests provide tentative evidence that unconventional policies have not had a larger
contribution to exchange rate movements than other types of monetary policy. A thorough analysis
of the role of unconventional policy measures and their link to exchange rate volatility, however,
requires measures of unconventional policies for more countries across more time variation than
currently available in our sample.

              c. Implications for currency wars and international spillovers

         What does this imply for concerns that monetary policy is having a greater impact on
exchange rates than in the past? If monetary policy is driving greater currency volatility, this could
create substantial challenges, especially in emerging markets. These concerns were serious enough
that they were the topic of a 2013 G-7 meeting and discussed in the resulting statement establishing
ground rules to address the potential effects on exchange rates of different monetary policy tools. 27

     The series of results presented above, however, provides mixed evidence to justify increased
concerns about how monetary policy may be driving "currency wars". The role of monetary policy in
driving exchange rate movements appears to have increased moderately for advanced economies
since the crisis. This increase was more pronounced in advanced economies not constrained by the
ELB, but was not associated with increased exchange rate volatility. Even for advanced economies
near the ELB, which experienced a significant increase in exchange rate volatility in the post-crisis
period, the role of monetary policy shocks only increased modestly and was still lower than the role
for other advanced economies. This evidence does not support the notion that monetary policy used
by countries close to the ELB drove a disproportionate share of exchange rate volatility and is
responsible for increased concerns about "currency wars".

         These results provide a simple example of how decomposing exchange rate movements into
their underlying shocks can be useful to provide insights on a range of questions. In this case, the
framework provides moderate support for arguments that exchange rates have been driven more by


26 The short-term market-based rates we experimented with were the 3-month, 3-month and 6-month, 6-month forward
interbank rates. We used two different measures of shadow interest rates: by De Rezende and Ristiniemi (2018) for
Sweden and the UK; and by Krippner (2016) for the UK, Switzerland and Japan.
27 See Group of Seven (2013), "Statement by G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors," February 12, available at:

www.g8.utoronto.ca/finance/fm130212.htm

                                                           19
monetary policy since the crisis in advanced economies than before, but little support for arguments
that this has been associated with higher exchange rate volatility and is a prominent economic factor
driving concerns about "currency wars".


 VI.        Conclusions

    This paper develops a framework for a cross-section of countries that can estimate the role of
economic conditions (the shocks) causing the exchange rate to move. It shows how this framework
can be used to address a range of questions, focussing on its use to estimate the pass-through of
exchange rate movements to inflation, and to investigate the relative importance of "shocks" versus
longer-term structural characteristics for pass-through. It also shows how this framework can help
understand other topical questions, using an example of whether changes in the role of monetary
policy since the GFC have led to changes in exchange rate volatility.

    The results suggest that although structural characteristics are important for understanding
pass-through (in the cross-section and time-series), the shocks behind exchange rate movements
can also be important, particularly the role of monetary policy shocks for understanding changes in
pass-through over time within a given country. Exchange rate movements caused by monetary
policy shocks correspond to significantly higher pass-through, while there is some evidence (albeit
weaker) that those caused by demand shocks correspond to lower pass-through. These results
support previous evidence for the UK, but suggest that these insights also apply to a more diverse
sample of economies.

    The results also suggest that although exchange rate volatility has not increased in advanced
economies in the post-crisis period, monetary policy shocks have played a greater role in driving
exchange rate movements, particularly in countries that are not close to the lower bound on interest
rates. The group of advanced economies that were constrained by the lower bound at some point
since the GFC have experienced higher exchange rate volatility, but the role of monetary policy
shocks in explaining this volatility increased somewhat less and was overall less important. These
results are helpful to better inform the debate around "currency wars" and the corresponding role
of monetary policy in advanced economies. All of these results should be interpreted cautiously,
however, given the small sample and limited experience with unconventional monetary policy. If
more countries approach or remain near their lower bounds in the future --making unconventional
monetary policy tools become more "conventional" ­ more observations will be available to test
these relationships formally.



                                                  20
References
Ahnert, Toni, Kristin Forbes, Christian Friedrich, and Dennis Reinhardt, 2019, "Macroprudential FX
Regulations: Shifting the Snowbanks of FX Vulnerability?" NBER Working Paper No. 25083.

Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki and Josef Konings, 2016, "International Shocks and Domestic Prices: How
Large Are Strategic Complementarities?" NBER Working Paper No. 22119, March.

Bank of England, 2015, Inflation Report, November. London: Bank of England.

Berger, David and Joseph Vavra, 2015, "Volatility and Pass-through," NBER Working Paper, No.
19651, May.

Bils, Mark, 1987, "The Cyclical Behavior of Marginal Cost and Price", American Economic Review,
Vol. 77, No. 5, pp. 838-55.

Blanchard, Olivier and Danny Quah, 1989, "The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and Supply
Disturbances," The American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 4, pp. 655-673.

Brainard, Lael, 2017, "Cross-Border Spillovers of Balance Sheet Normalization," Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System speech, given in New York. Available at:
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20170711a.htm

Burstein, Ariel, and Gita Gopinath, 2014, "International Prices and Exchange Rates," in Handbook of
International Economics, 4th Ed., No. 4, pp. 391-451.

Campa, José and Linda Goldberg, 2010, "The sensitivity of the CPI to exchange rates: Distribution
margins, imported inputs, and trade exposure," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 92, No. 2,
pp. 392-407.

Campa, José and Linda Goldberg, 2005, "Exchange rate pass-through into import prices," The Review
of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87, No. 4, pp. 679­690.

Carrière-Swallow, Yan and Luis Felipe Céspedes, 2013, "The impact of uncertainty shocks in
emerging economies," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 90, No. 2, pp. 316-325.

Carrière-Swallow, Yan, Bertrand Gruss, Nicolas Magud and Fabian Valencia, 2016, "Monetary Policy
Credibility and Exchange Rate Pass-Through," IMF Working Paper, No. 16/240.

Caselli, Francesca and Agustin Roitman, 2016, "Non-Linear Exchange Rate Pass-Through in Emerging
Markets," IMF Working Paper, No. 16/1.

Choudhri, Ehsan and Dalia Hakura, 2006, "Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Domestic Prices: Does the
Inflationary Environment Matter?" Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp.
614-639.

Coeuré, Benoit, 2017, "The transmission of the ECB's monetary policy in standard and non-standard
times," Speech given in Frankfurt am Main on 11 September.

Comunale, Mariarosaria and Davor Kunovac, 2017, "Exchange Rate Pass-Through in the Euro Area,"
ECB Working Paper, No. 2003, January.

Corbo, Vesna and Paola Di Casola, 2018, "Conditional exchange rate pass-through: evidence from
Sweden," Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper, No. 352.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc, 2009, "Optimal Monetary Policy and the Sources
of Local-Currency Price Stability," International Dimension of Monetary Policy edited by Jordi Gali
and Mark Gertler, Chicago University Press, pp. 319-367.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola and Sylvain Leduc, 2008, "High Exchange-Rate Volatility and Low
Pass-Through," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 55, No. 6, pp. 1113-1128.

Curcuru, Stephanie, 2017, "The Sensitivity of the U.S. Dollar Exchange Rate to Changes in Monetary
Policy Expectations," Federal Reserve Board IFDP Notes, 22 September.

De Rezende, Rafael and Annuka Ristiniemi, 2018, "A Shadow rate without a lower bound constraint,"
Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series, No. 355.

Devereux, Michael, Ben Tomlin and Wei Dong, 2015, "Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Currency of
Invoicing and Market Share," NBER Working Paper, No. 21413, July.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1987, "Exchange rates and prices," American Economic Review, Vol. 77, pp. 93-
106.

Erceg, Christopher, Christopher Gust, and Luca Guerrieri, 2005, "Can long-run restrictions identify
technology shocks?" Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 3, No. 6, pp. 1237­1278.

Ferrari, Massimo, Jonathan Kearns, and Andreas Schrimpf, 2017, "Monetary Policy's Rising FX Impact
in the Era of Ultra-Low Rates" BIS mimeo.

Forbes, Kristin, 2015, "Much ado about something important: How do exchange rate movements
affect inflation," Speech given at the Money, Macro and Finance Research Group Annual Conference
in Cardiff on September 11 and available at:
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2015/839.aspx.

Forbes, Kristin, Ida Hjortsoe and Tsvetelina Nenova, 2018, "The Shocks Matter: Improving our
Estimates of Exchange Rate Pass-Through," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 114, pp. 255-
275.

Forbes, Kristin, Ida Hjortsoe, and Tsvetelina Nenova, 2017, "Shocks versus Structure: Explaining
Differences in Exchange Rate Pass-Through across Countries and Time," Bank of England External
MPC Working Paper, No. 50.

Forbes, Kristin, Dennis Reinhardt and Tomasz Wieladek, 2017, "The Spillovers, Interactions, and
Unintended Consequences of Monetary and Regulatory Policies," Journal of Monetary Economics,
Vol. 85, pp. 1-22, January.

Gagnon, Joseph and Jane Ihrig, 2004, "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Pass-Through,"
International Journal of Finance & Economics, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 315­338.

Gali, Jordi, 1999, "Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks Explain
Aggregate Fluctuations?" The American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 1, pp. 249-271.

Gilchrist, Simon and Egon Zakrajsek, 2015, "Customer Markets and Financial Frictions: Implications
for Inflation Dynamics" Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole.

Glick, Reuven, and Sylvain Leduc, 2015, "Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Dollar:
Conventional Signs, Unconventional Magnitudes," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working
Paper, 2015-18.

                                                  22
Gopinath, Gita, 2015, "The International Price System," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, pp. 71-150.

Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki and Roberto Rigobon, 2010, "Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-
Through," American Economic Review, American Economic Association, Vol. 100, No. 1, pp. 304-36.

Gust, Christopher, Sylvain Leduc and Robert Vigfusson, 2010, "Trade integration, competition, and
the decline in exchange-rate pass-through," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 57, No. 3, pp. 309-
324.

Hatzius, Jan, Sven Stehn, Nicholas Fawcett and Karen Reichgott, 2017, "Policy Rate vs. Balance Sheet
Spillovers," Goldman Sachs Economics Research, Global Economics Analyst, July 28.

Ito, Takatoshi and Kiyotaka Sato, 2008, "Exchange Rate Changes and Inflation in Post-Crisis Asian
Economies: VAR Analysis of the Exchange Rate Pass-Through," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
Vol. 40, No. 7, pp. 1407-1438.

Jasová, Martina, Richhild Moessner and Elod Takáts, 2016, "Exchange Rate Pass-Through: What Has
Changed Since the Crisis?" BIS Working Paper, No. 583.

Jordà, Òscar and Alan Taylor, 2019, "Riders on the Storm," Paper prepared for the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, "Challenges for Monetary Policy," Jackson Hole,
Wyoming, August 22­24.

Klein, Michael, 1990, "Macroeconomic Effects of Exchange Rate Pass-Through," Journal of
International Money and Finance, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 376-387.

Krippner, Leo, 2016, "Documentation for measures of monetary policy," mimeo, Reserve Bank of
New Zealand, 13 July.

Krugman, Paul, 1987, "Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes," in Real-Financial
Linkages among Open Economies, edited by Sven W. Arndt and J. David Richardson, Cambridge,
Mass., MIT Press.

Liu, Philip, Haroon Mumtaz, and Angeliki Theophilopoulou, 2011, "International transmission of
shocks: a time-varying factor-augmented VAR approach to the open economy," Bank of England
Working Paper, No. 425.

Marazzi, Mario, Nathan Sheets, Robert J. Vigfusson, Jon Faust, Joseph Gagnon, Jaime Marquez,
Robert F. Martin, Trevor Reeve, and John Rogers, 2005, "Exchange rate pass-through to U.S. import
prices: some new evidence," International Finance Discussion Papers, No. 833, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).

Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson, 2013, "Price Rigidity: Microeconomic Evidence and
Macroeconomic Implications," Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 5, pp. 133-63.

Neely, Christopher, 2015, "Unconventional Monetary Policy had Large International Effects," Journal
of Banking and Finance, Vol. 52, pp. 101-111.

Pesaran, M. Hashem, 2015, "Time Series and Panel Data Econometrics," Oxford University Press,
ISBN-13: 9780198736912.

Rotemberg, Julio, and Michael Woodford, 1999, "The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and Costs," in
Handbook of Macroeconomics, eds. John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, pp. 1051­135.


                                                 23
Shambaugh, Jay, 2008, "A new look at pass-through," Journal of International Money and Finance,
Vol. 27, pp. 560-591.

Stulz, Jonas, 2007, "Exchange rate pass-through in Switzerland: Evidence from vector
autoregressions," Swiss National Bank Economic Studies, No. 4.




                                                24
Figure 1. Estimates of "long sample" and 6-year exchange rate pass-through by country

  a) Long sample estimates across countries

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.6
                                                                       New Zealand




                                                                                                                                                               Mexico
                                                                                     Sweden


                                                                                                            UK




                                                                                                                                   Colombia
      Australia




                                                                                                                                                                        Peru


                                                                                                                                                                                             Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Romania
                                                                                              Switzerland




                                                                                                                                                                               Philippines




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         South Africa
                                              Japan


                                                              Norway




                                                                                                                          Chile


                                                                                                                                               Ghana




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Thailand
                                                                                                                 Brazil




                                                                                                                                                       India




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Turkey
                                                      Korea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Serbia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Uruguay
                  Canada


                                     Israel
                           Iceland




  b) Six-year estimates: Advanced economies

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.5
     1992-97
     1998-03
     2004-09
     2010-15

                              1992-97
                              1998-03
                              2004-09
                              2010-15

                                                      1992-97
                                                      1998-03
                                                      2004-09
                                                      2010-15

                                                                              1992-97
                                                                              1998-03
                                                                              2004-09
                                                                              2010-15

                                                                                                            1992-97
                                                                                                            1998-03
                                                                                                            2004-09
                                                                                                            2010-15

                                                                                                                              1992-97
                                                                                                                              1998-03
                                                                                                                              2004-09
                                                                                                                              2010-15

                                                                                                                                                        1992-97
                                                                                                                                                        1998-03
                                                                                                                                                        2004-09
                                                                                                                                                        2010-15

                                                                                                                                                                               1992-97
                                                                                                                                                                               1998-03
                                                                                                                                                                               2004-09
                                                                                                                                                                               2010-15

                                                                                                                                                                                                         1992-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1998-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2004-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2010-15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1992-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1998-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2004-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2010-15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1992-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2004-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2010-15

         Australia                   Canada               Iceland                      Israel                    Japan                 Korea                   Norway          New Zealand                      Sweden                   Switzerland                     UK


  c) Six-year estimates: Emerging markets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1
     1992-97
     1998-03
     2004-09
     2010-15

                           1992-97
                           1998-03
                           2004-09
                           2010-15

                                              1992-97
                                              1998-03
                                              2004-09
                                              2010-15

                                                          1992-97
                                                          1998-03
                                                          2004-09
                                                          2010-15

                                                                                 1992-97
                                                                                 1998-03
                                                                                 2004-09
                                                                                 2010-15

                                                                                                       1992-97
                                                                                                       1998-03
                                                                                                       2004-09
                                                                                                       2010-15

                                                                                                                      1992-97
                                                                                                                      1998-03
                                                                                                                      2004-09
                                                                                                                      2010-15

                                                                                                                                         1992-97
                                                                                                                                         1998-03
                                                                                                                                         2004-09
                                                                                                                                         2010-15

                                                                                                                                                            1992-97
                                                                                                                                                            1998-03
                                                                                                                                                            2004-09
                                                                                                                                                            2010-15

                                                                                                                                                                          1992-97
                                                                                                                                                                          1998-03
                                                                                                                                                                          2004-09
                                                                                                                                                                          2010-15

                                                                                                                                                                                                1992-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                1998-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                2004-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                2010-15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1992-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1998-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2010-15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1992-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1998-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2004-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2010-15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1992-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1998-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2004-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2010-15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1992-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1998-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2004-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2010-15




           Brazil              Chile           Colombia         Ghana                   India               Mexico          Peru              Philippines      Poland          Romania                Serbia        South Africa                   Thailand            Turkey    Uruguay


Notes: The red diamonds depict point estimates of exchange rate pass-through based on equation (1) and the blue ranges depict the
corresponding 95% confidence intervals. Panel a) plots the estimate using the full sample period for each country, while panels b) and c)
show the 6-year window estimates. The black dashed lines in panels b) and c) correspond to the point "long sample" estimates for each
country shown in panel a). Note that for some countries the "long sample" consists of the longest period possible and can include years
that are not included in the individual six-year periods used for the short-term estimates. As a result, the dashed lines may not necessarily
correspond to an average of the red diamonds.


                                                                                                                                          25
Figure 2. Cross-country mean group estimate for the response of consumer prices conditional on a
1% exchange rate depreciation, eight quarters after shock

                                                                        +/- 2SE confidence band
       0.8                                                              Cross-country mean ERPT estimate by shock
                                                                        10th percentile
       0.6                                                              90th percentile

       0.4

       0.2

          0

      -0.2

      -0.4

      -0.6
                   Supply           Demand             MonPol             Supply*          Demand*            MonPol*
    Notes: The blue range depicts the 2 standard error range of median cumulative consumer price responses
    corresponding to a cumulative exchange rate appreciation of 1% within four quarters caused by different shocks
    across the 26 countries. The mean group point estimate and standard deviations around it are calculated as in Pesaran
    (2015), pp. 717-718. The orange lines correspond to the 10th and 90th percentiles of the country-specific median
    responses. The first, second and third columns show the estimates after domestic supply, demand and monetary
    policy shocks respectively, while the fourth, fifth and sixth show the estimates after global supply, demand and
    monetary policy shocks, respectively.




                                                                26
Figure 3. Determinants of "long sample" pass-through

  pp deviation from cross-
                                                                      demand shock                                   monetary policy shock                                inflation volatility                               trade openness
  country average pass-through
  60
  50
  40
  30
  20
  10
   0
 -10
 -20
 -30




                                                                                                                                                                                 Philippines




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Serbia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Turkey
                               Iceland




                                                                  Norway
                      Canada




                                                                                                                     Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Romania




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Thailand
          Australia




                                         Israel




                                                                                                                              Chile
                                                                                                                                      Colombia


                                                                                                                                                         India
                                                                                                                                                                 Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                               Poland
                                                          Korea




                                                                                                                                                 Ghana
                                                                                         Sweden
                                                                                                  Switzerland
                                                                                                                UK
                                                  Japan




                                                                           New Zealand




                                                                                                                                                                          Peru




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           South Africa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Uruguay
Note: The black diamonds depict country-specific pass-through estimates in percentage point deviation from the cross-
country average. The shaded grey area is the percentage point deviation explained by cross-country differences in the
importance of the two shock variables (for domestic monetary policy and domestic demand) and the shaded blue is the
percentage point deviation explained by the two structural variables (inflation volatility and trade openness).



Figure 4. Determinants of the deviation from average country-specific pass-through, selected
countries

 Australia                                                                                                                        Sweden
         Trade openness                                             Inflation volatility                                                         Trade openness                                              Inflation volatility
         Monetary policy shocks                                                                                                                  Monetary policy shocks
   10                                                                                                                                     4

                                                                                                                                          2
    5
                                                                                                                                          0
    0
                                                                                                                                         -2
    -5
                                                                                                                                         -4

  -10                                                                                                                                    -6
             1992-1997 1998-2003 2004-2009 2010-2015                                                                                                1992-1997 1998-2003 2004-2009 2010-2015
 Korea                                                                                                                            Mexico
         Trade openness                                             Inflation volatility                                                         Trade openness                                              Inflation volatility
         Monetary policy shocks                                                                                                                  Monetary policy shocks
   30                                                                                                                                  40
   20
   10                                                                                                                                  20
    0
  -10                                                                                                                                     0
  -20
  -30                                                                                                                                 -20
             1992-1997 1998-2003 2004-2009 2010-2015                                                                                                1992-1997 1998-2003 2004-2009 2010-2015
Note: The figure shows the percentage point deviation of estimated pass-through from the country-average (black
diamonds) and the estimated contribution from inflation volatility, trade openness and the monetary policy shock variable.


                                                                                                                              27
Figure 5. Exchange rate volatility pre- and post- crisis in different country groups


 Avg. abs. %chg.
 in quarterly ER
     3.5
                                                             Pre-crisis
     3.0
                                                             Post-crisis
     2.5


     2.0


     1.5
                 All         Emerging Advanced              AEs near      AEs not at
              Countries      Markets Economies                ELB            ELB
                                        (AEs)



Note: Exchange rate volatility measured as the average percent change in the quarterly trade-weighted exchange rate of
each country in the group. Pre-crisis is the period 2001q1-2006q4 and post-crisis is 2010q1-2015q4. Countries are defined as
being at the ELB (effective lower bound) if their policy interest rate falls to 0.5% or less.




Figure 6. Weighted Percent of Exchange Rate Movements from Monetary Policy Shocks


 % of ER
movements

      0.4
                                   Pre-crisis
                                   Post-crisis


      0.3




      0.2
                 All         Emerging Advanced AEs near                  AEs not at
              Countries      Markets Economies   ELB                        ELB
                                        (AEs)

Notes: Uses shock-decomposition discussed in paper to estimate the percent of exchange rate movements driven by
monetary policy shocks, with each observation weighted by the size of the exchange rate movement in order to give more
weight to larger movements. Pre-crisis is the period 2001q1-2006q4 and post-crisis is 2010q1-2015q4. Countries are defined
as being at the ELB (effective lower bound) if their policy interest rate falls to 0.5% or less.

                                                            28
   Table 1. Determinants of long-sample and 6-year window pass-through

                                                        Cross-section (long sample)                                                                           Panel (6-year periods)
                            (1)            (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)               (6)             (7)           (8)           (9)            (10)         (11)       (12)             (13)            (14)
% Supply shock             0.19                                                                                             -0.02
                          (0.20)                                                                                            (0.11)
% Demand shock                         -0.74***                                                               -0.25                      -0.31**                                                                   -0.00
                                         (0.23)                                                               (0.18)                      (0.15)                                                                  (0.12)
% Monetary policy                                        0.16                                                  0.14                                      0.41***                                                  0.25**
      shock                                             (0.18)                                                (0.12)                                      (0.11)                                                  (0.11)
% Global supply                                                      0.33                                                                                                 -0.38*
      shock                                                         (0.69)                                                                                                (0.22)
% Global demand                                                                  0.43                                                                                                   0.18
      shock                                                                     (0.57)                                                                                                 (0.35)
% Global monetary                                                                             -0.80                                                                                                -0.36
      policy shock                                                                            (0.75)                                                                                               (0.30)
 volatility                                                                                                 15.62***                                                                                             15.55***
                                                                                                             (2.86)                                                                                               (2.51)
Trade openness                                                                                                0.10                                                                                               0.83***
                                                                                                             (0.15)                                                                                               (0.29)

Constant                  0.08*         0.24***          0.06        0.09        0.06        0.17***          -0.05          0.01        0.15**           -0.07*           0.03         0.00        0.09         -0.27***
                          (0.04)         (0.04)         (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.07)        (0.06)          (0.07)        (0.04)       (0.08)           (0.04)          (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.07)          (0.09)

# observations             26              26            26          26          26             26              26            74            74              74              74           74          74             73
Degrees of freedom         24              24            24          24          24             24              21            47            47              47              47           47          47             43
Adjusted_R2               -0.00           0.28          -0.01       -0.03       -0.02          0.01            0.67          0.48          0.53            0.59            0.51         0.49        0.50           0.77
   Notes: Estimated using weighted least squares with the inverse of the variance of the estimated pass-through coefficients as weights. Standard errors in parentheses. *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. The left-hand side
   variable is exchange rate pass-through, as estimated in Section II, either for the full period (long-sample) or fixed 6-year windows from 1992 through 2015. Explanatory variables used in the regressions are the
   standard deviation of quarterly inflation, trade openness (the share of imports in GDP), and the contribution of the relevant shock to the forecast error variance decomposition of the exchange rate over the relevant
   period (either the full period or corresponding 6-year window). The 6-year panel regressions utilise the historical shock decomposition from the SVAR models for each country to calculate the 6-year shock contribution
   (as the sum of squared shock contributions of each shock divided by the sum of squared contributions of all shocks to the exchange rate). The regressions based on 6-year windows also include country fixed effects.
                                                  Appendix to
                    "International Evidence on Shock-Dependent Exchange Rate Pass-Through"

            Appendix A: Data sources and sample periods

            Table A.1. Country-specific data sources

                                                                                     Data sources for:
                              Consumer price   Nominal effective      Real GDP               Short-term           Value of imports      Nominal GDP
                 Sample
  Country                     index(b)         exchange rate          (national currency,    interest rate(c)     (national currency,   (national currency,
                 period(a)
                                               index                  seasonally                                  seasonally            seasonally
                                                                      adjusted)                                   adjusted)             adjusted)
ADVANCED ECONOMIES
Australia   1990q1-2015q4     IMF              IMF International      IMF International       Central bank        OECD Quarterly        OECD Quarterly
                              International    Financial Statistics   Financial Statistics    rate, IMF           National Accounts     National Accounts
                              Financial                                                       International
                              Statistics                                                      Financial
                                                                                              Statistics
Canada        1990q1-2015q4   IMF              IMF International      OECD Economic           Central bank        OECD Quarterly        OECD Quarterly
                              International    Financial Statistics   Outlook                 rate, OECD          National Accounts     National Accounts
                              Financial                                                       Main Economic
                              Statistics                                                      Indicators
Iceland       2000q1-2015q4   IMF              IMF International      IMF International       Central bank        OECD Quarterly        OECD Quarterly
                              International    Financial Statistics   Financial Statistics    rate, Central       National Accounts     National Accounts
                              Financial                                                       Bank of Iceland
                              Statistics
Israel        2004q1-2015q4   IMF              IMF International      IMF International       3-month             OECD Quarterly        OECD Quarterly
                              International    Financial Statistics   Financial Statistics    interbank rate,     National Accounts     National Accounts
                              Financial                                                       OECD Main
                              Statistics                                                      Economic
                                                                                              Indicators
Japan         1990q1-2015q4   IMF              IMF International      IMF International       Central bank        OECD Quarterly        OECD Quarterly
                              International    Financial Statistics   Financial Statistics    rate, Oxford        National Accounts     National Accounts
                              Financial                                                       Economics
                              Statistics
Korea         1991q1-2015q4   IMF              IMF International      IMF International       Central bank        OECD Quarterly        OECD Quarterly
                              International    Financial Statistics   Financial Statistics    rate, IMF           National Accounts     National Accounts
                              Financial                                                       International
                              Statistics                                                      Financial
                                                                                              Statistics
New           1990q1-2015q4   IMF              IMF International      IMF International       Overnight           OECD Quarterly        OECD Quarterly
Zealand                       International    Financial Statistics   Financial Statistics    interbank rate,     National Accounts     National Accounts
                              Financial                                                       OECD Main
                              Statistics                                                      Economic
                                                                                              Indicators
Norway        1993q1-2015q4   IMF              IMF International      IMF International       Central bank        OECD Quarterly        OECD Quarterly
                              International    Financial Statistics   Financial Statistics    rate, IMF           National Accounts     National Accounts
                              Financial                                                       International
                              Statistics                                                      Financial
                                                                                              Statistics
Sweden        1993q1-2015q4   IMF              IMF International      IMF International       Official discount   OECD Quarterly        OECD Quarterly
                              International    Financial Statistics   Financial Statistics    rate, Sveriges      National Accounts     National Accounts
                              Financial                                                       Riksbank
                              Statistics
Switzerland   1990q1-2015q4   IMF              IMF International      IMF International       Central bank        OECD Quarterly        OECD Quarterly
                              International    Financial Statistics   Financial Statistics    rate, IMF           National Accounts     National Accounts
                              Financial                                                       International
                              Statistics                                                      Financial
                                                                                              Statistics
UK            1993q1-2015q4   IMF              IMF International      IMF International       Central bank        OECD Quarterly        OECD Quarterly
                              International    Financial Statistics   Financial Statistics    rate, IMF           National Accounts     National Accounts
                              Financial                                                       International
                              Statistics                                                      Financial
                                                                                              Statistics




                                                                         30
EMERGING ECONOMIES
Brazil      1995q4-2015q4      IMF             IMF International      Oxford Economics       Central bank        OECD Quarterly         OECD Quarterly
                               International   Financial Statistics                          rate, Oxford        National Accounts      National Accounts
                               Financial                                                     Economics
                               Statistics
Chile          1990q1-2015q4   OECD Main       IMF International      OECD Economic          Central bank        OECD Quarterly         OECD Quarterly
                               Economic        Financial Statistics   Outlook                rate, Oxford        National Accounts      National Accounts
                               Indicators                                                    Economics
Colombia       1994q1-2015q4   IMF             IMF International      IMF International      90-day deposit      OECD Quarterly         OECD Quarterly
                               International   Financial Statistics   Financial Statistics   certificate rate,   National Accounts      National Accounts
                               Financial                                                     OECD Main
                               Statistics                                                    Economic
                                                                                             Indicators
Ghana          2006q1-2015q4   IMF             IMF International      Ghana Statistical      Central bank        Oxford Economics       Oxford Economics
                               International   Financial Statistics   Services               rate, IMF
                               Financial                                                     International
                               Statistics                                                    Financial
                                                                                             Statistics
India          1996q2-2015q4   IMF             Bank for               OECD Main              Lending rate,       OECD Quarterly         OECD Quarterly
                               International   International          Economic Indicators    IMF                 National Accounts      National Accounts
                               Financial       Settlements                                   International
                               Statistics                                                    Financial
                                                                                             Statistics
Mexico         1990q1-2015q4   IMF             IMF International      OECD Quarterly         90-day T-bill       OECD Quarterly         OECD Quarterly
                               International   Financial Statistics   National Accounts      rate, IMF           National Accounts      National Accounts
                               Financial                                                     International
                               Statistics                                                    Financial
                                                                                             Statistics
Peru           1993q3-2015q4   IMF             J.P. Morgan            Central Reserve        Central bank        IMF International      Central Reserve
                               International                          Bank of Peru           rate, IMF           Financial Statistics   Bank of Peru
                               Financial                                                     International
                               Statistics                                                    Financial
                                                                                             Statistics
Philippines    1990q1-2015q4   IMF             IMF International      Oxford Economics       Central bank        IMF International      Philippine Statistics
                               International   Financial Statistics                          rate, Oxford        Financial Statistics   Authority
                               Financial                                                     Economics
                               Statistics
Poland         1992q1-2015q4   IMF             IMF International      Oxford Economics       Central bank        OECD Quarterly         OECD Quarterly
                               International   Financial Statistics                          rate, Oxford        National Accounts      National Accounts
                               Financial                                                     Economics
                               Statistics
Romania        2004q1-2015q4   IMF             IMF International      Oxford Economics       Central bank        IMF International      NIS - National
                               International   Financial Statistics                          rate, Oxford        Financial Statistics   Institute of
                               Financial                                                     Economics                                  Statistics, Romania
                               Statistics
Serbia         2005q2-2015q4   IMF             National Bank of       IMF International      Discount rate,      IMF International      Statistical Office of
                               International   Serbia                 Financial Statistics   National bank       Financial Statistics   the Republic of
                               Financial                                                     of Serbia                                  Serbia
                               Statistics
South Africa   1998q1-2015q4   IMF             IMF International      Statistics South       Central bank        OECD Quarterly         OECD Quarterly
                               International   Financial Statistics   Africa                 rate, IMF           National Accounts      National Accounts
                               Financial                                                     International
                               Statistics                                                    Financial
                                                                                             Statistics
Thailand       1998q1-2015q4   IMF             Bank for               NESDB - Office of      Discount rate,      IMF International      NESDB - Office of
                               International   International          the National           IMF                 Financial Statistics   the National
                               Financial       Settlements            Economic and Social    International                              Economic and Social
                               Statistics                             Development            Financial                                  Development
                                                                      Board, Thailand        Statistics                                 Board, Thailand
Turkey         2000q1-2015q4   IMF             Bank for               OECD Main              Central bank        OECD Quarterly         OECD Quarterly
                               International   International          Economic Indicators    rate, IMF           National Accounts      National Accounts
                               Financial       Settlements                                   International
                               Statistics                                                    Financial
                                                                                             Statistics
Uruguay        2002q1-2015q4   IMF             IMF International      Banco Central del      Central bank        Oxford Economics       Oxford Economics
                               International   Financial Statistics   Uruguay                rate, IMF
                               Financial                                                     International
                               Statistics                                                    Financial
                                                                                             Statistics


                                                                         31
Notes: (a) As explained in the text, the sample period selection is determined by the existence of a floating exchange rate regime and data availability.
(b) We seasonally adjusted the quarterly series for all countries ourselves using the U.S. Census Bureau's X-12 method. In addition, we exclude quarters that are
characterized or followed by annualized inflation of 100% or more in the preceding or following year. In practice, this "no-hyperinflation" criterion has limited effect
on our sample, as the only period excluded due to this restriction is 1990q1-1995q3 for Brazil.
(c) Whenever available, we use an official policy interest rate. When that is not available or is only published for a short sample period, we use the shortest maturity
market interest rate instead.




            Table A.2. Data sources common across countries
             Variable                                Data source                                    Notes

             Trading partners' export prices         IMF - International Financial                  Export price indices, all commodities. Each country's
                                                     Statistics; Oxford Economics;                  export price index is seasonally adjusted using the U.S.
                                                     National statistics offices                    Census Bureau's X-12 method.

             Bilateral trade flows with              IMF - Direction of Trade Statistics            The US dollar value of imports and exports of each
             trading partners                                                                       country in our sample with all its trading partners is
                                                                                                    used to construct the weights for trading partners'
                                                                                                    export prices.
             Oil price                               Thompson Reuters                               Crude oil, Brent U$/BBL.
             Foreign GDP, CPI, interest rate         IMF - Direction of Trade Statistics;           Trade-weighted GDP, CPI, interest rate of US, euro
                                                     IMF - International Financial                  area, Japan and China
                                                     Statistics; OECD; National Statistical
                                                     Offices
             Foreign currency %                      Dataset developed for Gopinath                 Long-term average currency of invoicing share of
                                                     (2015); available at:                          imports; used in cross-sectional regressions.
                                                     https://scholar.harvard.edu/gopinath
                                                     /publications/international-price-
                                                     system
                                                     Dataset developed for Ito and Kawai            Time-varying currency of invoicing share of imports; a
                                                     (2015); provided by the authors.               continuous linearly interpolated version is used in
                                                                                                    panel regressions.
             Less differentiated goods in            UNCTAD Merchandise Trade Matrix                Ratio of primary commodities (SITC 0 + 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 +
             imports                                                                                68) to the sum of total products and services.

             Regulation                              OECD Dataset: Regulation in energy,            The scores are linearly extrapolated from available
                                                     transport and communications 2013              time periods to construct a continuous time series.




                                                                                 32
 Appendix B: SVAR Methodology and Country-specific Results

      a. Methodology

 We modify the methodology developed in Forbes et al. (2018) to derive shock-dependent estimates
 of pass-through for each of the 26 countries for which we computed reduced-form estimates of
 pass-through in Section II. 28 More specifically, we estimate an SVAR with seven variables for each
 country: changes in nominal trade-weighted exchange rates, consumer price inflation, real GDP
 growth, short-term interest rates, and changes in trade-weighted foreign GDP and consumer prices
 as well as foreign short-term interest rates. Detailed definitions are available in Appendix A, and all
 variables are at a quarterly frequency. We allow for seven shocks that can affect each country's
 exchange rate: three domestic shocks (supply, demand, and monetary policy) and three global
 shocks (global supply, demand and monetary policy) and we leave one shock unidentified so as to
 capture any shocks that don't satisfy the characteristics of the six well-identified shocks.

 In order to identify the shocks, we use a set of standard and straightforward long- and short-run zero
 restrictions and sign restrictions, summarized in Appendix Table B.1. We impose this identification
 using an algorithm based on Rubio-Ramirez et al. (2010) and Binning (2013) and estimate the model
 using Bayesian methods with Minnesota priors. 29 The resulting "shock dependent" estimates of
 pass-through tend to be very close to the reduced form estimates of pass through (from Section II).
 For a detailed comparison of the estimates obtained using these two different methods, see Figure 6
 in Forbes et al. (2017).

 Table B.1. SVAR identification

                           Domestic         Domestic          Domestic          Global             Global         Global
                            supply          demand            monetary          supply            demand         monetary
                            shock            shock           policy shock       shock              shock        policy shock
                                                                   Short-run restrictions
GDP                                 +              +                  _
CPI                                 -              +                  _
Interest rate                                      +                  +
Exchange rate                                      -                  -
Foreign GDP                         0              0                  0               +                  +                -
Foreign CPI                         0              0                  0               -                  +                -
Foreign interest rate               0              0                  0                                  +                +
                                                                   Long-run restrictions
GDP                                                0                  0                                  0                0
CPI
Interest rate
Exchange rate
Foreign GDP                         0              0                   0                                 0                0
Foreign CPI                         0              0                   0
Foreign interest rate               0              0                   0



 28 The main differences between this framework and that in Forbes et al. (2018) are: we include more foreign variables to
 identify a set of well-defined global shocks alongside the domestic shocks, and that we exclude import prices from the
 SVAR. Unfortunately, there is not sufficient, reliable data on import prices over the time-series needed to estimate the
 model with import prices for the larger set of countries. We also do not allow for exogenous shocks to the exchange rate,
 as it is no longer possible to identify this shock with only four domestic variables.
 29 The technical details of the estimation are identical to those in Forbes et al. (2018) and described in its Appendix A.

                                                             33
   b. Contributions of shocks to exchange rate fluctuations for individual countries and over time

Figure B.1. Forecast error variance decomposition of exchange rate changes, 1990-2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                       Proportion of exchange
    Supply                                                                Demand                                                          Monetary policy                                              rate forecast error  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                       variance explained
    Global supply                                                         Global demand                                                   Global monetary policy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                        Iceland




                                                                                                                                                                          Phillipines
   Australia




                                                                          Sweden
               Canada




                                                                                                                                                                   Peru



                                                                                                                                                                                                 Romania
                                                                                                                                          India




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Serbia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    South Africa
                                                                                                                                                  Korea
                                  Israel



                                                            New Zealand




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Turkey
                                                                                                                       Colombia




                                                                                                                                                                                        Poland
                                           Japan
                                                   Norway



                                                                                   Switzerland




                                                                                                                                  Ghana
                                                                                                      Brazil




                                                                                                                                                          Mexico
                                                                                                 UK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Uruguay
                                                                                                               Chile




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Thailand
                           Advanced economies                                                                                                             Emerging economies




                                                                                                                                  34
Figure B.2. Historical shock decompositions of year-on-year exchange rate changes

        a) Advanced economies

                                            Australia                                                                                           Canada                                                                                                 Iceland                                                                                        Israel
         Global MP                                         Global demand                                      Global MP                                    Global demand                                            Global MP                                        Global demand                                     Global MP                                 Global demand
         Global supply                                     Monetary policy                                    Global supply                                Monetary policy                                          Global supply                                    Monetary policy                                   Global supply                             Monetary policy
         Demand                                            Supply                               30            Demand                                       Supply                                    20             Demand                                           Supply                               30           Demand                                    Supply                         20
         Base level and trend                              Effective exchange rate              25            Base level and trend                         Effective exchange rate                                  Base level and trend                             Effective exchange rate                           Base level and trend                      Effective exchange rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                     15                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                20                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                15                                                                                                                                                                                                        0                                                                                     10
                                                                                                10                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -10                                                                                   5
                                                                                                5                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -20
                                                                                                0                                                                                                    -5                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -30
                                                                                                -5                                                                                                   -10
                                                                                                -10                                                                                                                                                                                                       -40                                                                                   -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -15                                                                                                  -50
                                                                                                -15
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -20                                                                                                                                                                                        -10
                                                                                                -20                                                                                                                                                                                                       -60
                                                                                                -25                                                                                                  -25                                                                                                  -70                                                                                   -15
 1991
        1993
               1995
                       1997
                              1999
                                     2001
                                            2003
                                                    2005
                                                            2007
                                                                   2009
                                                                          2011
                                                                                 2013
                                                                                         2015




                                                                                                      1991
                                                                                                             1993
                                                                                                                    1995
                                                                                                                           1997
                                                                                                                                  1999
                                                                                                                                         2001
                                                                                                                                                2003
                                                                                                                                                        2005
                                                                                                                                                                2007
                                                                                                                                                                        2009
                                                                                                                                                                                2011
                                                                                                                                                                                       2013
                                                                                                                                                                                              2015




                                                                                                                                                                                                            2001


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2003


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2007


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2009


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2011


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2013


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2005



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2007



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2009



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2011



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2013



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2015
                                             Japan                                                                                               Korea                                                                                           New Zealand                                                                                        Norway
         Global MP                                        Global demand                                       Global MP                                    Global demand                                            Global MP                                        Global demand                                     Global MP                                 Global demand
         Global supply                                    Monetary policy                                     Global supply                                Monetary policy                                          Global supply                                    Monetary policy                                   Global supply                             Monetary policy
         Demand                                           Supply                                40            Demand                                       Supply                                    40             Demand                                           Supply                               20           Demand                                    Supply                         15
         Base level and trend                             Effective exchange rate                             Base level and trend                         Effective exchange rate                   30             Base level and trend                             Effective exchange rate                           Base level and trend                      Effective exchange rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                     20                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                20                                                                                                   10                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                10                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -5                                                                                    0
                                                                                                0                                                                                                    -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -30                                                                                                                                                                                        -5
                                                                                                -10                                                                                                  -40                                                                                                  -15
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -50                                                                                                  -20                                                                                   -10
                                                                                                -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -60                                                                                                  -25
                                                                                                -30                                                                                                  -70                                                                                                  -30                                                                                   -15
 1991
        1993
               1995
                       1997
                              1999
                                     2001
                                            2003
                                                    2005
                                                            2007
                                                                   2009
                                                                          2011
                                                                                 2013
                                                                                         2015




                                                                                                      1992

                                                                                                             1994

                                                                                                                    1996

                                                                                                                           1998

                                                                                                                                  2000

                                                                                                                                         2002

                                                                                                                                                 2004

                                                                                                                                                         2006

                                                                                                                                                                 2008

                                                                                                                                                                         2010

                                                                                                                                                                                 2012

                                                                                                                                                                                         2014




                                                                                                                                                                                                            1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2008

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2010

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2014
                                            Sweden                                                                                         Switzerland                                                                                                    UK
         Global MP                                        Global demand                                       Global MP                                    Global demand                                            Global MP                                        Global demand
         Global supply                                    Monetary policy                                     Global supply                                Monetary policy                                          Global supply                                    Monetary policy
         Demand                                           Supply                                30            Demand                                       Supply                                    20             Demand                                           Supply                               20
         Base level and trend                             Effective exchange rate               25            Base level and trend                         Effective exchange rate                                  Base level and trend                             Effective exchange rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                     15                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                15                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                10                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                5                                                                                                    5                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                0                                                                                                    0                                                                                                    -5
                                                                                                -5                                                                                                                                                                                                        -10
                                                                                                -10                                                                                                  -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -15
                                                                                                -15
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -10                                                                                                  -20
                                                                                                -20
                                                                                                -25                                                                                                  -15                                                                                                  -25
 1994

        1996

                1998

                         2000

                                2002

                                        2004

                                                   2006

                                                           2008

                                                                   2010

                                                                          2012

                                                                                  2014




                                                                                                      1991
                                                                                                             1993
                                                                                                                    1995
                                                                                                                           1997
                                                                                                                                  1999
                                                                                                                                         2001
                                                                                                                                                2003
                                                                                                                                                        2005
                                                                                                                                                                2007
                                                                                                                                                                        2009
                                                                                                                                                                                2011
                                                                                                                                                                                       2013
                                                                                                                                                                                              2015




                                                                                                                                                                                                            1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2008

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2010

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                           35
       b) Emerging economies

                                             Brazil                                                                                             Chile                                                                                        Colombia                                                                                             Ghana
       Global MP                                     Global demand                                         Global MP                                        Global demand                                      Global MP                                   Global demand                                       Global MP                                       Global demand
       Global supply                                 Monetary policy                                       Global supply                                    Monetary policy                                    Global supply                               Monetary policy                                     Global supply                                   Monetary policy
       Demand                                        Supply                  40                            Demand                                           Supply                  25                         Demand                                      Supply                  20                          Demand                                          Supply                  20
       Base level and trend                          Effective exchange rate                               Base level and trend                             Effective exchange rate                            Base level and trend                        Effective exchange rate                             Base level and trend                            Effective exchange rate
                                                                             30                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10                                                                                    10
                                                                             20                                                                                                                  15
                                                                             10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                 10                                                                                              0
                                                                             0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                             -10                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                                                   -20
                                                                             -20
                                                                             -30                                                                                                                 -5                                                                                              -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -30
                                                                             -40                                                                                                                 -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -30                                                                                                 -40
                                                                             -50                                                                                                                 -15
                                                                             -60                                                                                                                 -20                                                                                             -40                                                                                                 -50
1997

        1999

                 2001

                         2003

                                     2005

                                             2007

                                                      2009

                                                               2011

                                                                           2013

                                                                                    2015




                                                                                                   1991
                                                                                                          1993
                                                                                                                 1995
                                                                                                                         1997
                                                                                                                                1999
                                                                                                                                       2001
                                                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                                                                     2005
                                                                                                                                                             2007
                                                                                                                                                                    2009
                                                                                                                                                                            2011
                                                                                                                                                                                   2013
                                                                                                                                                                                          2015




                                                                                                                                                                                                        1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                               1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2001

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2009

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2011

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2007




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2009




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2011




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2013




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2015
                                             India                                                                                            Mexico                                                                                             Peru                                                                                       Philippines
       Global MP                                     Global demand                                         Global MP                                        Global demand                                      Global MP                                   Global demand                                       Global MP                                       Global demand
       Global supply                                 Monetary policy                                       Global supply                                    Monetary policy                                    Global supply                               Monetary policy                                     Global supply                                   Monetary policy
       Demand                                        Supply                  15                            Demand                                           Supply                  20                         Demand                                      Supply                  15                          Demand                                          Supply                  20
       Base level and trend                          Effective exchange rate                               Base level and trend                             Effective exchange rate                            Base level and trend                        Effective exchange rate                             Base level and trend                            Effective exchange rate
                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                             10                                                                                                                                                                                                    10                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                             5                                                                                      -10                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                             0                                                                                      -20                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                    -30                                                                                                                                                                                                              -10
                                                                                             -5                                                                                     -40                                                                                                          -5
                                                                                                                                                                                    -50                                                                                                                                                                                                              -20
                                                                                             -10                                                                                                                                                                                                 -10
                                                                                                                                                                                    -60                                                                                                                                                                                                              -30
                                                                                             -15                                                                                                                                                                                                 -15
                                                                                                                                                                                    -70
                                                                                             -20                                                                                    -80                                                                                                          -20                                                                                                 -40
1997

        1999

                  2001

                             2003

                                      2005

                                              2007

                                                        2009

                                                                    2011

                                                                             2013

                                                                                      2015




                                                                                                   1991
                                                                                                          1993
                                                                                                                 1995
                                                                                                                         1997
                                                                                                                                1999
                                                                                                                                       2001
                                                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                                                                     2005
                                                                                                                                                             2007
                                                                                                                                                                    2009
                                                                                                                                                                            2011
                                                                                                                                                                                   2013
                                                                                                                                                                                          2015




                                                                                                                                                                                                        1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                               1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2001

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2009

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2011

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2015
                                            Poland                                                                                            Romania                                                                                           Serbia                                                                                      South Africa
       Global MP                                     Global demand                                         Global MP                                        Global demand                                      Global MP                                   Global demand                                       Global MP                                       Global demand
       Global supply                                 Monetary policy                                       Global supply                                    Monetary policy                                    Global supply                               Monetary policy                                     Global supply                                   Monetary policy
       Demand                                        Supply                  25                            Demand                                           Supply                  20                         Demand                                      Supply                  20                          Demand                                          Supply                  40
       Base level and trend                          Effective exchange rate 20                            Base level and trend                             Effective exchange rate                            Base level and trend                        Effective exchange rate                             Base level and trend                            Effective exchange rate
                                                                                                                                                                                    15                                                                                             15                                                                                                  30
                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                 10                                                                                              10                                                                                                  20
                                                                             10
                                                                             5                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 5                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                             0                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                             -5                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -5
                                                                             -10                                                                                                                 -5                                                                                                                                                                                                  -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -10
                                                                             -15                                                                                                                 -10                                                                                                                                                                                                 -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -15
                                                                             -20
                                                                             -25                                                                                                                 -15                                                                                             -20                                                                                                 -30
                                                                             -30                                                                                                                 -20                                                                                             -25                                                                                                 -40
1993

       1995

               1997

                      1999

                              2001

                                      2003

                                             2005

                                                     2007

                                                             2009

                                                                     2011

                                                                             2013

                                                                                     2015




                                                                                                   2005



                                                                                                                  2007



                                                                                                                                   2009



                                                                                                                                                     2011



                                                                                                                                                                     2013



                                                                                                                                                                                      2015




                                                                                                                                                                                                        2006




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2012




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2014




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1999

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2001

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2009

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2011

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                       36
                               Thailand                                                              Turkey                                                               Uruguay
        Global MP                       Global demand                        Global MP                      Global demand                          Global MP                     Global demand
        Global supply                   Monetary policy                      Global supply                  Monetary policy                        Global supply                 Monetary policy
        Demand                          Supply                  10           Demand                         Supply                  40             Demand                        Supply                  30
        Base level and trend            Effective exchange rate              Base level and trend           Effective exchange rate                Base level and trend          Effective exchange rate
                                                                8                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                6                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                4                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                2                                                                   -20                                                                  -10
                                                                0
                                                                                                                                    -40                                                                  -20
                                                                -2
                                                                -4                                                                                                                                       -30
                                                                                                                                    -60
                                                                -6                                                                                                                                       -40
                                                                                                                                    -80                                                                  -50
                                                                -8
                                                                -10                                                                 -100                                                                 -60
 1999

         2001

                2003

                       2005

                               2007

                                      2009

                                             2011

                                                    2013

                                                           2015




                                                                      2001


                                                                             2003


                                                                                      2005


                                                                                              2007


                                                                                                     2009


                                                                                                              2011


                                                                                                                     2013


                                                                                                                             2015




                                                                                                                                            2003


                                                                                                                                                      2005


                                                                                                                                                               2007


                                                                                                                                                                          2009


                                                                                                                                                                                 2011


                                                                                                                                                                                          2013


                                                                                                                                                                                                  2015
Notes: The figures show the year-on-year changes in the quarterly trade-weighted exchange rate (effective exchange rate) of each country, decomposed into the historical contributions of the
six SVAR-identified structural shocks. All data is expressed in percent. Unlike for the regression results in the rest of this paper, the exchange rate index has not been inverted for these charts,
so that a positive change reflects an appreciation rather than a depreciation and vice versa.




                                                                                                                                           37
Appendix C: Sensitivity Tests

This appendix discusses a series of sensitivity tests assessing if various assumptions and choices
significantly affect the main results. In almost all cases, the choices do not significantly affect key
results--so we will only briefly summarize the tests.

    a. Different approaches to estimating long-sample pass-through

First, we examine if changes in our baseline specification of reduced-form pass-through significantly
affect key results. Section II of the paper discussed the parsimonious distributed lag regression in
equation (1) which is standard in the literature and used as our baseline. We also estimate 26
alternative specifications (using different control variables and lag structures), which are detailed in
Appendix B of Forbes et al. (2017). The results for pass-through from these sensitivity tests are not
systematically different from the baseline estimates, but it is possible that certain controls in the
baseline specification could affect pass-through estimates in ways that are correlated with the
shocks behind exchange rate movements. For example, controlling for GDP growth in the first stage
could capture some of the impact of the shocks (such as a demand shock), and thereby make it more
difficult to find a significant role for the shock variables in the second-stage estimates discussed in
Section IV. Or, adding oil prices to the first stage could capture some of the impact of global shocks,
and therefore reduce the significance of the global supply and demand shock variables in the
second-stage estimates. To test these hypotheses, we estimate equation (1) with no control for GDP
growth, and then with an additional control for oil prices. In each case the main results from the
second stage regressions are very similar, but with small changes that follow these predictions of the
correlations between GDP growth, oil prices, and the shock variables. The shock variables are
somewhat more often significant when the control for GDP growth is excluded from the first stage,
and the shock variables are slightly less often significant when the control for oil prices is included in
the first stage. These changes are very marginal, however, and the general conclusions do not
change.

Next, we note that the reduced-form estimates of exchange rate pass-through presented in Figure 1
are sometimes imprecisely estimated and can take on implausibly high values for some countries.
Our generalized least square estimates in the second stage utilize the variance of the estimated
coefficients to attach lower weight on the more imprecise estimates. This approach, however, does
not address issues arising from potentially biased estimated coefficients with narrow confidence
bands. The high pass-through estimate of 67% for Turkey in Figure 1 stands out as the most notable
outlier with narrow confidence bands. We therefore ran all second-stage regressions in Table 1
without the estimates for Turkey. The key results were unchanged, but some estimated coefficients
became slightly larger or more significant. For example, the trade openness in Table 1 was usually
significant (at least at the 10% level). The coefficients on our shock variables were unchanged.

    b. Different shock identification assumptions and excluding the crisis period

To more precisely identify domestic shocks, our baseline SVAR model imposes sign restrictions on
the response of domestic prices within the quarter a shock occurs (see Appendix Table B.1). We then
study the response of domestic consumer prices relative to the exchange rate eight quarters after
that shock when we discuss shock-dependent pass-through. To ensure that our results are not
generated by assumption, we drop all sign restrictions on the domestic CPI and re-estimate the SVAR

                                                    38
model relying only on sign and zero restrictions on other variables to identify the six shocks of
interest. 30 Figure C.1 shows that the results do not change when we modify the sign restrictions
imposed on the CPI; pass-through is still significantly lower for domestic demand shocks compared
to domestic monetary policy shocks. The second stage regressions based on these estimates and
explaining variations in pass-through are also broadly similar, with the coefficients on the shock
variables of similar magnitudes, albeit the marginally significant coefficients in some cross country
regressions become insignificant.



Figure C.1. Cross-country mean group estimate for the response of consumer prices conditional on
a 1% exchange rate depreciation, eight quarters after shock: SVAR model without sign restriction
on domestic CPI

                                                                       +/- 2SE confidence band

           1                                                           Cross-country mean ERPT estimate by shock
                                                                       10th percentile
                                                                       90th percentile
         0.5



           0



        -0.5
                    Supply           Demand            MonPol            Supply*           Demand*           MonPol*
         Notes: The light blue range depicts the 2 standard error range of median consumer price responses corresponding to a 1%
         exchange rate depreciation caused by different shocks across the 26 countries.



Second, our sample includes the financial crisis ­ an episode when many countries experienced
particularly large exchange rate movements. To check if the estimated differences between pass-
through after different shocks are driven by the crisis only, we re-estimate the SVAR without data for
2008 and 2009 31. The average shock-dependent pass-through across countries is plotted in Figure
C.2 and is similar to our main result. Indeed, the relative responses of domestic prices and exchange
rates are less dispersed across countries when the crisis is excluded from the estimation period, as
indicated by the somewhat narrower confidence bands. Estimating the same second-stage
regressions as in Section IV is only feasible across countries, but not over the six-year periods within
countries (as these cover the crisis). The resulting coefficients on shock variables are similar to the
baseline, but not significant.



30 While sufficient to identify the desired shocks, this set-up relies exclusively on long-run restrictions to differentiate
domestic supply shocks from other domestic shocks. Long-run restrictions can lead to weak identification when imposed
on relatively short sample periods (see Pagan and Robertson, 1998, Faust and Leeper, 1997, and Christiano et al., 2007), so
we retain the sign restrictions on CPI in our preferred baseline model in the main text.
31 This means excluding 10 quarterly observations, since using the first two quarters of 2010 requires using the last

quarters of 2009 as explanatory variables given our two-lag VAR model.

                                                                39
Figure C.2. Cross-country mean group estimate for the response of consumer prices conditional on
a 1% exchange rate depreciation, eight quarters after shock: Excluding the financial crisis in 2008-9

                                                                          +/- 2SE confidence band
          0.8                                                             Cross-country mean ERPT estimate by shock
          0.6                                                             10th percentile
                                                                          90th percentile
          0.4

          0.2

            0

         -0.2

         -0.4

         -0.6
                     Supply           Demand             MonPol            Supply*          Demand*            MonPol*
Notes: The light blue range depicts the 2 standard error range of median consumer price responses corresponding to a 1% exchange rate
depreciation caused by different shocks across the 26 countries.




     c. Different measures of "structure" variables

Many of the structural country characteristics that previous literature has highlighted as affecting
pass-through are highly correlated with each other. This, especially when combined with our limited
sample size, makes it difficult to control for many variables simultaneously. Therefore, we estimate
the main regressions using a range of different possible "structural" variables and show a sample of
the results below. Table C.1 presents an extended version of columns 1-7 of Table 1, where each set
of structural characteristics is first included simultaneously and then kept in the more parsimonious
regressions including the shocks only if significant. Table C.2 presents a similar set of regressions,
controlling for more structural characteristics, but using 6-year windows, as in columns 8-14 of Table
1. As discussed in the text, these highlight the consistent importance of inflation volatility for
explaining pass-through estimates across countries and over time, supporting our choice of variables
in the baseline regressions presented in the main text of this paper.




                                                                  40
Table C.1. Determinants of estimated long sample exchange rate pass-through, controlling for a larger set of structural characteristics

                                              (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)                   (7)                   (8)
 Foreign currency %                          0.06
                                           (0.17)
 ER volatility                               0.18                  1.25
                                           (1.18)                (1.13)
  (average)                                  3.82                 -4.72
                                           (6.82)                (5.95)
  volatility                                17.17**               24.52***              23.61***         15.06***              17.78***                   15.37***              17.29***
                                           (7.70)                (6.99)                (3.21)            (2.90)                   (2.61)                 (2.93)                (2.59)
 Emerging market                            -0.08                 -0.05
   dummy                                   (0.05)                (0.05)
 Trade openness                                                                          0.33**                                                           0.20                  0.18
                                                                                       (0.14)                                                            (0.14)                (0.14)
 Less differentiated                                                                     0.38*                                                            0.11                  0.27
     goods/imports                                                                     (0.21)                                                            (0.22)                (0.21)
 Market regulation                                                                      -0.02
                                                                                       (0.02)
 % demand shock                                                                                               -0.34*                                      -0.23
                                                                                                             (0.17)                                      (0.20)
 % monetary policy                                                                                                                   0.20*                                       0.18
     Shock                                                                                                                         (0.11)                                      (0.12)
 Constant                                   -0.10                 -0.09**               -0.19**               0.04                  -0.10**               -0.07                 -0.21**
                                           (0.12)                (0.04)                (0.07)                (0.05)                (0.05)                (0.11)                (0.08)
 # observations                               18                    26                    19                    26                    26                    26                    26
 Degrees of freedom                           12                    21                    14                    23                    23                    21                    21
 Adjusted-R2                                 0.70                  0.64                  0.82                 0.65                   0.65                  0.65                  0.66
Notes: Estimated using weighted least squares with the inverse of the variance of the estimated pass-through coefficients as weights. Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
The left-hand side variable is exchange rate pass-through, as estimated in Section II. Explanatory variables used in the regressions are the share of foreign currency invoicing in imports, the standard
deviation of the exchange rate, the average quarterly inflation rate, the standard deviation of quarterly inflation, a dummy variable for emerging markets, trade openness (the share of imports in GDP),
share of less differentiated imports ( the share of raw materials in imports), the degree of market regulation, the contribution of the domestic demand shock to the forecast error variance decomposition
of the exchange rate and that of the domestic monetary policy shock.




                                                                                                                         41
Table C.2. Determinants of estimated 6-year window exchange rate pass-through, controlling for a larger set of structural characteristics

                                          (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (6)                 (7)
 Foreign currency %                      0.54
                                       (0.55)
 ER volatility                          -1.08
                                       (1.26)
  (average)                            -10.62
                                       (7.58)
  volatility                            25.01**             15.58***            11.56***            12.71***            16.23***           15.56***
                                       (8.93)              (2.80)              (2.85)              (2.38)              (2.59)             (2.44)
 Trade openness                                             1.00**                                                      1.17***            0.85***
                                                           (0.38)                                                      (0.25)             (0.27)
 Less differentiated                                        0.53
     goods/imports                                         (0.44)
 Market regulation                                          0.02
                                                           (0.03)
 % demand shock                                                                 -0.22                                   -0.10
                                                                               (0.13)                                  (0.11)
 % monetary policy                                                                                   0.42***                                0.25**
     shock                                                                                         (0.09)                                 (0.10)
 Constant                               -0.36               -0.38***            0.06                -0.13***            -0.25***           -0.27***
                                       (0.39)              (0.13)              (0.07)              (0.03)              (0.09)             (0.06)
 # observations                           40                  59                 74                   74                  73                 73
 Degrees of freedom                     23.00               36.00               46.00               46.00               44.00              44.00
 Adjusted-R2                             0.59                0.74               0.65                 0.74                0.75               0.78
Notes: Estimated using weighted least squares with the inverse of the variance of the estimated pass-through coefficients as weights. Standard errors in parentheses.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. For further details on variable definitions, see notes to Table C.1.




                                                                                                                        42
        d. Different measures for monetary policy

   One challenge during the period in our analysis is measuring changes in monetary policy, as several
   economies were at their effective lower bound (ELB) for their policy interest rate and adjusted
   monetary policy through other tools. More specifically, in the wake of the global financial crisis, the
   central banks of Canada, Israel, Japan, UK, Sweden and Switzerland all lowered their interest rates to
   levels below 1% and some of them introduced additional unconventional easing measures such as
   quantitative easing or forward guidance. Given these policies, official interest rates are likely to miss
   changes in the monetary policy stance, affecting our identification of monetary policy shocks.

   To address this potential issue, we estimated the SVAR model using several alternative interest rate
   series for these countries. First, we re-estimate the SVAR model for Japan and the UK ­ two
   countries in our sample that used quantitative easing most extensively ­ using shadow interest rates
   developed by Krippner (2016). The resulting mean group estimates of the relative responses of
   domestic consumer prices and the exchange rate, conditional on each shock identified in our SVAR,
   are almost identical to the baseline results using central bank rates shown in Figure 2 of the paper.
   The second-stage regression results for the role of the shocks in explaining differences in exchange
   rate pass-through across countries and over time are reported in the left of Tables C.3 and C.4
   alongside the baseline results from Table 1 of the paper for the cross-country results (columns 2, 3,
   and 7) and time-series results (in columns 9, 10, and 14). The results are almost identical.

   As no shadow rates were available for Canada, Israel, Sweden and Switzerland, we also performed
   two more robustness checks using financial market forward rates of different maturities to proxy for
   the stance of monetary policy. We re-estimated the SVAR model for the six countries that were near
   the zero lower bond using 3-month, 3-month and 6-month, 6-month forward rates from interest
   rate swap markets. The resulting mean group estimates of shock-dependent exchange rate pass-
   through are again very similar to the baseline results presented in the paper. Second-stage
   regression results for the role of shocks in explaining variations in reduced form pass-through are
   also similar and shown to the right of Tables C.3 and C.4.

   Table C.3. Determinants of estimated long sample exchange rate pass-through: coefficients on
   shocks from SVAR estimated with shadow or forward interest rates
                       Baseline:                                    3-month, 3-month        6-month, 6-month
                                           Shadow interest rate
                   central bank rate                                   forward rate            forward rate
                  (2),(3)        (7)        (2),(3)       (7)      (2),(3)        (7)      (2),(3)        (7)
% demand          -0.74***        -0.25     -0.77***       -0.27   -0.74***       -0.22    -0.73***       -0.22
shock
% monetary          0.16          0.14        0.15         0.14     0.17          0.15      0.17           0.16
policy shock
   Notes: See notes to Table 1 in paper.

   Table C.4. Determinants of estimated 6-year window exchange rate pass-through: coefficients on
   shocks from SVAR estimated with shadow or forward interest rates
                       Baseline:                                     3-month, 3-month       6-month, 6-month
                                           Shadow interest rate
                  central bank rate                                     forward rate            forward rate
                 (9),(10)       (14)       (9),(10)      (14)      (9),(10)        (14)    (9),(10)        (14)
% demand          -0.31**       -0.00      -0.33*       -0.07      -0.33**       -0.02     -0.33**        0.02
shock
% monetary        0.41***       0.25**      0.40***      0.27**     0.42***       0.26**    0.40***       0.24**
policy shock
   Notes: See notes to Table 1 in paper.

                                                           43
     e. Other Tests

In a final set of sensitivity tests, we explore the role of commodity exporters/importers and
emerging markets. As noted, these different groups of countries often have different characteristics
of pass-though, such as emerging markets generally having higher pass-through and commodity
exporters being differentially affected by permanent global shocks than commodity importers. To
better explore these relationships, we included an emerging market dummy variable in the second
stage regressions wherever possible, and then a dummy variable capturing whether the country is a
commodity exporter or importer. 32 These additional dummy variables are usually insignificant and
do not change the key results. We also considered the possibility that the impact of the shocks we
focus on differ depending on whether the country considered is a net commodity exporter or
importer. To test for these types of effects, we include an interaction between the commodity
exporter/importer dummy and the shock contributions in the second stage regressions. The
coefficients on the interaction term were not significant and the key results are robust. A more
thorough analysis of the importance of commodity price shocks for exporters and importers of those
commodities, and how these may affect pass-through, requires a VAR model which identifies
commodity shocks separately. While this could potentially be important for some countries, e.g.
New Zealand as found in Parker and Wong (2014), we leave that for future research.

Finally, we explore whether changes in the VAT/GST could explain some of the sharp changes in
pass-through that occur for specific countries over time. For our main analysis, we measure the pass-
through of exchange rate movements to the consumer price index (not adjusted for changes in VAT
or other government policies) as this measure is most widely available across countries. For several
countries, however, there is a period when estimated pass-through changes around the same time
that there were changes in the VAT (such as in Australia in 2000, New Zealand in 2010, and the UK in
2008, 2010 and 2011). Therefore, for these three countries, we re-estimate the rolling regressions of
pass-through, but add dummy variables for increases or decreases in the VAT/GST. This flattens the
short-term jumps in estimated pass-through experienced by New Zealand from 2011-2014, but it has
minimal effect on the pass-through estimates for Australia and the UK.



References

Binning, Andrew, 2013, "Underidentified SVAR models: A framework for combining short and long-
run restrictions with sign-restrictions," Norges Bank Monetary Policy Working Paper, No. 14.

Christiano, Lawrence, Eichenbaum, Martin, and Vigfusson, Robert, 2007, "Assessing structural
VARs," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, Vol. 21, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc., pp.
1­106.

Faust, John and Leeper, Eric, 1997, "When do long-run identifying restrictions give reliable results?"
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Vol. 15, No. 3, pp. 345­353.




32We include the additional dummies in the cross-section and 6-year windows. The commodity exporters (importers)
dummy is based on UNCTAD data (from 1995-2015) with commodity exporters (importers) defined as being a net exporter
(importer) over the relevant period and commodities defined as SITC 0+1+2+3+4+68.
                                                        44
Forbes, Kristin, Hjortsoe, Ida and Nenova, Tsvetelina, 2018, "The Shocks Matter: Improving our
Estimates of Exchange Rate Pass-Through," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 114, pp. 255-
275.

Forbes, Kristin, Hjortsoe, Ida and Nenova, Tsvetelina, 2017, "Shocks versus Structure: Explaining
Differences in Exchange Rate Pass-Through across Countries and Time," Bank of England External
MPC Working Paper, No. 50.

Gopinath, Gita, 2015, "The International Price System," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Symposium 2015, Jackson Hole, pp. 71-150.

Ito, Hiro and Kawai, Masahiro, 2015, "Trade Invoicing in Major Currencies in the 1970s-1990s:
Lessons for Renminbi Internationalization," mimeo.

Pagan, Adrian and Robertson, John, 1998, "Structural models of the liquidity effect," The Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp. 202­217.

Parker, Miles and Wong, Benjamin, 2014, "Exchange Rate and Commodity Price Pass-Through in
New Zealand," Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Notes, March.

Rubio-Ramirez, Juan, Waggoner, Daniel and Zha, Tao, 2010, "Structural Vector Autoregressions:
Theory of Identification and Algorithms for Inference," The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 77, No.
2, pp. 665-696.




                                                 45
