                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CHEAP THRILLS: THE PRICE OF LEISURE AND THE GLOBAL DECLINE IN
                               WORK HOURS

                                     Alexandr Kopytov
                                     Nikolai Roussanov
                               Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel

                                      Working Paper 27744
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27744


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




We thank Julieta Caunedo and Jeremy Greenwood as well as seminar participants at Cornell,
Wharton and Princeton for useful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alexandr Kopytov, Nikolai Roussanov, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cheap Thrills: the Price of Leisure and the Global Decline in Work Hours
Alexandr Kopytov, Nikolai Roussanov, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel
NBER Working Paper No. 27744
August 2020
JEL No. E24,J22,J32

                                           ABSTRACT

The real price of recreation goods and services has fallen dramatically over the last century. At
the same time, hours per worker have also been on a steady decline. As recreation goods make
leisure time more enjoyable, we investigate if the fall in their price has contributed to the decline
in work hours. Using aggregate data from OECD countries, as well as disaggregated data from
the United States, we provide evidence that the two are strongly related. To identify the effect of
recreation prices on hours worked, we use variation in the bundle of recreational goods across
demographic groups to instrument for the changing price of leisure faced by these groups over
time. We then construct a macroeconomic model with general preferences that allows for
trending relative prices and work hours along a balanced growth path. We estimate the model and
find that a large part of the decline in hours worked can be explained by the declining price of
leisure. In contrast, we find mixed evidence that higher wages contributed to the decline in hours
worked over the last several decades.

Alexandr Kopytov                                  Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel
912 K. K. Leung Building                          Cornell University
The University of Hong Kong                       Department of Economics
China/Hong Kong                                   Uris Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853
alexandrkopytov91@gmail.com                       Ithaca, NY 14853
                                                  mathtd@gmail.com
Nikolai Roussanov
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School, Finance Department
2400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
nroussan@wharton.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
    Hours worked have declined substantially over the last hundred years. Nowadays, the average
American worker spends about two thousand hours a year at work, while its 1900 counterpart
worked 50% more. Over the same period, technological progress has increased labor productivity
and wages, and so the decline in hours is often attributed to an income effect through which
richer households choose to enjoy more leisure time. Indeed, Keynes (1930) prophesized that "the
economic problem may be solved [...] within a hundred years" and that therefore there would be
no need to work long hours to satisfy one's desire for consumption.
    Another important change occurred over the same period, however. New technologies such
as televisions and the internet have brought a virtually unlimited trove of cheap entertainment
at consumers' fingertips. The impact of these technologies is clearly visible in the price data. For
instance, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) documents that the (real and quality-adjusted) price
of a television set has fallen about 1000-fold since the 1950s, while computers are about fifty times
cheaper than they were in the mid-1990s. Similarly, the inflation-adjusted price of admission to a
(silent, black and white) movie in 1919 is roughly equal to the current cost of a monthly subscription
to a video streaming service providing essentially unlimited access to movies and television shows.
While these are some of the most obvious examples, the aggregate price index tracking recreational
goods and services has also declined dramatically since 1900, falling by more than half in real terms.
It is hard to think of this large decline in the price of leisure as having no impact on the observed
increase in its quantity.
    In this paper, we investigate how much of the decline in hours worked can be attributed to
rising wages, and how much comes from the decline in recreation prices. Answering this question
has important implications for our understanding of the labor market and, in particular, for mak-
ing predictions about how much people will work in the future. If the decline in hours can be
mostly attributed to the income effect, then the weakening growth in median income might lead
to a slowdown in the decline in work hours (Mishel et al., 2012). If instead the movement in recre-
ation prices is driving the downward trend in hours, we can expect the trend to continue as new
technologies keep making leisure cheaper and more enjoyable. In addition, taking into account the
impact of recreation prices on hours worked can lead to a better understanding of the elasticity of
labor supply to changes in wages--a key parameter for the design of multiple government policies.
    We begin by providing an overview of the data. For the United States, we consider three
metrics in order to evaluate the decline in work hours.1 Using data from the Census and the BLS,
we first show that hours per worker have declined at a steady pace since 1900, with the exception of
large movements around the Great Depression and the Second World War. Hours per capita have

    1
    Similar evidence is presented in a number of studies, including Owen (1970), Lebergott (1993), Fogel (2000),
Greenwood and Vandenbroucke (2005), and Boppart and Krusell (2020).


                                                       1
also fallen over that period, although the decline is concentrated in the first part of the twentieth
century. After 1950, the large increase in female labor force participation has kept that measure
mostly flat. Finally, we plot data from the American Time Use Survey that show that self-reported
leisure time has also been increasing, for both men and women, since the 1960s (Robinson and
Godbey, 2010; Aguiar and Hurst, 2007b).2 This last piece of evidence confirms that the decline
in market work hours is not simply an artifact of a reallocation toward housework. The trends
observed in the U.S. are also visible in other developed countries. We look at the evolution of work
hours in 38 OECD countries and find that hours per worker have declined virtually everywhere,
while hours per capita have fallen in 27 countries.
    This decline in work hours in the United States over the last 120 years was accompanied by a
large, well-documented, increase in wages, as well as a large decline in recreation prices. We extend
early work by Owen (1970) with data from the Census and the BLS to show that the real price of
recreation goods and services has been steadily decreasing since 1900, at a pace of about -0.75% per
year. This trend is also clearly visible in our multi-country sample. Indeed, real recreation prices
have fallen in all the countries that we consider, with an average annual decline of -1.49%. We
conclude from these data that the decline in work hours and real recreation prices are widespread
phenomena that affected a broad array of developed countries.
    We propose a series of reduced-form exercises to estimate the impact of changes in wages
and recreation prices on hours worked. In the United States, we take advantage of variation in
recreation prices across U.S. Census regions. We combine these data with information from the
Current Population Survey on hours worked and labor income. Through a series of regressions,
we show that a decline in recreation prices is significantly associated with a decline in hours per
capita. This effect is also economically important: a one percentage point increase in the growth
rate of recreation prices is associated with about a 0.65 p.p. increase in the growth rate of hours.
We perform similar exercises in the cross-section of OECD countries and also find a strong positive
relationship between recreation prices and hours. These regressions also inform us about the impact
of hourly wages on hours worked. Here the link is more tenuous. While we find some evidence of an
income effect in the United States and our multi-country sample, the sign of the relevant coefficient
depends on the exact specification under consideration. The effect of wages also tends to become
statistically indistinguishable from zero when we filter out high-frequency fluctuations in the data
to focus on variations over longer horizons.
    We also provide estimates of the impact of wages and recreation prices using detailed individual-
level data from the U.S. Census. While our main focus is on aggregate variables, one key advantage
of using these disaggregated data is that they allow us to construct two instrumental variables to

   2
     Ramey and Francis (2009) also provide evidence that leisure time per capita has increased between 1900 and
2005. Their estimates are somewhat smaller than those of Aguiar and Hurst (2007b), mostly because of a different
classification of activities. See Aguiar and Hurst (2007a) for more details.


                                                       2
tackle potential endogeneity issues. In the spirit of Bartik (1991), we construct a first instrument,
for wages, that uses location-specific industry employment shares to tease out fluctuations in local
wages that are driven by national movements. We also construct a second instrument, this time for
recreation prices, using variation in the type of recreation goods and services that are consumed by
different demographic groups. Using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, we document
that, for instance, individuals without a high-school diploma consume a disproportionate amount of
"Audio and video" items, while those with more than a college education consume relatively more
of "Other services", which includes admissions, fees for lessons, club memberships, etc. Taking
advantage of this variation, we construct our second instrument to capture how national movements
in the price of different recreation items affects different demographics groups. This strategy delivers
a strong instrument, as judged by high first-stage F-statistics. Using these two instruments, we find
a strong positive relationship between recreation prices and hours worked. At the same time, the
Bartik shocks suggest a positive (rather than negative) effect of wages on hours worked. We find,
however, that this is driven entirely by the decline in employment among regions and demographic
groups that used to work heavily in manufacturing (e.g., non-college educated in the Midwest).
Since these jobs have been disproportionately displaced by automation and globalization, controlling
for the role of manufacturing is key for identifying the effect of wages. With that additional control,
we find no significant impact of wages on hours worked but our inference about the role of recreation
prices is unaffected.
   In order to further refine and interpret this evidence, we construct a macroeconomic model in
which recreation prices and wages can affect labor supply decisions. One of our goals is to derive
theoretically-grounded relationships between observables that an estimation procedure can use to
better pinpoint the effect of recreation prices on hours worked. At the heart of our analysis is
a household that values recreation time and recreation goods and services, as well as standard
(i.e. non-recreation) consumption goods. To be consistent with well-known long-run trends, we
build on the standard macroeconomic framework of balanced growth and assume that all prices
and quantities in the economy grow at constant, but potentially different, rates. Importantly, and
in contrast to the standard balanced-growth assumptions, we do not assume that hours worked
remain constant over time, but instead allow them to also grow (or decline) at a constant rate.
   For our analysis to be as general as possible, we follow the approach of Boppart and Krusell
(2020) and keep the household's preferences mostly unrestricted, only requiring that they be con-
sistent with a balanced-growth path. We characterize the general form that a utility function must
take in this setup, and show that it nests the standard balanced-growth preferences with constant
hours of King et al. (1988), as well as the more general preferences of Boppart and Krusell (2020)
that allow for hours to decline over time through the income effect of changing wages. In addi-
tion, in the class of economies we study, the growth rates of hours, recreation consumption and
non-recreation consumption are log-linearly related to those of the wage rate and the real price of


                                                   3
recreation items. As a result, changes in the price of recreation goods and services can affect hours
worked.
   Our theoretical model has several key advantages when it comes to making contact with the
data. First, since we keep the household's preferences quite general, our empirical strategy does not
hinge on a specific utility function, but instead remains valid under several functional forms that
have been proposed in the literature. Second, there is no need to fully specify the production sector
of the economy. We only need wages and recreation prices to grow at constant rates for our analysis
to be well-grounded. Third, the system of equations derived from the model can be estimated using
standard techniques and allows for straightforward identification of the key structural parameters
of the economy. Finally, the model provides a set of cross-equation restrictions that impose more
structure on the estimation compared to reduced-form techniques. In particular, these restrictions
allow us to use consumption data to discipline the estimation of the effect of recreation prices on
hours worked.
   We estimate the structural relations implied by our model using the regional U.S. data as well
as the OECD data. Once again, we find that a decline in recreation prices leads to a large and
significant increase in leisure time in both of our samples. In contrast, the evidence for the income
effect is mixed. In the multi-country setting, the income and substitution effects offset each other
in all the specifications that we consider, as in the standard balanced-growth preferences of King
et al. (1988). At the same time, for the United States, we do find that the income effect dominates
under some specifications. In particular, using our Bartik-like instruments in conjunction with our
structural model yields a statistically and economically significant role for wages, in addition to
that for recreation prices. Overall, based on this empirical analysis, we find that the fall in the
price of recreation goods and services, on its own, can explain a large fraction of the decline in
hours worked observed in the data.


Literature

   Our empirical results update and extend an early analysis by Owen (1971) who finds strong
evidence of complementarity between leisure time and recreational goods and services in the United
States (see also Gonzalez-Chapela, 2007). Owen attributes one quarter of the decline in hours
worked over the 1900-1961 period to the declining price of recreation items, and the remaining three
quarters to the income effect of rising wages. In contrast, we find much less evidence in support
of the income effect in our preferred specifications. An important difference with our approach is
that we construct Bartik-like instruments to handle endogeneity issues. We also provide a general
balanced-growth path model to guide our empirical exercises.
   A weak income effect is consistent with cross-sectional evidence that higher-skilled individuals




                                                 4
work more hours per week, especially in the more recent period (Aguiar and Hurst, 2007b).3 A weak
income effect is also consistent with the work of Bick et al. (2018) who find that the relationship
between hours and labor productivity is strongly negative across developing countries, but that it
is essentially flat across individuals in developed countries, which suggests that the income effect
itself might be diminishing with income. They interpret this as evidence of a subsistence level
in consumption, whereby poorer households must supply more labor to purchase essential goods.
Since our sample consists mostly of developed countries, our findings are consistent with this
interpretation.
    A subsistence level in consumption would also reconcile our findings with those of Vanden-
broucke (2009), who evaluates the impact of recreation prices in a static model with worker het-
erogeneity. In a calibration exercise over the 1900-1950 period, he finds that 82% of the decline in
hours worked can be attributed to the income effect and only 7% to the declining price of recreation
goods. With a subsistence level in consumption, one would expect a stronger income effect in the
U.S. over the first half of the century, when incomes where lower, compared to the recent decades
which are the focus of our analysis.
    Our work is also consistent with findings from Aguiar et al. (2017) who show that the increased
leisure time, in particular among young men, is strongly associated with the consumption of leisure
goods and services made available due to the advent of cheap new media technologies, such as
online streaming and video games. In a recent paper, Fenton and Koenig (2018) argue that the
introduction of televisions in the United States in the 1940s and 1950s had a substantial negative
effect on labor supply decisions, especially for older men. Kopecky (2011) focuses on the reduced
labor market participation of older men and argues that retirement has become more attractive
due to the decline in the price of leisure.
    Our main theoretical result generalizes recent work by Boppart and Krusell (2020) who charac-
terize the class of preferences that are consistent with a balanced-growth path and declining work
hours. We extend their preferences to include recreation goods that are complement with leisure
time. As a result, we can investigate the importance of wages and recreation prices as drivers of
the decline in work hours.
    Greenwood and Vandenbroucke (2005) consider a static model of the role of technological
changes in the long-run evolution of work hours through three channels: rising marginal prod-
uct of labor (the income effect), the introduction of new time-saving goods (the home production
channel) and the introduction of time-using goods (the leisure channel). The second effect, in par-
ticular, is important for accounting for the entry of women into the labor force, which makes the
long-run decline of work hours per person (rather than hours per worker) less pronounced.

   3
     Aguiar and Hurst (2009) also show that less educated men increased their leisure time over the last decades,
while more educated men (whose earnings increased the most) recorded a decrease in time allocated to leisure--a
finding at odds with a strong income effect.


                                                       5
    Ngai and Pissarides (2008) construct a model in which leisure time rises on a balanced
growth path due to a complementarity between leisure and "capital goods" (such as entertain-
ment durables), as well as marketization of home production. Building on this, Boppart and Ngai
(2017) provide a model where both leisure time and leisure inequality increase along a balanced
growth path due to the growing dispersion in labor market productivity. In recent work, Boerma
and Karabarbounis (2020) argue that the rising productivity of leisure time combined with cross-
sectional heterogeneity in preferences (or "non-market productivity") is responsible for these trends.
Our work departs from the existing literature in several ways. On the theoretical side, we keep
the preferences of the household as general as possible. On the empirical side, we investigate the
impact of recreation prices in both aggregate and disaggregated data in the U.S. as well as in a
broad cross-section of countries. Most importantly, we use instruments to tease out the causal
impact of recreation prices and the wage.
    The next section provides an overview of the data as well as reduced-form exercises to evaluate
the impact of recreation prices on hours worked in the United States and in OECD countries.
We then introduce the model and provide our main theoretical result. Finally, we estimate the
structural relationships derived from the model. The last section concludes.


2       A first look at the data and some reduced-form evidence
    We begin by presenting the relevant data for the United States and for a cross-section of
countries. We document three important trends that hold in almost all the countries in our sample
over the last decades: 1) hours worked have fallen, 2) the price of recreation goods and services has
declined substantially, and 3) wages have been increasing. We also present a series of reduced-form
exercises to show that the decline in work hours is strongly associated with the decline in recreations
prices.4


2.1     United States evidence

    Figure 1 shows the evolution of work hours, wages and recreation prices in the United States.
The solid blue line in panel (a) shows how hours worked per capita have evolved between 1900
and 2019. Over the whole period, hours have fallen significantly from about 1500 annual hours per
person in 1900 to about 1100 hours per person today. While the figure shows an overall reduction
in hours, all of the decline actually took place before 1960, with even a slight increase since then.
But these aggregate statistics are somewhat misleading as they conceal substantial heterogeneity
between men and women, whose hours are shown in red and green in panel (a). As the panel
demonstrates, the second half of the twentieth century saw a large increase in women's hours,
    4
    To avoid burdening the text, we keep the precise data sources and the steps taken to construct the datasets in
Appendix A.


                                                        6
presumably due to the rise in labor force participation, which clearly contributed to the stagnation
of the aggregate hours worked data.5 At the same time, male hours worked have kept declining
(note that between 2000 and 2019 hours declined for both men and women).
    The evidence in panel (a) might suggest that women are working much more in 2020 than in
1960, but this is somewhat misleading, since the figure only reports hours worked in the marketplace.
Total work hours, which also include home production, have been declining since 1960. To show
this, we follow Aguiar and Hurst (2007b) and Aguiar et al. (2017) and use the American Time Use
Survey to construct measures of market work, total work (including market work, home production
and non-recreational childcare), and leisure for men and women. These series are presented in
Figure 2. Between 1965 and 2017, total annual work hours have declined by 416 (8.0 hours per
week) for women and by 504 (9.7 hours per week) for men. According to that metric, women work
substantially less now than fifty years ago (although classifying all time spent with children such as
playing games and going to a zoo as childcare "work" rather than "leisure" moderates this trend
somewhat -- see discussion in Ramey and Francis, 2009 and Aguiar and Hurst, 2007a).
    The decline in hours worked is also clearly visible when looking at hours per worker, instead of
per capita. These data are presented in panel (b) of Figure 1. Except for large fluctuations around
the Great Depression and the Second World War, that measure has been on a steady decline from
more than 3000 annual hours per worker in 1900 to less than 2000 today.6
    What are the drivers behind this long-run decline in hours? Clearly, people are now richer
than in 1900 and it might be that at higher income levels they prefer enjoying leisure to working.
Indeed, panel (c) of Figure 1 shows that real hourly wages have gone up ten-fold since 1900.
Theoretically, this tremendous increase in wages could lead to an increase in labor supply, if the
standard substitution effect dominates, or to its decline, if the income effect dominates instead.
    Like the benefit of working, the cost of enjoying leisure has also undergone a massive change
over the last century. To show this, we plot in panel (d) of Figure 1 the real price of recreation
goods and services since 1900.7 Items in that category include goods and services that are asso-
ciated with leisure time, such as video and audio equipment, pet products and services, sporting
goods, photography, toys, games, recreational reading materials, and admission to movies, theaters,


   5
      This increase in female labor force participation is well documented and was driven by several factors. Many
women were probably kept away from market work because of discriminatory social norms. As these norms evolved,
the stigma of women in the labor force faded and female participation increased. In addition, technological im-
provements made it easier to perform nonmarket work--mostly done by women--leaving more time for market work
(Greenwood et al., 2005). Goldin and Katz (2002) also document that the adoption of contraceptive might have
affected women's decision to pursue higher education.
    6
      Using decennial data from the Census, McGrattan et al. (2004) also find that hours per worker have declined
and hours per capita have increased in the U.S. since 1950. Kendrick (1961) and Whaples (1991) document a decline
in work hours since 1830 (see also Figure 1 in Vandenbroucke, 2009). Kendrick (1961) also show that this decline has
happened in all industries.
    7
      Throughout the paper, nominal variables divided by the price of all consumption goods and services are referred
to as "real".


                                                         7
                       (a) Hours per capita                                                      (b) Hours per worker




                            (c) Real wage                                                      (d) Real recreation price

Panel (a): Annual hours worked over population of 14 years and older. Source: Kendrick, 1961 (hours, 1990-1947); Kendrick et al., 1973 (hours,
1948-1961); Carter et al., 2006 (population, 1900-1961); ASEC (total, male and female hours per capita, 1962-2018). Panel (b): Annual hours
worked over number of employed. Source: Bureau of the Census, 1975 (1900-1947); FRED (1947-2018). Panel (c): Real labor productivity. Source:
Kendrick, 1961 (real gross national product divided by hours, 1900-1928); FRED (real compensation of employees, divided by hours and CPI,
1929-2018). Panel (d): Real price of recreation goods and services. Source: Owen, 1970 (real recreation price, 1900-1934); Bureau of the Census,
1975 (real price of category `Reading and recreation', 1935-1966); BLS (real price of category `Entertainment', 1967-1992); BLS (real price of
category `Recreation', 1993-2018). Series coming from different sources are continuosly pasted.


                                 Figure 1: Hours, wages and recreation price in the U.S.




                                                                       8
                               (a) Men                                                                  (b) Women

Weekly hours spent on market work, total work and leisure. Market work includes any work-related activities, travel related to work, and job
search activities. Total work includes market work, home production, shopping, and non-recreational childcare. Leisure is any time not allocated
to market and nonmarket work, net of time required for fulfilling biological necessities (8 hours per day). Sample includes people between 16 and
64 years old who are not full-time students. Source: ATUS, Aguiar and Hurst (2007b) and Aguiar et al. (2017).


                               Figure 2: Market work, total work, and leisure in the U.S.


concerts, sporting events, etc.8 As we can see, these prices have experienced a steep decline, falling
by about 60% in real terms since 1900. If these goods and services are complement to leisure time,
a decline in their price would incentivize household to consume more leisure. As a result, they
could play an important role in the decline of hours worked.


2.1.1      Cross-regional regressions

     To investigate whether there is a statistical association between work hours, wages, and recre-
ation prices, we take advantage of variation in these variables across time and geographical regions
of the United States. To do so, we use annual data on the price of recreation goods and services
collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) since 1978 in certain metropolitan areas. These
data are then aggregated by the BLS to provide a recreation price index for each of the four U.S.
Census regions: Northeast, Midwest, South, and West.9
     We gather individual-level data on work hours and labor income from the Annual Social and
Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the Current Population Survey (CPS). We restrict our sample to
individuals between 25 and 64 years of age who are not serving in the armed forces, and aggregate
these data at the regional level so that they can be compared with the information on price.10 We



    8
      These data come from a variety of sources and their construction is detailed in Appendix A.
    9
      We also do the same analysis using data on the metropolitan-area level. As shown in Appendix C.1.3, the results
are similar.
   10
      See Figure 10 in Appendix C for the time-series evolution of hours, real recreation prices and real wages across
the four U.S. Census regions.


                                                                       9
then construct regional measures of hours worked per capita and wages.11 , 12
    We begin our analysis of these data with a relationship that, as we will show in the next section,
arises naturally in a broad class of labor supply models consistent with a balanced-growth path.
Namely, we consider the ordinary least squares regression


                              log hlt = 0 + p  log plt + w  log wlt + l +                    lt ,                     (1)

where h is hours worked per capita, p is the real recreation price and w is the real wage. All nominal
prices and wages are adjusted for inflation using the regional all-item consumer price indices. The
subscript l denotes a Census region and t indicates the year. The operator  computes the growth
rate of the variable and is discussed in more details below. The coefficients of interest, p and
w , capture how the growth rate of hours worked is affected by the growth rates of recreation
prices and wages, respectively. We also include regional fixed effects l to control for cross-region
heterogeneity.13 , 14
    Since we are interested in long-run trends, we remove high-frequency fluctuations in the data
by constructing multi-period average growth rates of the variables of interest. Specifically, for any
variable xt we define the n-period growth rate as

                                                        t+2n                       t+n
                                    1              1                           1
                            log xt    log                        x    - log              x          ,                 (2)
                                    n              n                           n    =t
                                                        =t+n+1


which corresponds to the annualized log difference between the average of xt over two consecutive
windows of n periods. We construct these averages so that they only include non-overlapping data.
In our benchmark exercises, we use n = 3 years to filter out high-frequency fluctuations without
removing too many observations from the sample, but most of our results are robust to increasing
n as we discuss below.
    The estimation results are presented in Table 1. In columns (1) and (2), we regress the growth
rate of hours on the growth rates of recreation prices and wages separately. Both  log p and  log w,
in isolation, show significant explanatory power. For instance, a 1 percentage point increase in the
growth rate of recreation prices is associated with a 0.76 p.p. increase in the growth rate of hours.
When  log p and  log w are both included in the regression, the coefficients p and w remain
significant but decline in magnitudes (column 3).

    11
       Hours worked per capita is the sum of hours worked by all individuals within that region divided by its population.
Wages are then measured as the sum of individual labor income divided by the number of hours worked in the region.
    12
       In our main analyses, we investigate the association between wages and recreation prices with hours per capita.
Appendix C.1.2 shows that we find similar but weaker results if we consider only intensive margin of hours adjustment
(i.e., we use hours per employed as a measure of hours).
    13
       In Appendix C.1.1, we control for demographic changes by splitting people by demographic characteristics (age,
education, sex) and running the same regression at the region-demographic bin level.
    14
       Notice that we do not include time fixed effects because price growth rates are strongly correlated across the
U.S. regions (see panel a of Figure 10 in Appendix A).


                                                           10
     These results show a strong positive association between hours worked and the price of leisure
goods and services. As recreation items become cheaper, households purchase more of them, which
makes leisure time more enjoyable and leads to a reduction in hours worked. Wages also matter for
hours worked, but the estimates in columns (1) to (3) suggest that the substitution effect dominates
the income effect: higher wage growth incentivizes households to work more, so that hours worked
also grow.

                                                 (1)                   (2)                (3)                                     (4)
Dependent variable                                             Growth rate of hours per capita  log h
 log p                                         0.76                                                 0.67                      0.52
 log w                                                                    0.40                      0.20                      -0.34
Business cycle controls                           N                         N                          N                          Y
Region FE                                         Y                         Y                          Y                          Y
R2                                               0.42                      0.18                       0.45                       0.75
# observations                                    48                        48                         48                         48
Notes: Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 years. Real per capita output is used as a business cycle control. Errors
are robust to heteroscedasticity.  , , indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


 Table 1: Regressions across U.S. regions: impact of wage and recreation price growth on hours worked.


     We perform several exercises to make sure that our results are not driven by short-term business
cycle fluctuations (in particular, the fact that involuntary unemployment might rise in recessions,
while wages slump). In the last column of Table 1, we control for the growth rate in real per capita
output. In this case, p remains strongly positive but w now takes on a negative value indicating
that the income effect of wages on work hours dominates here. In Appendix Table 10, we report
the same regressions but using hours per worker rather than per capita to focus on the intensive
margin of labor supply. We find a much smaller substitution effect, consistent with the role of
unemployment fluctuations over the business cycle.
     To further make sure that short-term fluctuations are not driving our results, we show that our
estimates of p are robust to increasing the number of years n over which the data is averaged in
(2). Figure 3 shows the coefficients p and w , along with their 90% confidence intervals, from the
same regression as that of column (3) in Table 1 but with the data averaged over periods of one to
eight years, which is the range usually associated with business cycles (Baxter and King, 1999). We
can see that -- except when no averaging is done -- the coefficient p remains significantly positive.
Moreover, its point-estimate is quite stable for n  3, suggesting that our regressions capture long-
run changes rather than high-frequency fluctuations, which might be subject to reverse causality, as
involuntary unemployment in recessions might increase consumption of leisure, pushing up prices
of recreation-specific goods. The coefficient w tends, however, to become insignificant for larger
n which suggests that the substitution effect might dominate in the short-run (again, likely due to
the effect of unemployment) but that the income effect gains in importance over longer horizons.

                                                                     11
p and w are estimated from the regression (1) without additional business cycles controls. Vertical bars represent 90% confidence intervals.
Errors are robust to heteroscedasticity.


                         Figure 3: Impact of averaging window n on estimated coefficients


2.1.2      Using cross-household variation

     So far, we have used aggregate variations across geographical regions to investigate the link
between wages, recreation prices and hours worked. But, while there is substantial regional variation
in wages, recreation prices are highly correlated across regions. In order to better identify their
role, we take advantage of larger price variation in more highly disaggregated data.
     In recent decades, different households have experienced very different changes in their labor
income and their work hours. While the large increase in earnings inequality has been extensively
documented, the U.S. has also witnessed a substantial rise in leisure inequality (Aguiar and Hurst,
2009). For instance, Attanasio et al. (2012) show that low-income people have experienced a
much more pronounced increase in their leisure time than their high-income counterparts. At the
same time, and as we document below, the recreation prices faced by different households have
also changed dramatically over the same period. In this subsection, we take advantage of these
heterogenous changes across households to evaluate the link between hours worked, wages and
recreation prices from a different angle.
     One key advantage of using disaggregated household-level data is that we can construct Bartik-
like instruments to address potential endogeneity concerns (Bartik, 1991). Indeed, the regional re-
gressions conducted above show an association between recreation prices, wages, and hours worked,
but they are silent on whether a causal link exists. To move further in addressing endogeneity issues,
we construct two instrumental variables to capture exogenous variations in wages and recreation
prices. Our wage instrument relies on the differences in industrial composition across U.S. local-
ities and across demographic groups, as is relatively standard in the literature. In contrast, our
instrument for recreation prices takes advantage of differences in recreation consumption bundles
across households' demographic characteristics, such as education and age, as we describe in detail


                                                                    12
below.


2.1.2.1        Instrument for wages          We use initial variation in industrial composition across lo-
calities and demographic group together with nation-wide changes in sectoral wages to construct
a measure of changes in wages that are driven by factors independent of regional labor market
conditions, such as technological growth, etc. To be precise, we compute

                              IV
                                              e0
                                               igl                         h0
                                                                            igl
                         log wgl =                0      log eU S
                                                              ig -            0      log hU S
                                                                                          ig ,                     (3)
                                         i     j ejgl                i     j hjgl

where i denotes an industry, g is a demographic group, and l is a locality.15 The operator  denotes
the total growth rate over our sample. The variable eigl = wigl × higl refers to labor earnings and
                                               IV , we first compute the fraction of earnings and
higl is total hours worked. To construct  log wgl
hours worked that can be attributed to an industry i in a given locality-demographic unit in a base
period, which we denote by the superscript t = 0. Since these shares provide a measure of how
sensitive local earnings and hours are to aggregate changes in industry i, we can then compute
      IV as the growth rate in local wages that can be attributed to changes in national factors:
 log wgl
 log eU S          US
      ig and  log hig . As these national factors are unlikely to be driven by local conditions, (3)
provides a potential source of exogenous variation in local wages for a given demographic group.16
    To construct the needed measures of hours and earnings at the locality-demographic-industry
level, we use data from the U.S. Census (years 1980 and 1990) and the Census' American Commu-
nity Surveys (2009-2011 three-year sample, which we refer to as 2010). The key advantage of these
data over the ASEC is that they cover a much larger sample of the U.S. population, which allows
us to exploit variation across the 543 finely-defined Census-identified geographic locations.17 We
limit our analysis to individuals between the ages of 25 and 64, and split them into 15 demographic
groups based on age (25-34 years old, 35-49 years old, 50-64 years old) and education (less than
high school, high school, some college, four years of college, more than college), excluding those
serving in the armed forces. Our industry classification includes 34 industries.18 We construct ini-
tial industry shares (the base year in (3)) using the data for 1980; growth rates are then constructed
by comparing 1990 outcomes to their 2010 counterparts. Importantly, the base-year shares in (3)

   15
      We show in Appendix C.1.8 that equation (3) can be derived from the definition of labor earnings eiglt =
                                                         x
wiglt × higlt together with replacing local growth rates iglt +1
                                                           xiglt
                                                                 , for some variable x, by their nation-wide equivalent
 xigt+1   US
  xigt
               .
  16
      See discussion in Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2018) of the implicit assumptions under which the exclusion re-
striction is satisfied, in particular the absence of geographical spill-overs due to worker mobility, etc.
   17
      This regional classification "identifies the most detailed areas that can consistently be delineated from the
geographic codes available in Public Use Microdata Sample files for 1980 through 2011".
   18
      We use the `IND1990' variable. The industries are Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries; Mining; Construction;
Manufacturing (19 subcategories); Transportation; Communications; Utilities and Sanitary Services; Wholesale Trade
(2 subcategory); Retail Trade; Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate; Business and Repair Services; Personal Services;
Entertainment and Recreation Services; Professional and Related Services; Public Administration.


                                                           13
are computed over a period that precedes the horizon over which we compute the growth rates. As
a result, these shares are less likely to be affected by the future growth rates.


2.1.2.2    Instrument for recreation prices We construct a similar instrument for recreation
prices. Since these prices are not available at the local level, we cannot construct location-specific
prices. Instead, we take advantage of the substantial variation in the type of goods and services
that are consumed across demographic groups. Individuals of different education levels and ages
consume very different types of recreation items, and the aggregate prices of these items have
evolved differently over the last decades. To the extent that differences in the bundles of recreation
goods consumed by different demographic groups are driven by differences in tastes, variation in
the relative prices of these bundles generates exogenous variation in the implicit cost of enjoying
leisure faced by different groups.
    In order to make sure that changes in the relative prices are not reflecting demand shifts, we
construct a Bartik-like instrument based on the expenditure shares of different recreation goods in
a pre-period interacted with aggregate changes in the relative prices of the specific goods over a
subsequent period to capture a source of exogenous variation in recreation prices. Specifically, we
compute

                                                               c0
                                                                jg
                                       log pIV
                                            g =                   0     log pU S
                                                                             j ,                                (4)
                                                      j        i cig

where cjg denotes the nominal consumption expenditure of recreation items of type j by individuals
in demographic group g (a combination of education and age). We use the recreation consumption
shares of each demographic group during an initial period (superscript t = 0) as a measure of how
sensitive the recreation prices they face are to nation-wide changes  log pU S
                                                                           j . Since these aggregate
movements are unlikely to be related to factors originating specifically from individuals in a given
group,  log pIV
             g provides a source of exogenous variation in the recreation prices affecting these
individuals.19
    Our source of data for recreation consumption is the interview part of the Consumption Expen-
diture Survey (CE). We follow Aguiar and Bils (2015) in constructing and cleaning the sample. We
split all recreation consumption expenditures into the seven subcategories used by the BLS to con-
struct price indices: Audio-video, Sports, Pets, Photo, Reading, Other goods (including toys and
musical instruments), Other services (including admissions, fees for lessons and instructions, club
memberships, etc.). We use the period 1980 and 1988 when computing the consumption shares.20
  19
      A similar approach is used by Acemoglu and Linn (2004) to instrument for changes in demand, rather than
supply, as they interact expenditure shares of individual goods with demographic changes in order to capture shifts
in the market size over time. As shown by Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2018) in the context of the standard Bartik
instrument, this construction is essentially equivalent to a differences-in-differences research design.
   20
      We pool observations between 1980 and 1988 to construct initial consumption shares to reduce the noise because
the Consumption Expenditure Survey--our source of consumption data--has on average 1484 annual observations.


                                                          14
Growth rates are computed between the 1989-1991 period and the 2009-2011 period.21
    The strength of the price instrument (4) relies on substantial heterogeneity across the initial
recreation consumption baskets of households with different demographics. We show in Figure 4
how the recreation spending of two extreme demographics is allocated, and how that spending has
evolved over time. Panels (a) and (c) refer to households whose heads do not have a high school
diploma and who are between the ages of 25 and 34. Panels (b) and (d) show how households whose
heads have more than a college degree and who are between 50 and 64 allocate their recreation
spending. Panels (a) and (b) refer to spending during the period 1980-1988, while panels (c) and
(d) show the data between 2010 and 2018, respectively.
    Focusing on the 1980-1988 period first, we see from panels (a) and (b) that consumption baskets
vary substantially across demographics. In particular, households whose heads are young and less-
educated spend disproportionally more on "Audio-video" items, while households whose heads are
older and are more-educated spend more on "Other services".22 Panels (c) and (d) show that these
differences remain in the most recent decade and, if anything, have become starker. Notably, the
share of expenditure on "Audio-video" items by households whose heads are young and less educated
has increased from about 36% to more than 50% between the two periods. Importantly, though, for
our analysis, we are only using the pre-period shares as our source of exogenous variation. While
expenditure shares for the same demographic groups in the recent period are somewhat different
from what they looked like in the 1980-1988 period, the latter are still a good predictor of the
former.
    Importantly for our purpose, the aggregate price of the different items in the recreation con-
sumption baskets have evolved very differently over the last decades. As Figure 5 shows, the real
price of "Audio-video" items, disproportionately consumed by young less-educated households, has
declined by 60% since 1980. In contrast, the average price of items in the "Other services" cat-
egories, mostly consumed by old highly-educated households, has increased by about 20%. As a
result, the price of a recreation basket has evolved very differently across demographic groups. We
use this variation in our regressions below to tease out the impact of recreation prices on hours
worked.
    One implicit assumption behind our identification approach is that the differences in the ex-
penditure shares of the different recreation goods across demographic groups in the pre-period are
orthogonal to the forces driving changes in prices of the different good categories during our period
   21
      When constructing recreation consumption baskets across demographic groups in the CE data, we use demo-
graphic characteristic of reference persons. By definition, "the reference person of the consumer unit is the first
member mentioned by the respondent when asked `What are the names of all the persons living or staying here?
Start with the name of the person or one of the persons who owns or rents the home'. It is with respect to this
person that the relationship of the other consumer unit members is determined". Our measures of wages and hours
from the Census are at the individual level. Our results are similar if we instead only use hours and wage data for
the household heads only. See Appendix C.1.10.
   22
      Figure 12 in Appendix C.1.9 shows that education alone can account for large variations in spending habits on
recreation items.


                                                        15
  (a) No high school diploma, 25-34 years old, 1980-1988                     (b) More than college, 50-64 years old, 1980-1988




  (c) No high school diploma, 25-34 years old, 2010-2018                     (d) More than college, 50-64 years old, 2010-2018

Shares of different items in total recreation consumption, constructed by pooling observations for the two periods, 1980-1988 and 2010-2018.
Source: Consumer Expenditure Survey.


                     Figure 4: Share of recreation spending across education and age groups.




                                                                    16
of interest, 1990-2011. This is reasonable, since the bulk of the changes over the last decades were
driven by external forces such as technological innovation and globalization (e.g., development of
information and computing technologies and automation driving down prices of audio-video goods
and services, in particular, as well as advances in automation technologies and globalization of
trade bringing down the prices of certain leisure-related manufactured goods, such as toys, musical
instruments, and sporting goods).
    Our instrument is able to tackle an array of endogeneity issues that can arise in standard
regressions. For instance, since it relies on cross-sectional variation, it can handle aggregate shocks
that might jointly affect the price of recreation items and hours worked. For instance, a shock
to preferences that makes leisure more enjoyable might lead to a change in demand for recreation
items, which might affect their price, while at the same time incentivizing people to work fewer
hours.23 In addition, our instrument is robust to individuals changing their recreation consumption
basket in response to change in prices since we fix the consumption shares to their 1980-1988 levels,
before the observed movement in prices.
    One potential concern that is not addressed directly by this instrument, however, is that there
might be an omitted variable that simultaneously drives changes in hours worked and in recreation
prices and that affects different demographic groups differentially. Over the past decades, manu-
facturing jobs have been moving overseas at the same time as technological improvements have led
to cheaper recreation goods. These changes might have affected different demographic groups in
different ways, in particular depressing demand for less-educated labor while potentially increasing
demand for highly skilled workers (e.g., Autor et al., 2006, Autor and Dorn, 2013, Bloom et al.,
2019, Jaimovich and Siu, 2020). In order to account for the role of these shifts, which have been
largely confined to the manufacturing sector, we add in some specifications an additional control for
the share of each demographic group employed in manufacturing in 1980, well before such changes
occurred, thus helping to make sure that these trends are not driving our results.


2.1.2.3     Regression results Now that we have defined our two instruments, we can move to
estimate how the growth in hours per capita h is affected by the growth in real recreation prices p
and wages w. Namely, we run the regression


                           log hgl = 0 + p  log pg + w  log wgl + Xgl +                  gl ,                      (5)

where the subscripts g and l denote, respectively, demographic groups and localities. As for our
instruments, the operator  computes differences between 2010 and 1990 outcomes. We also allow

   23
      This particular type of shock would also have counterfactual implications. It would lead to an increase in demand
for recreation goods, which would push up their prices, while at the same time reducing work hours. As a result, this
shock would tend to bias our estimates against us finding that cheaper recreation goods lead to a decline in labor
supply.


                                                          17
                               Real U.S.-wide price of various recreation goods and services. Source: BLS.


                         Figure 5: Real prices of different recreation goods and services.


for a set of control variables Xgl that we specify later.24 For each locality-demographic group,
we are computing unique growth rates, between 1990 and 2010, for hours per capita, wages and
recreation prices. As such, (5) is a purely cross-sectional regression with no time dimension. The
identification comes from variations across localities and demographic groups, and aggregate trends
are absorbed by the constant in the estimation.
    The outcome of the estimation is presented in Table 2, where the first three columns refer to
ordinary-least square regressions and the last three columns take advantage of our instruments. In
all cases, the F -statistics are large, suggesting that our two instruments are strong. In columns
(2)-(3) and (5)-(6) we allow for additional demographic controls. In particular, for each location-
demographic group, we compute the fractions of males, married people, and whites. We control
for the 1980 values of these fractions, as well as for their growth rates between 1990 and 2010.
Columns (3) and (6) also control for the share of manufacturing hours in each demographic group
in 1980.
    We see in all cases that an increase in recreation prices is associated with an increase in work
hours. The coefficients are strongly statistically and economically significant with a decline in
recreation prices of 1 percent associated with a decline in hours of 0.57 percent in our preferred
specification (column 6). Importantly, this effect remains strong even in the IV regressions, which
are less subject to endogeneity issues. At the same time, we find a somewhat limited impact of
wages on hours worked. Column (3) shows some evidence for the income effect but four out of six
specifications, including our preferred one in column (6), find that the income and the substitution
  24
       Since recreation prices are not available at the local level, we cannot construct location-specific prices. We instead
                                                                                                                                   US
                                                                                                        pg,t+1           cjg,t+1 pj,t+1
construct the annual demographic-specific growth in prices according to the formula                      pg,t
                                                                                                                 =   j     cig,t+1 p US .
                                                                                                                         i           j,t
Since (5) is specified for growth rates only, we pick an arbitrary number for the initial price level in each category
j . Note that we use growth rates when constructing the price level pg since the prices indexed are not comparable
across categories j .


                                                                  18
                                 (1): OLS   (2): OLS     (3): OLS     (4): IV      (5): IV     (6): IV
Dependent variable                      Growth in hours per capita  log h between 1990 and 2010
 log p                            0.87                0.88               0.46               0.78               0.69              0.57
 log w                            -0.00               -0.03             -0.07               0.12               0.27               0.13
1980 manuf. empl.                                                       -0.46                                                    -0.24
Locality F.E.                        Y                  Y                   Y                  Y                   Y                  Y
Addtl. dem. cont.                    N                  Y                   Y                  N                   Y                  Y
F -statistics                        --                 --                  --               295.4               312.4              136.4
R2                                  0.26               0.31                0.32               --                  --                 --
# observations                      8145               8145                8145              8145                8145               8145
The regressions are across people sorted by locality/education-age group. Controls include manufacturing hours share in 1980, and a rich set of
additional demographic controls (see text for details). Errors are clustered at location level. F -statistics are Kleibergen-Paap.  , , indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


Table 2: Regressions across people sorted by location and education-age groups: impact of wage and
recreation price growth on hours worked.


effects nearly offset each other. According to that evidence, the large increase in wages documented
in Figure 1 might have had only a small effect on labor supply decisions. In fact, in columns
(4) and (5) the coefficient on wages is positive, suggestive of the substitution effect dominating,
but it disappears after controlling for the manufacturing share, consistently with the view that
skill-biased technological change and/or greater openness to trade reduced demand for labor in the
manufacturing sector, thus simultaneously depressing hours and wages of demographic groups (e.g.,
non-college educated) and regions (e.g., Midwest) with a heavy manufacturing presence (Autor and
Dorn, 2009; Bloom et al., 2019).


2.2      Evidence from other countries

     We now take a look at international evidence on hours worked, wages and recreation prices.
As for the United States, we begin by providing an overview of the data, and we then show the
outcome of regressions to characterize the relationship between these quantities.


2.2.1      Overview of the data

     The trends observed in the U.S. economy are also visible in the international data. To show
this, we gather data on real recreation prices and wages from a variety of sources, such as the
OECD and national statistical agencies. The OECD tracks the price of "Recreation and culture"
items which we use as our main recreation price index. This category includes items such as audio-
visual and photographic equipment, musical instruments, toys, pets, admission to movies, theaters,
concerts, etc. For several countries, we are able to augment these data using price series from
national statistical agencies. Data on hours worked comes from the Total Economy Database of



                                                                      19
the Conference Board.25 Our final sample covers 38 countries and 1023 country-year observations.
More information about how the dataset is constructed is provided in Appendix A.
    Figure 6 shows the evolution of hours worked (both per capita and per worker), recreation prices
and wages for a selected group of countries in our sample.26 While there is some heterogeneity
across countries, the figure shows a clear overall decline in both hours and recreation prices, and
an increase in real wages. Across the full sample, we find that since 1950, per capita hours have
been declining at an average rate of 0.26% per year and hours per worker have been declining at
0.41% per year.27 At the same time, real wages have been increasing by 1.88% per year, and real
recreation prices have been declining by 1.07% per year.28
    To show how widespread these patterns are, Table 9 in the Appendix provides the list of
countries in our sample along with their individual average growth rates for hours, wages and
recreation prices. We observe, first, that there has been a broad decline in hours worked throughout
our sample. Hours per capita have had a negative growth rate in 27 countries out of 38, and the
decline is even more pronounced when looking at hours per worker, which have declined in all but
one country (Lithuania). Second, the growth in real wages lw is positive for all countries except
Mexico, which experienced a large decline in real wages in the 1980's due to very high inflation
rates.
    Real recreation prices have also been declining worldwide. As the table shows, we find a negative
growth rate for all countries in our sample, and these growth rates are statistically different from
zero at the 1% level in all cases. The coefficients are also economically large. Even for the country
with the slowest decline (Ireland), recreation prices have still gone down by 0.4% per year, a large
number when compounded over a hundred years. Compared to the other countries in our sample,
the United States experienced a relatively slow decline in real recreation prices (-0.7% per year).
Only four countries (Ireland, Japan, Luxembourg and Norway) went through slower declines.


2.2.2    Cross-country regressions

    We now use ordinary least square regressions to characterize the relationship between hours,
wages and recreation prices in our multi-country sample. Our benchmark specification is


   25
      We compute hours per capita by dividing total hours worked by the number of persons in the population that are
between 15 and 64 years of age, and similarly for hours per worker. We use the OECD's compensation of employees
divided by hours as our main measure of wages. We adjust all prices for inflation using the country-specific all-item
consumer price indices, also provided by the OECD. We restrict the sample to countries with at least ten years of
observations.
   26
      See Figure 13 in Appendix C.2.1 for the same graphs with all the countries in our sample.
   27
      Table 1 in Huberman and Minns (2007) shows that the decline in hours per worker goes back to at least 1870
in Australia, Canada, the United States and Western Europe.
   28
      We compute these growth rates by running a pooled regression of a given variable of interest xlt in country l
at time t on the time trend and a set of country fixed effects l , so that log xlt = l +  x t + lt . The coefficient  x
therefore provides a measure of average growth rates for variable x across countries.


                                                          20
                       (a) Hours per capita                                                     (b) Hours per worker




                    (c) Real recreation prices                                                     (d) Real wages

Panel (a): Annual hours worked over population between 15 and 64 years old. Source: Total Economy Database and OECD. Panel (b): Annual
hours worked over number of employed. Source: Total Economy Database. Panel (c): Price of consumption for OECD category "Recreation and
culture", normalized by price index for all consumption items. Base year = 2010. Source: see Appendix A.2. Panel (d): Real compensation of
employees divided by hours worked. Base year = 2010. Black lines represent log-linear trends, constructed by regressing log of the variable of
interest on time and country fixed effects.


                  Figure 6: Hours, wages and recreation prices for a selected group of countries.




                                                                     21
                                   log hlt = 0 + p  log plt + w  log wlt + l +                           lt ,                             (6)

where h is hours worked per capita, p is the real recreation price and w is the real wage.29 The
subscript l denotes a country and t refers to a year. We include country fixed effects l to control for
heterogeneity. Again, to smooth-out high frequency fluctuations we average variables over n = 3
years and then compute n-year growth rates, as specified in equation (2).
     The outcome of these cross-country regressions is presented in Table 3. They are broadly
consistent with those conducted on U.S. data. Columns (1) and (2) show that, when considered
in isolation, the growth in recreation prices and wages are positively associated with growth in
hours worked. When both terms are included together in the regression (column 3), we still find a
positive and statistically significant association. In column 4, we add the growth in real GDP per
capita to further control for business cycle fluctuations. In this case, our main coefficient of interest,
p , stays significantly positive but w switches sign. Finally, in the last column, we use real GDP
per hour as an alternative measure of the real wage. We find a significantly negative coefficient
w , in line with Boppart and Krusell (2020).30 Crucially, p remains significantly positive in all
the specifications considered, so that cheaper recreation prices is robustly associated with lower
working hours in the cross section of countries. The predicted impact of wages however depends
on how they are measured and on the precise specification.

                                            (1)                 (2)           (3)            (4)                                   (5)
Dependent variable                                           Growth rate of hours per capita  log h
 log p                                    0.28                                       0.25                 0.14                  0.30
 log w                                                         0.17                  0.15                -0.18
 log y/h                                                                                                                       -0.24
Business cycle controls                      N                    N                     N                        Y                 N
Country FE                                   Y                    Y                     Y                        Y                 Y
R2                                          0.10                 0.12                  0.15                     0.46              0.14
# observations                              290                  290                   290                      290               290
Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 years. Country-specific growth in real per capita GDP is used as a business cycle
control. Errors are clustered at the country level.  , , indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


     Table 3: Cross-country regressions: impact of wage and recreation price growth on hours worked.


     In Figure 7, we show the coefficients p and w for the same regressions as that of column
(3) in Table 3 but with the data averaged over periods of one to eight years. As we can see from
the figure, the point estimates are almost all positive and their magnitudes are fairly stable across
different averaging periods. However, for larger n's the number of observations in our cross-country
   29
      Appendix C.2.2 shows that we find similar but weaker results if we instead use hours per employed as a measure
of hours.
   30
      We do not include growth in real GDP per capita as a control because in that case the right-hand side variables
entirely span the left-hand side variable.


                                                                     22
Regression coefficients p and w for equation (6) with different averaging windows n and without business cycle controls. Vertical bars represent
90% confidence intervals. Errors are clustered at the country level.


                          Figure 7: Impact of averaging window n on estimated coefficients.


sample declines significantly and the confidence intervals widen accordingly (for example, for n = 8
years we are left with only 52 country-time observations).
     Specification (6) implicitly assumes that p and w are the same across countries. To explore
potential cross-country heterogeneity, we run the same regression on each individual country and
compare the estimated coefficients. To get reliable point estimates, we limit this exercise to countries
with at least 30 years of data. Figure 8 shows each country in a diagram where the horizontal axis
corresponds to the coefficient on recreation prices (p ) and the vertical axis corresponds to the
coefficient on wages (w ). We see that the sign of w varies widely across different countries,
suggesting that an increase in wage growth could be associated with an increase or a decline in
hours growth. At the same time, for all but one country (Australia), changes in the growth rates
of real recreation prices and hours worked are positively associated. These results suggest a robust
link between recreation prices and hours worked, while evidence for the traditional income effect of
wages on hours is mixed.


2.3      Discussion

     In this section, we have provided an overview of the data and showed evidence on the impor-
tance of rising wages and declining recreation prices for the observed decline in work hours over
the last several decades. In all the specifications that we have considered, we found a large and
significantly positive association between growth in hours and growth in recreation prices. That
relationship is visible at the country level, across the United States regions, across households, and
it remains almost unchanged when using instruments to capture exogenous variations in wages
and prices. The relationship also survives several changes in specifications as well as using differ-
ent measures of wages and hours worked (see Appendix C). Overall, we find strong evidence that


                                                                      23
           Growth rates are constructed using n = 3 years averaging windows. Countries with at least 30 years of data only.


Figure 8: Regression coefficients associated with growth rates in recreation prices (p ) and wages (w ) in
country-by-country regressions.


cheaper recreation goods and services might have been an important driver of the decline in work
hours that we observed in several countries. In contrast, the evidence for the impact of wages on
hours is somewhat mixed. In most of our regressions at the country and regional levels, we find that
the substitution effect dominates, although there is substantial variation across countries (Figure
8), and controlling for business cycle variation reveals a potential role for the income effect. In
our preferred specification, when instrumenting for wages and recreation prices, we find that the
income and substitution essentially offset each other, suggesting that increasing wages might have
contributed little to the decline in labor supply.
    We have abstracted from other potential forces that might also affect work hours in order to
keep our analysis focused. One such channel has to do with the evolution of home production and,
more specifically, improvements to home appliances that might have contributed to an increase in
female labor force participation. To see whether these changes could explain away our results, we
provide in Appendix C.1.7 regressions in which we also include the price of durable goods as a
control for the quality of appliances. We also provide an exercise in which we consider changes in
the classification of recreation items by the BLS. In both cases, we still find strong and statistically
significant evidence that recreation prices are positively associated with work hours.


3    Model
    In the previous section, we presented reduced-form evidence for a relationship between recreation
prices and work hours. But that evidence alone does not inform us about the origin of that
relationship and on which features of the economy influence its strength. For instance, it is unclear
whether that relationship is structural or if it could change in response to policy interventions.


                                                                 24
To gain a better understanding of the mechanisms involved, we therefore build a macroeconomic
model of labor supply in which wages and recreation prices affect work hours. Our goal is to build a
model that is general, microfounded and that can easily be brought to the data. We then estimate
the model in the next section and use it as a tool to disentangle how economic forces affect hours
worked.


3.1    Balanced-growth-path facts

    Since our goal is to explain economic changes that occur over long time horizons, we adopt the
standard macroeconomic framework for this type of analysis, namely that of a balanced-growth
path. In what follows, we therefore assume that prices and quantities grow at constant, but
perhaps different, growth rates. That framework offers a good description of the evolution of the
U.S. economy over the long-run, so that we can be sure that our model economy does not clash
with important regularities in the data. We however make one important departure from the usual
balanced-growth path assumptions: we do not impose that hours worked remain constant over
time. Instead, we allow them to also decline at a constant rate.
    In a recent paper, Boppart and Krusell (2020) show that -- apart from hours dynamics -- styl-
ized balanced-growth facts, as outlined by Kaldor (1961), remain valid for the United States today.
However, these facts do not distinguish between different types of consumption. Our modeling
strategy, described below, assumes that the consumption of recreation and non-recreation items
evolve in such a way that their ratio remains constant over time. Before going through the details
of the model, we therefore provide some evidence to show that this assumption is justified for the
United States and our sample of countries.
    For the United States, we use consumption data from the NIPA tables and construct a measure
of recreation consumption that includes items such as video and audio equipment, sports goods,
memberships and admissions, gambling, recreational reading materials, pet products, photographic
goods and services, and package tours (see Appendix A for the details of that exercise). We then
compute the share of recreation consumption expenditure and plot that measure as the blue solid
line in panel (a) of Figure 9. As we can see, this share has remained roughly constant over the last
hundred years, moving from about six percent in 1929 to seven percent today.31
    When constructing our measure of recreation consumption, we follow the classification used

   31
      Our finding that the share of recreation consumption has been roughly constant is in contrast with earlier work
by Kopecky (2011) who uses data from Lebergott (2014) and finds an increasing recreation share over the twentieth
century. Two important differences between the datasets are responsible for the different conclusions. First, our
sample includes additional data from 2000 to 2019, a period over which the recreation share has declined by more
than one percentage point. Second, Lebergott (2014) finds a large increase (from three to six percentage points) in
the recreation share between 1900 and 1929 (see Figure 3 in Kopecky, 2011). But, unlike the rest of the time series,
these data are not from NIPA, but are instead imputed from a variety of sources. For instance, adjusted sectoral
wages are used as a proxy for the consumption of recreation services. While we cannot rule out a small increase in
the recreation share since 1900, we view the data since 1930 as more reliable for estimating its overall trend.


                                                         25
by the BLS and exclude information processing equipment (i.e. computers), which might also be
used for work or education. We however provide an alternative measure, displayed in red in panel
(a) that includes all of these expenditures in the recreation category. In this case, the share of
recreation expenditure increases slightly over our sample.32 To further emphasize that the share of
recreation consumption has remained constant, we also construct expenditures on recreation goods
and services using the CE data. That measure is also shown, in green, in panel (a). Although it is
only available since 1980, it has remained fairly stable since then.
     Since our analysis is not limited to the U.S. economy, we also compute the recreation consump-
tion share in the other countries in our sample, using data from the OECD. The OECD categorizes
all consumption expenditures into different baskets. We use the items in the `Recreation and
culture' basket as our measure of recreation consumption. This category includes items such as
audio-visual and photographic equipment, musical instruments, toys, pets, admission to movies,
theaters, concerts, etc.33 Panel (b) shows that measure for a selected group of countries, and we
include the same figure but for all countries in Appendix C.2.1. While there is some variation
across countries, the recreation shares stay fairly constant over time, in line with our modeling
assumption.




      (a) Recreation consumption share: United States                     (b) Recreation consumption share: International sample

Panel (a): Fraction of recreation consumption in total consumption for the United States. Source: NIPA and CE Surveys. Panel (b): Fraction of
recreation consumption in total consumption for a selected group of countries. Source: OECD.


                             Figure 9: Income, consumption, and recreation consumption.




   32
      Kopecky (2011) argues that up to 30% of transportation expenses are related to social and recreational trips. The
transportation expenditure share has been slowly declining starting from 1980. Including transportation expenditures
in the recreation consumption category would largely undo the impact of computers.
   33
      Since the consumption categories are not as fine as the ones available from the NIPA tables, we cannot exclude
information processing equipment and computers are therefore counted as recreation in this measure.


                                                                    26
3.2    Problem of the household

    We now turn to the description of our model economy. At the heart of our analysis is a household
-- representative or else -- that maximizes some period utility function u. Our main mechanism
operates through the impact of cheaper recreation goods and services on labor supply decisions.
We therefore include these items, denoted by d, directly into u. The utility function also depends
on the consumption of other goods and services c, and on the amount of time worked h. Since it
plays a central role, we keep the utility function as general as possible, only assuming that it be
consistent with a balanced-growth path -- the benchmark macroeconomic framework for long-run
analysis. We will show below that this assumption imposes some structure on the shape of the
utility function.
    Importantly for our mechanism, the utility function is free to feature some complementarity
between leisure time and recreation consumption, such that, for instance, the purchase of a sub-
scription to an online streaming service can make leisure time more enjoyable, which then pushes
the household to work less. It follows that with such a complementarity a decline in recreation
prices can lead to a decline in work hours.
    The household maximizes its lifetime discounted utility

                                                
                                                      t u (ct , ht , dt ) ,                                    (7)
                                               t=0

subject to a budget constraint

                                   ct + pdt dt + at+1 = wt ht + at (1 + rt ) ,                                 (8)

where wt denotes the wage, pdt the price of recreation goods, rt the interest rate, and at+1 the asset
position of the household at the end of period t.34 Since time worked ht is constrained by the size
of the (normalized) time endowment, we assume ht  1, but we focus on interior solutions so this
inequality never binds.
    The household chooses {ct , dt , ht , at+1 } while taking the prices {wt , pdt , rt } as given. On a
balanced-growth path the prices {wt , pdt } grow at constant rates, and the interest rate rt > 0
                                                 t p
remains constant. We therefore assume that pdt = p               t w , where 
                                                        and wt = w
                                                   d d0             0         pd > 0 and

w > 0 are exogenous growth rates, and pd0 and w0 are initial conditions. In Appendix (B), we
provide a potential microfoundation for the growth rates w and pd that involves the production
sector of the economy.

    34
       The model uses non-recreation consumption as the numeraire. However, a price index for these items is not
readily available for all the countries in our sample, so in our empirical exercises we normalize nominal terms by
all-item price indices. The discrepancy between the two is unlikely to be large because recreation expenditures
typically account for less than 10% of the overall consumption spending. Appendix C.1.6 shows that the all-item and
non-recreation price indices for the four U.S. Census regions are very similar to each other.


                                                           27
    On a balanced-growth path, ct , dt and ht also grow at constant (endogenous) rates, denoted
by gc , gd and gh . Since hours worked are naturally bounded by the time endowment we focus on
the case in which gh  1. These growth rates might depend, in turn, on the growth rates of the
fundamentals w and pd , and perhaps on other features of the economy. The budget constraint of
the household imposes some restrictions on these endogenous growth rates. For (8) to be satisfied
in every period, each term must grow at the same rate and it must therefore be that

                                             gc = pd gd = w gh .                                            (9)


3.3    Balanced-growth path preferences

    Another set of restrictions on the growth rates comes from the preferences of the household. For
instance, under the utility function introduced by King et al. (1988), hours worked ht must remain
constant over time which implies that consumption and the wage grow at the same rate: gc = w .
Boppart and Krusell (2020) generalize these preferences to let hours worked grow on a balanced-
                                                                                   1- , where
growth path and the growth rate of consumption can take the more general form gc = w
 is a parameter of the utility function. In our case, the growth rate of consumption might also be
affected by the growth rate of recreation prices, pd , and we therefore consider the more general
form
                                                       
                                                 gc = w p d ,                                              (10)

where  and  are constants that have to be determined.
    We can combine equations (9) and (10) to characterize the growth rates of all the endogenous
quantities in terms of the constants  and  such that

                                                      
                                                gc = w pd ,
                                                      -1 
                                                gh = w  pd ,                                               (11)
                                                       -1
                                                gd = w pd .

    Given these restrictions, we can formally define the properties of a utility function that is
consistent with a balanced-growth path in this economy.35

Definition 1 (Balanced-growth path preferences). The utility function u is consistent with a
balanced-growth path if it is twice continuously differentiable and has the following properties:
for any w > 0, p > 0, c > 0, w > 0 and p > 0, there exist h > 0, d > 0 and r > -1 such that for


  35
     The following definition is a generalization of Assumption 1 in Boppart and Krusell (2020). We focus on the
case  > 0 and  > 0. From (11) we see that when  < 0 higher wage growth leads to lower consumption growth.
When  < 0 higher growth in the price of recreation goods leads to smaller growth in hours. We therefore focus on
the parameterizations that are more empirically relevant.


                                                      28
any t
                                            t                    t                   t
                                                     -1                    -1
                           uh c w p d           , h w  p d           , d w p d
                                                                                              t
                       -                                         t
                                                                                           = ww ,        (12)
                                    t               -1                      -1 t
                           uc c   w p d , h        w  p d            ,d   w p d

                                        t                    t                   t
                                                 -1                    -1
                        ud c w p d          , h w  p d           , d w p d
                                                                                              t
                                                             t
                                                                                         = pd p d
                                                                                                  ,      (13)
                                  t               -1                    -1 t
                         uc c   w p d , h        w  p d          ,d   w p d

and
                                    t                   t                    t
                                             -1                   -1
                      uc c w p d        , h w  p d          , d w p d
                                                       t+1
                                                                                          =  (1 + r) ,   (14)
                             t+1             -1                         -1 t+1
                  uc c     w p d ,h         w  p d           ,d       w pd

where  > 0 and  > 0.

   These equations are the usual first-order conditions of the household. The first one states that
the marginal rate of substitution between hours ht and consumption ct must equal the wage wt ,
the second equation states that the marginal rate of substitution between leisure goods dt and
consumption ct must equal the price of leisure goods pt , and the third equation is the intertemporal
Euler equation. Definition 1 imposes that these optimality conditions must be satisfied in every
period t, starting from some initial point {c, h, d, pd , w} and taking into account the respective
growth rates of each variable provided by (11).
   The following proposition describes the class of utility functions that are consistent with a
balanced-growth path.

Proposition 1. The utility function u (c, h, d) is consistent with a balanced-growth path (Definition
1) if and only if (save for additive and multiplicative constants) it is of the form

                                                                                 1-
                                          c1- d v c1-- h d                               -1
                            u (c, h, d) =                                                     ,          (15)
                                                     1-

for  = 1,
                           u (c, h, d) = log c1- d + log v c1-- h d                               ,      (16)

for  = 1, and where v is an arbitrary twice continuously differentiable function and where 0 < 
and 0 <  .

Proof. The proof is in Appendix D.

   This proposition establishes necessary and sufficient conditions on the shape of u so that it is
consistent with a balanced-growth path. They are the only restrictions that we impose on the utility


                                                       29
function, such that our analysis remains general and does not hinge on a particular choice of u.36
Of course, several utility functions that satisfy (15)­(16) make little economic sense. Additional
restrictions would need to be imposed so that, for instance, u is increasing in c and decreasing in
h. But we do not need to explicitly specify these restrictions. For our analysis to hold, we only
need that the household maximizes some version of (15)­(16), and that the first-order conditions
are necessary to characterize its optimal choice.37
    Several utility functions that have been used in the literature are nested in (15)­(16). For
instance, the standard balanced-growth preferences of King et al. (1988) in which labor remains
constant can be obtained by setting  = 0,  = 0 and  = 1. To allow for a nonzero income effect
of rising wages on the labor supply, we can instead set  = 0 and  = 0 and  = 0 to get the
preferences of Boppart and Krusell (2020).38 , 39


3.4    The impact of w and pd

    Proposition 1 also shows that the constants  and  introduced as placeholders in (10) can come
directly from the utility function. As such, they do not depend on other (perhaps endogenous)
economic variables whose presence might lead to endogeneity issues in our estimation. From (11),
we therefore have a system of three equations

                                       log gc =  log w +  log pd ,
                                       log gd =  log w + ( - 1) log pd ,                                          (17)
                                       log gh = ( - 1) log w +  log pd .

to be estimated in the following section.
    These equations show that the log of the growth rates of the endogenous variables ct , dt and ht
are linear relationships in the log of the growth rates of the exogenous variables wt and pdt , and
that the preference parameters  and  characterize these relationships. These parameters capture
the intensity of standard income and substitution effects, triggered by changes in prices, that are
at work in the model.

   36
      Proposition 1 extends Theorems 1 and 2 in Boppart and Krusell (2020). These theorems establish necessary
and sufficient conditions on the shape of u for consistency with a balanced-growth path in an environment without
recreation goods.
   37
      Our analysis goes through even if the utility function (15)­(16) is not concave. In this case, the first-order
conditions are not sufficient to characterize a solution to the household's optimization problem but they are still
necessary. As a result, they are satisfied at the household's optimal decision and we can use them to characterize the
balanced-growth path.
   38
      Our preferences, however, do not nest some utility functions that have recreation goods and services as an input.
For instance, the preferences used by Kopecky (2011) and Vandenbroucke (2009) do not allow for a balanced-growth
path and are therefore not a special case of (15)­(16).
   39
      We can compute the Frisch elasticity of labor supply associated with the utility function (15)­(16) and show
that it is constant along the balanced-growth path. Although it is not, in general, only a function of the parameters
of the utility function.


                                                          30
     The third equation plays a central role in our exploration of the causes behind the decline in
hours worked. The first term on its right-hand side captures how rising wages affect the supply
of labor. When  - 1 < 0, higher wages lead to more leisure through a standard income effect:
richer households substitute consumption with leisure. When instead  - 1 > 0, the substitution
effect dominates and the household takes advantage of the higher wage rate to work more and
earn more income. The second term on the right-hand side of the equation captures the impact of
falling recreation prices on labor supply. When  > 0, a decline in the price of recreation goods
and services incentivizes the household to enjoy more leisure and work less.
     Overall, the results of this section provide a clear path to empirically evaluate the importance
of the decline in recreation prices on hours worked. From (17), we know that gc , gd and gh are
related log-linearly to w and pd , so that we can estimate these relationships readily through
standard techniques. Furthermore, these relationships are structural, so that we can be sure that
our estimation captures deep parameters that are unaffected by changes in policy.40 Proposition
1 also shows that the relationship between hours worked and leisure prices is invariant to various
features of the utility function, such as the function v and the parameter . As a result, we can
be confident that our empirical strategy is robust to a broad class of utility functions. Finally,
our analysis does not hinge on a particular set of assumptions about the production sector of the
economy, as long as wt and pdt grow at constant rates. As such, it is robust to different production
technologies, market structures, etc. We nonetheless provide in Appendix B an example of a
production structure that provides a microfoundation in which the constant growth rates w and
pd depend on underlying productivity growth in the non-recreation and recreation sectors.


4        Measuring the impact of the decline in leisure prices
     We now turn to the structural estimation of the model described in the previous section. Our
focus is on the system of equations (17), which relates the growth rates of hours, recreation con-
sumption and non-recreation consumption to the growth rates of wages and recreation prices. The
advantage of focusing on this system of equations is that it allows us to impose the key restrictions
implied by the structural model without having to provide the complete description of the economy,
i.e. the full specification of preferences, technology, etc. We estimate this model on the United
States and the multi-country datasets that we introduced in Section 2. To highlight the robustness
of our results, we use various specifications and different sets of controls. In all cases, we find a
strong impact of the decline of recreation prices on work hours.41


    40
     Note also that the third equation in (17) justifies our use of a linear specification in the previous section.
    41
     Since our theoretical model does not distinguish between the extensive and intensive margins of labor supply, we
focus on total hours per capita as our main measure of work hours throughout this section. We show in Appendices
C.1.5 and C.2.4 that our results are robust to using hours per worker instead.


                                                         31
4.1    Data

    For the United States, we already introduced our recreation price data in Section 2. These
data are available from 1978 for the four U.S. Census regions, and we therefore adopt these regions
as our basic unit of observation. We use the Consumer Expenditure Survey, also introduced in
Section 2, as our data source for consumption, hours and wages.42 These data are available at the
household level and so we aggregate them to the regional level to be consistent with our price data.
    For our multi-country sample, Section 2 also described our data sources for wages, prices and
hours. For recreation and non-recreation consumption data, we rely on the OECD dataset as in
Section 3.1. Importantly for our purpose, the OECD consumption and price series categorize items
in the same way. We normalize the consumption series by the size of population between 15 and 64
years old to obtain a measure of consumption per capita. Appendix A provides additional details
on how we construct the datasets.


4.2    Estimation

    We now turn to the structural estimation of the model. We proceed by first augmenting the
system of three equations (17) with normally distributed error terms, so that it becomes

                          log clt = c +   log wlt +   log plt + lc +            c
                                                                                lt ,

                          log dlt = d +   log wlt + ( - 1)  log plt + ld +              d
                                                                                        lt ,                   (18)
                          log hlt = h + ( - 1)  log wlt +   log plt + lh +              h
                                                                                        lt ,

where the index l denotes a location -- either a U.S. region or a country, depending on the dataset
under consideration.43 We also allow, in some specifications, for non-zero intercepts (c , d , h )
and location fixed effects lc , ld , lh . We add these variables to control for heterogeneity across
regions or countries, and also to absorb factors that might affect hours worked and consumption
but that are absent from the model (e.g., secular increase in women's labor force participation,
demographic trends, etc). As in Section 2, we remove high-frequency fluctuations in the data by
constructing multi-period average growth rates of the variables of interest. We use n = 3 years as
our benchmark averaging period in (2) but we also show results for longer windows.
    We estimate the preference parameters  and  in (18) via maximum likelihood.44 These
parameters control the household's reaction to changes in wages and recreation prices and are key
to understand the long-run behavior of work hours.
  42
      Hours and wages are also available from the Current Population Survey, but for consistency reasons we prefer
to use data from a unique source whenever possible. Using the CPS data for hours and wages does not affect the
results in any meaningful way.
   43
      To be precise, the vector of error terms is c    d    h
                                                  lt , lt , lt  iid N (0, ), where  is a variance-covariance matrix.
In our benchmark exercises, we assume that  is diagonal but the results do not change much when we do not impose
that restriction.
   44
      We also perform a separate estimation of each of the the three equations in Appendices C.1.4 and C.2.3.


                                                        32
4.2.1      United States

     For the United States sample, the estimated coefficients are reported in Table 4, along with
their 90% confidence interval. We report estimates for  - 1 instead of  to better highlight the
marginal impact of wage growth on hours. In our first specification (column 1), we do not include
any fixed effects or intercepts (c = d = h = 0). For  , we find a positive and statistically
significant value of 0.31. The estimate of  - 1 is also significant at -0.22. In columns 2 and 3, we
include intercepts (column 2) and fixed effects (column 3). For these specifications,  - 1 stays close
to about -0.25, while  increases substantially with   0.55. Finally, in column 4, we estimate
the model with a longer averaging window of n = 5 years to further reduce the impact of business
cycle--frequency fluctuations. Both  and  remain positive and significant; importantly, in this
case  - 1 becomes statistically indistinguishable from zero.

                                               (1)                       (2)                       (3)                        (4)
                                            0.31                      0.54                       0.57                       0.73
                                        (0.08, 0.54)              (0.27, 0.81)               (0.30, 0.84)               (0.55, 0.91)
-1                                         -0.22                     -0.26                      -0.25                       0.00
                                       (-0.39, -0.05)            (-0.42, -0.10)             (-0.41, -0.09)             (-0.20, 0.19)
h                                            --                      0.005                      0.005                      0.005
                                                                 (0.002, 0.008)             (0.000, 0.011)             (0.002, 0.009)
Averaging window                             n=3                        n=3                       n=3                       n=5
Intercepts                                    N                          Y                         Y                         Y
Region FE                                     N                          N                         Y                         Y
Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 (columns 1 to 3) and n = 5 (column 4) years. 90% confidence intervals,
constructued using heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors, are reported between parentheses. The parameters are estimated using maximum-
likelihood approach assuming that the error terms are jointly normal with a diagonal variance-covariance matrix.


                        Table 4: Joint estimation of the system 18 using U.S. regional data.


     How should we interpret these estimates? Focusing first on the impact of wage growth, we see
from Table 4 that the coefficient of interest  - 1 takes a negative value in the first three columns.
From the third equation in (17), this implies that higher wage growth leads to smaller growth
in work hours. In other words, the preferences of the household are such that the income effect
dominates. In the fourth column of Table 4, we see that  - 1 is statistically indistinguishable from
zero, in which case the income and the substitution effects exactly offset each other and the wage
has no impact on hours worked, while consumptions of both recreational and non-recreation goods
grow proportionally with wages.
     The evidence from Table 4 also points to a value for  that is significantly larger than zero.
Going back once again to the third equation in (17), this suggests that as recreation prices decline,
households prefer to enjoy more leisure and therefore hours fall, between a quarter and three quar-
ters of a percent for each one percent decrease in prices (depending on specification). As a result,


                                                                   33
our estimation finds that the secular decline in recreation prices might have been a contributor to
the decline in work hours that we documented earlier.
   We can perform some back-of-the-envelope calculations to have a sense for the magnitudes
involved by the estimates of Table 4. From Table 9, we see that the annual growth rate of wages
has been 1.05% in the U.S. and that the equivalent number for recreation prices is -0.7%. If we
take   0.54 and  - 1  -0.18 as the average estimates from Table 4, our results suggest that
wage growth has pushed for a decline in the growth rate of hours of about 1.05% × 0.18  0.19%
per year. Similarly, the decline in recreation prices can account for a decline in the growth of hours
of about 0.7% × 0.54  0.38% per year. Based on these calculations, the recreation channel has
been twice as important as the income effect as a driver of the decline in work hours in the United
States.
   Put together, these two channels would suggest that the average annual growth rate of work
hours should be about -0.57%, more than the actual annual movement in hours per capita (0.02%)
observed since 1950 and reported in Table 9. What explains this discrepancy? Clearly, the intercept
h in (18) plays a non-trivial role, capturing for instance the entry of women into the labor force.
We can filter out that effect by looking at male employment only. From Figure 1a, we see that
male hours per capita have gone down by about 0.4% per year since 1962. From the CPS, we find
that the median real weekly earnings for males have been essentially unchanged since 1979, so that
wage growth had approximately no impact on male labor supply decisions over that period. In this
case, the predicted impact of the decline in recreation prices (0.38% per year) can explain most of
the decline in male work hours (0.4% per year).
   The estimates of Table 4 suggests that the income effect of higher wages on work hours dominate
the substitution effect. This is in contrast to some of our finding in the reduced-form estimation of
Table 1 where higher wage growth led to higher growth in hours. This discrepancy comes from the
cross-equation restrictions imposed by the system (18). In particular, the estimation in Table 4 uses
information about the correlation between wage growth and consumption growth to pin down  . If
the substitution effect dominated, consumption growth would tend to move more than one-for-one
with wage growth. Intuitively, after a given increase in wages, households would also increase their
labor supply so that total income would go up by more than the increase in wages, leading to a
more than one-for-one increase in consumption ( > 1). Since the data suggests otherwise, the
joint estimation is pushed towards finding the income effect dominant ( < 1).
   The difference in findings between the reduced form results in Table 1 and the joint estimation
in Table 4 highlights one of the key advantages of estimating a structural model. By using infor-
mation about other related covariates we can discipline the estimation and better measure the key
preference parameters that drive the relationship between our variables of interest.




                                                  34
4.2.2    Instrumenting for wages and recreation prices

    The exercise of Table 4 provides evidence that recreation prices and wages affect hours worked,
but one might worry that the estimation is subject to potential endogeneity issues, in particular
the equilibrium response of recreation goods' prices to shock to demand for leisure, as well as the
response of wages to labor supply. To address these concerns, we can replicate that exercise using
the household-level data described in 2.1.2. In this case, we can rely on our two instruments to
tease out the causal impact of recreation prices and wages via a generalized method of moments
with appropriate orthogonality conditions.
    Specifically, we estimate

                                                                             c
                             log cg = c +   log wgl +   log pg +             gl ,
                                                                                     d                         (19)
                             log dg = d +   log wgl + ( - 1)  log pg +               gl ,
                                                                                     h
                            log hgl = h + ( - 1)  log wgl +   log pg +               gl ,

where  log xgl denotes the log growth rate of a variable x for households in an age-education
group g in location l between 1990 and 2010. As in Section 2.1.2, we instrument for the wage by
using a Bartik-like instrument that captures how aggregate changes in industry-level wages affects
labor earning in different location. Similarly, we take advantage of differences in the composition
of recreation consumption baskets across household with different education and age to construct
an instrument for recreation prices.45
    The estimated coefficients are presented in Table 5. The results are similar to those of Table
4. We find again that rising wages lead to a decline in hours and that growing recreation prices
also put downward pressure on hours. We also test whether the cross-equation restrictions imposed
by the model are valid and find that we cannot reject their validity at the 5% threshold, which is
reassuring for our modeling strategy.
    These results complement the findings of Table 4 in several ways. First, the estimation only
uses cross-sectional variation to identify the effect of recreation prices and wages on hours worked.
Aggregate shocks such as technological changes, openness to trade, increased reliance on outsourcing
should therefore have a limited effect on the estimation. Second, because the estimation of Table
5 uses instruments, it is less susceptible to endogeneity issues. As such, it is reassuring that, as in
all of our exercises, we find a strong and significant impact of recreation prices on hours worked.46
Instrumenting for wages also reveals that the income effect dominates the substitution effect.



   45
      Notice that non-recreation consumption, recreation consumption and recreation prices do not vary across loca-
tions due to limitations in the CE data. We estimate the system (19) via a two-step generalized method of moments.
We do not include additional controls and regional fixed effects because otherwise the estimation procedure does not
converge.
   46
      Redoing the estimation of Table 5 without instruments delivers similar results.


                                                        35
                                                                              (1)
                                                                           0.28
                                                                       (0.15, 0.42)
                                                    -1                    -0.37
                                                                     (-0.47, -0.27)
                                                    h                     0.003
                                                                      (0.001, 0.005)
                                                    J -statistic             9.19
                                                    p-value                 0.056
Estimates from a two-step GMM procedure with instrument variables (see Section 2.1.1 for the definition of the instruments). Weight matrix
accounts for arbitrary correlation within education-age groups. 90% confidence intervals are reported in parentheses. The last two rows report
results of a test of the validity of over-identifying restrictions (Hansen's J -statistic and its p-value).


                           Table 5: GMM estimation of the system (19) using instruments.


4.2.3      Cross-country sample

     We now turn to the estimation of the system of equations (18) using cross-country data. Table
6 reports the results in a similar fashion as Table 4. In the first specification (column 1), we
estimate  and  without country fixed effects and holding intercepts at zero. We find a somewhat
small but statistically significant coefficient  , while  is statistically indistinguishable from one.
With nonzero intercepts and country fixed effects (columns 2 and 3),  becomes larger but 
remains indistinguishable from one. In column 4, we use a longer five-year averaging window
when computing growth rates and find that estimates are essentially the same, which suggests that
short-term fluctuations are not driving the results.47

                                                 (1)                        (2)                         (3)                        (4)
                                               0.11                       0.26                       0.34                       0.37
                                           (0.04, 0.18)               (0.16, 0.36)               (0.19, 0.49)               (0.11, 0.63)
-1                                             0.03                      -0.03                      -0.05                      -0.02
                                          (-0.05, 0.09)              (-0.12, 0.06)              (-0.14, 0.05)              (-0.13, 0.08)
h                                               --                       0.005                      0.007                      0.007
                                                                     (0.003, 0.007)             (0.004, 0.009)             (0.004, 0.011)
Averaging window                               n=3                         n=3                        n=3                        n=5
Intercepts                                      N                           Y                          Y                          Y
Country FE                                      N                           N                          Y                          Y
Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 (columns 1 to 3) and n = 5 (column 4) years. 90% confidence intervals, constructed
using errors clustered an the country level, are reported between parentheses. The parameters are estimated using pseudo-maximum-likelihood
approach.


                         Table 6: Joint estimation of the system 18 using cross-country data.

   47
     Table 6 also highlights that estimating the full model, compared to the one-equation regressions of Section 2,
leads to tighter standard errors. For instance, in Figure 7 we could not find a statistically significant effect of recreation
prices on hours for n = 5. In contrast, column 4 of Table 6 shows that the relevant coefficient  is statistically larger
than zero.


                                                                      36
   One striking feature of Table 6 is that all our estimates of  are statistically indistinguishable
from one, which indicates that wage growth has essentially no effect on the growth of work hours.
Our estimates therefore suggest that the substitution and income effects of rising wages roughly
offset each other in our multi-country sample. In contrast, the positive values of  in Table 6 indicate
that declining recreation prices are associated with fewer hours worked. If we take  = 0.27 as an
average of the estimates, we can provide a sense of magnitude for the impact of recreation prices
on hours. In Table 9, we found that the average country experienced a decline in recreation prices
of about 1.49% per year. Our estimates therefore suggest that this decline in prices can explain
an annual growth rate in hours worked of -1.49% × 0.27 = -0.40%. In the data, hours per capita
have declined by about 0.16% per year for the average country while hours per worker have gone
down by 0.35%. As in our analysis of the United States, our estimates therefore explain a bit "too
much" of the observed decline in work hours. Once again, unmodeled changes in demographics
and women's labor force participation over the last decades might play a role in explaining the
difference.
   To verify that hypothesis, we replicate the exercise of Table 6, but instead of hours per capita
as our measure of labor supply, we use hours per worker which should be less affected by secular
changes in labor force participation. The results are in Table 19 in Appendix C.2.4. We still find
that  is significantly positive, but the intercepts in the equations are precisely estimated to be
zero (as is the wage coefficient,  - 1). This confirms that the growth in recreation prices can, on
its own, account for all of the observed changes in hours per worker.


4.3   Discussion and robustness

   The structural estimation of the model, using both the United States data and our multi-country
sample, points to a large influence of declining recreation prices on hours worked. In contrast, we
find mixed evidence for an income effect through which rising wages lead to fewer hours worked.
While the income effect dominates in the United States in some of our specifications, the evidence
is quite stark in our multi-country sample where the income and the substitution effects offset each
other in all of our specifications.
   To better understand the role of wages for hours worked, it is important to note that the United
States and most of the countries in our sample are relatively rich. Households in poorer countries,
where people might need to work to purchase basic necessities, might behave differently. Bick et al.
(2018) present evidence that goes in that direction. They show that average hours worked is larger
in poor countries, suggesting that some income effect might indeed be at work. They also show,
however, that the correlation between individual incomes and hours worked is essentially zero, or
even positive, in rich countries, suggesting that this income effect might taper off as households
become richer. That evidence, and ours, is consistent with a subsistence level in the utility function



                                                  37
that pushes poor households to work extensively to afford basic food and lodging. For higher levels
of income that subsistence level no longer affects decisions and the income effect vanishes. As
a result, rising wages might be a powerful motivator for longer work hours in poor countries but
might have only a limited impact in richer nations. In contrast, our evidence suggests that declining
recreation prices remain an important driver of work hours even in richer countries. As aggregate
incomes increase worldwide, it might further gain in relative importance in the future.


5    Conclusion
    We analyze the role of the declining prices of recreation goods in driving the downward trend
in hours worked over the recent decades, both in the U.S. and across the OECD countries. We
provide a general specification of preferences that are consistent with balanced growth, and show
that they imply a set of cross-equation restrictions on the growth rates of wages, recreation good
prices, labor hours, and consumption of recreation as well as non-recreation goods. Taking these
to the data we find that most of the decline in hours worked in the U.S. can be attributed to the
falling price of recreation goods, with at best a limited impact of rising wages.
    While we focus on the choice between supplying labor and enjoying leisure, the reality of house-
hold time use is surely more complex. An important branch of the literature has paid particular
attention to the role of home production. Much of it argues that the increased productivity of
market work relative to non-market work, as well as the reduction in the price of goods such as
household appliances, have pushed towards an increase in market hours and, in particular, to the
entry of women into the labor force (Greenwood and Vandenbroucke, 2005). At the same time,
recent evidence points to the growing importance of spending time with children, primarily among
highly-educated households (Guryan et al., 2008; Ramey and Ramey, 2010; Dotti Sani and Treas,
2016). Accounting for these mechanisms should provide a more complete picture of the forces
affecting labor supply.
    Finally, recent evidence by Aguiar et al. (2017) shows that young men increasingly stay at
home to play video games instead of working or attending school. Our evidence together with
theirs suggests that declining recreation prices might disincentivize human capital accumulation,
and thus slow down the movement towards a more highly-skilled workforce. Introducing this
mechanism into macroeconomic models of skill acquisition, such as Kopytov et al. (2018), might
improve their performance in matching the employment data. Exploring these forces in detail is
an exciting avenue for future research.




                                                 38
References
Acemoglu, D. and J. Linn (2004): "Market size in innovation: theory and evidence from the
  pharmaceutical industry," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 1049­1090.
Aguiar, M. and M. Bils (2015): "Has consumption inequality mirrored income inequality?"
  American Economic Review, 105, 2725­56.
Aguiar, M., M. Bils, K. K. Charles, and E. Hurst (2017): "Leisure Luxuries and the Labor
  Supply of Young Men," Working Paper 23552, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst (2007a): "Comments on Valerie A. Ramey's `How much has leisure
  inequality really increased since 1965?'." Work. Pap., Booth Sch. Bus., Univ. Chicago.
------ (2007b): "Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time over Five Decades," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 969­1006.
------ (2009): The Increase in Leisure Inequality: 1965-2005, Washington, DC: American Enter-
  prise Institute.
Attanasio, O., E. Hurst, and L. Pistaferri (2012): "The evolution of income, consumption,
  and leisure inequality in the US, 1980-2010," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Autor, D. and D. Dorn (2009): "This Job Is "Getting Old": Measuring Changes in Job Op-
  portunities Using Occupational Age Structure," American Economic Review, 99, 45­51.
Autor, D. H. and D. Dorn (2013): "The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization
  of the US Labor Market," American Economic Review, 103, 1553­1597.
Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2006): "The Polarization of the U.S. Labor
  Market," American Economic Review, 96, 189­194.
Bartik, T. J. (1991): Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?, W.E.
  Upjohn Institute.
Baxter, M. and R. G. King (1999): "Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate Band-Pass
  Filters for Economic Time Series," Review of Economics and Statistics, 81, 575­593.
Bick, A., N. Fuchs-Schundeln, and D. Lagakos (2018): "How Do Hours Worked Vary with
  Income? Cross-Country Evidence and Implications," American Economic Review, 108, 170­99.
Bloom, N., K. Handley, A. Kurmann, and P. Luck (2019): "The impact of chinese trade on
  us employment: The good, the bad, and the apocryphal," in American Economic Association
  Annual Meetings, vol. 2019.
Boerma, J. and L. Karabarbounis (2020): "Labor Market Trends and the Changing Value of
  Time," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 103885.
Boppart, T. and P. Krusell (2020): "Labor supply in the past, present, and future: a balanced-
  growth perspective," Journal of Political Economy, 128, 118­157.
Boppart, T. and L. R. Ngai (2017): "Rising inequality and trends in leisure," CEPR Discussion
  Papers 12325, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.


                                               39
Bureau of the Census, U. S. (1975): Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times
  to 1970, US Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.
Carter, S. B., S. S. Gartner, M. R. Haines, A. L. Olmstead, R. Sutch, G. Wright,
  et al. (2006): Historical statistics of the United States: Millennial edition, vol. 3, Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.
Cociuba, S. E., E. C. Prescott, and A. Ueberfeldt (2018): "US Hours at Work," Economics
  Letters, 169, 87­90.
Dotti Sani, G. M. and J. Treas (2016): "Educational gradients in parents' child-care time
  across countries, 1965­2012," Journal of Marriage and Family, 78, 1083­1096.
Fenton, G. and F. Koenig (2018): "The Labor Supply Response to Innovation in Entertainment:
  Evidence from TV," Tech. rep., Working paper.
Fogel, R. W. (2000): The fourth great awakening and the future of egalitarianism, University of
  Chicago Press.
Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (2002): "The power of the pill: Oral contraceptives and women's
  career and marriage decisions," Journal of Political Economy, 110, 730­770.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., I. Sorkin, and H. Swift (2018): "Bartik instruments: What, when,
  why, and how," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gonzalez-Chapela, J. (2007): "On the price of recreation goods as a determinant of male labor
  supply," Journal of Labor Economics, 25, 795­824.
Greenwood, J., A. Seshadri, and M. Yorukoglu (2005): "Engines of liberation," The Review
  of Economic Studies, 72, 109­133.
Greenwood, J. and G. Vandenbroucke (2005): "Hours Worked: Long-Run Trends," Working
  Paper 11629, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Guryan, J., E. Hurst, and M. Kearney (2008): "Parental Education and Parental Time with
  Children," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22, 23­46.
Huberman, M. and C. Minns (2007): "The times they are not changin': Days and hours of work
  in Old and New Worlds, 1870-2000," Explorations in Economic History, 44, 538­567.
Jaimovich, N. and H. E. Siu (2020): "Job Polarization and Jobless Recoveries," The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 102, 129­147.
Kaldor, N. (1961): "Capital accumulation and economic growth," in The theory of capital,
  Springer, 177­222.
Kendrick, J. W. (1961): Consumer expenditures: New measures and old motives, Princeton
  University Press.
Kendrick, J. W. et al. (1973): Postwar productivity trends in the United States, 1948­1969,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Keynes, J. M. (1930): Essays in Persuasion, New York: Harcourt Brace, chap. Economic Possi-
  bilities for Our Grandchildren.


                                                40
King, R. G., C. I. Plosser, and S. T. Rebelo (1988): "Production, growth and business
  cycles: I. The basic neoclassical model," Journal of Monetary Economics, 21, 195­232.
Kopecky, K. A. (2011): "The Trend in Retirement," International Economic Review, 52, 287­316.
Kopytov, A., N. Roussanov, and M. Taschereau-Dumouchel (2018): "Short-run pain,
  long-run gain? Recessions and technological transformation," Journal of Monetary Economics,
  97, 29 ­ 44.
Lebergott, S. (1993): Pursuing Happiness: American Consumers in the Twentieth Century,
  Princeton University Press.
------ (2014): Consumer expenditures: New measures and old motives, Princeton University Press.
McGrattan, E. R., R. Rogerson, et al. (2004): "Changes in hours worked, 1950-2000,"
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28, 14­33.
Mishel, L., J. Bivens, E. Gould, and H. Shierholz (2012): The state of working America,
  Cornell University Press.
Ngai, L. R. and C. A. Pissarides (2008): "Trends in hours and economic growth," Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 11, 239 ­ 256.
Owen, J. D. (1970): The Price of Leisure: An Economic Analysis of the Demand for Leisure
  Time, McGill-Queen's Press-MQUP.
------ (1971): "The Demand for Leisure," Journal of Political Economy, 79, 56­76.
Ramey, G. and V. A. Ramey (2010): "The Rug Rat Race," Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 41, 129­199.
Ramey, V. A. and N. Francis (2009): "A Century of Work and Leisure," American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 1, 189­224.
Robinson, J. and G. Godbey (2010): Time for life: The surprising ways Americans use their
  time, Penn State Press.
Vandenbroucke, G. (2009): "Trends in hours: The U.S. from 1900 to 1950," Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control, 33, 237­249.
Whaples, R. (1991): "The shortening of the American work week: An economic and historical
  analysis of its context, causes, and consequences," The Journal of Economic History, 51, 454­457.




                                                41
Appendices
A      Data
    This appendix contains the detailed data sources and the steps that we took to construct the
datasets.


A.1     United States data

    We first describe the regional and the aggregate level data that we use for the U.S. economy.


A.1.1     Regional data

Bureau of Labor Statistics The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) provides the regional price
data. Regional all-item Consumer Price Index (CPI) series are encoded as `CUUR0X00SA0', where
`X' takes values 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 which correspond to the entire U.S., Northeast, North Central
(Midwest), Southern, and Western regions, respectively. They are available starting from 1967.
Recreation CPI series are encoded as `CUUR0X00SAR' and are available starting from 1998. Before
1998, we use the price indices for the `Entertainment' group, encoded as `MUUR0X00SA6', which
are available between 1978 and 1997.48
    Starting from 1975, the BLS also provides price series for selected metropolitan areas. We
use these data for the robustness analysis (Appendix C.1.3). The metropolitan-area-level series
are encoded similarly to the region-level series. For example, pre-1997 recreation price series are
encoded as `CUURXXXXSAR', where `XXXX' is a metropolitan area code.
    For our cross-sectional analysis in Section 2.1.2, we construct price indices for seven subcate-
gories of recreation goods and services, available at the national level. The key difficulty is that
the BLS changed their classification of goods and services in 1993, which particularly affected the
recreation group. We try to map pre- and post-1993 price series as close as possible to ensure
consistency over time. Table 7 shows price items that we use in the pre- and post-1993 periods.
For a few subcategories (Other goods, Pets, Photo, Reading, Sports), we use price series that were
not changed in 1993 at all and, thus, are available for the entire sample.49 Despite it does not seem
that there were any major changes in the "Other services" subcategory, there is no unique price
series that covers the entire sample. We, therefore, smoothly past price indices `SE62' (pre-1993)
and `SERF' (post-1993). For `Audio-video' in the pre-1993 sample, we aggregate `SE31' (video and
audio products) with `SE2703' (cable television) using corresponding consumption shares from the
   48
      Other price series, e.g. price of durables (`CUUR0X00SAD') and housing (`CUUR0X00SAH') used in the
robustness analysis in Appendix C.1.7, come from the same source.
   49
      In the post-1993 period, some of these subcategories receive a few new items (for example, veterinary services
were added to the `Pets' subcategory, encoded by `SERB02'). We do not include these new additions to make price
indices as comparable across the pre- and post-1993 periods as possible.


                                                        42
CE Surveys. We smoothly paste the resulting series with `SERA' (post-1993) to get the price series
over the entire sample.

                                      Pre-1993 code          Post-1993 code               Notes
Audio-video                         SE31 and SE2703               SERA              SE31: Video and
                                                                                     audio products
                                                                                     SE2703: Cable
                                                                                       television
Other goods                               SE6101                 SERE01
Other services                             SE62                   SERF
Pets                                      SE6103                 SERB01
Photo                                     SE6102                 SERD01
Reading                                    SE59                   SERG
Sports                                     SE60                   SERC

                           Table 7: Prices of recreation goods and services.

   Finally, to construct regional non-recreation price indices between 1978 and 2018 (Appendix
C.1.6), we use the relative importance of each recreation consumption category, available in booklets
"Relative Importance of Components in the Consumer Price Indexes", annually published by the
BLS. Starting from 2001, these booklets are available on the BLS website. For most earlier years,
they are available in a digital form at the HathiTrust Digital Library. For a few missing years,
we got the booklets from local libraries. The relative importance of each consumption category
determines the weight its price change has on the overall inflation.

Annual Social and Economic Supplement               We use the ASEC dataset to construct hours and
wages. Following Cociuba et al. (2018), we compute average weighted annual hours worked using
the variable `ahrsworkt' within each region (variable `region' is used to identify which of the four
U.S. Census Bureau-designated regions agents reside). To construct hours per worker, we consider
only currently employed agents that were at work last week (`empstat'=10). Wages are constructed
as average weighted pre-tax wage and salary income for previous calendar year (variable `incwage')
divided by usual weekly hours for previous calendar year (`uhrsworkly') and weeks worked last year
(`wkswork1'). We adjust for the fact that wages at year t are constructed for a previous calendar
year t - 1 by shifting the variable one period ahead. For the metropolitan-area-level analysis, we
use the variable `metarea' as a geographic identifier. After merging the ASEC data with the price
data, we end up with 28 metropolitan areas.
   Figure 10 provides time series of hours worked, real recreation prices and real wages for the four
U.S. Census regions.

Consumer Expenditure Survey For consumption categories, we follow Aguiar and Bils (2015)
as close as possible, so we refer the reader to their data construction section for a detailed descrip-

                                                   43
         (a) Real recreation price                              (b) Real wage                                 (c) Hours per capita

Panel (a): Real price of recreation goods and services. Source: BLS (real price of category "Entertainment", 1967-1997); BLS (real price of
category "Recreation", 1998-2018). Panel (b): Real annual salary and wage income divided by hours worked. Source: ASEC. Panel (c): Annual
hours worked over population between 25 and 64 years old. Source: ASEC.


             Figure 10: Hours, wages and recreation price across U.S. Census designated regions.


tion. Relative to Aguiar and Bils (2015), an important difference in our analysis is that we construct
recreation consumption for seven different subcategories. In the CE, the consumption categories
are coded using Universal Classification Codes, UCCs. Table 8 shows the UCCs corresponding to
the seven recreation consumption subcategories.

                                                                               Universal Classification Codes
Audio-video                                                                    270310, 270311, 310110-310350, 310400,
                                                                               340610, 340902, 340905, 610130, 620904,
                                                                               620912, 620930, 620916-620918
Other goods                                                                    610110, 610140, 610120, 610130
Other services                                                                 610900-620111, 620121-620310, 620903
Pets                                                                           610320, 620410, 620420
Photo                                                                          610210, 620330, 620906, 610230, 620320
Reading                                                                        660310, 590110-590230, 590310, 590410,
                                                                               690118
Sports                                                                         520901, 520904, 520907, 600131, 600132,
                                                                               600141, 600142, 600110-600122,
                                                                               600210-609999, 620906-620909,
                                                                               620919-620922, 620902, 600127, 600128,
                                                                               600137, 600138

                                     Table 8: Recreation consumption subcategories.


     Similarly to Aguiar and Bils (2015), we consider only households with reference persons of ages
between 25 and 64 that completed 4 quarterly interviews within a year. We exclude households
with extremely large expenditure shares on generally small consumption categories. We exclude
households with nonzero wage and salary income (`FSALARYX') and zero hours (`INC HRS1' mul-
tiplied by `INCWEEK1' plus `INC HRS2' multiplied by `INCWEEK2'). We also exclude households
with zero wage and salary income and nonzero hours. To construct consumption baskets across


                                                                   44
age-education groups, we use age and education of reference persons. For the analysis in Section
(4.2.1), we use households' hours and wages constructed using the data only from the CE.


United States Census and American Community Survey Hours are measured as `UHR-
SWORK' multiplied by `WKSWORK1'. When `WKSROWK1' is unavailable (the ASC sample
of 2009-2011), we use projected values of `WKSWORK2' on `WKSWORK1'. Measure of wage is
`INCWAGE'. Geographic regions are constructed using variable `CONSPUMA'. Industry classifica-
tion is based on `IND1990' and includes 34 industries: Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries; Mining;
Construction; Manufacturing (19 subcategories); Transportation; Communications; Utilities and
Sanitary Services; Wholesale Trade (2 subcategories); Retail Trade; Finance, Insurance, and Real
Estate; Business and Repair Services; Personal Services; Entertainment and Recreation Services;
Professional and Related Services; Public Administration.


Business cycle controls       Industry-state outputs are from the the National Income and Prod-
uct Accounts (NIPA), Table `SAGDP2'. They are deflated using all-item regional CPI series.
Metropolitan-area-level outputs are not available until recently; we use state-level output to
proxy for business cycle fluctuations in the regressions using more granular geographic data. If
a metropolitan area belongs to more than one state, we take a sum of corresponding state-level
outputs.


A.1.2      Longer series available at the national level

Prices     Early data on real recreation prices comes from Owen (1970) (Table 4-B, pages 85-86, the
data covers the period between 1901 and 1961). The data between 1935 and 1970 is from Bureau
of the Census (1975) (page 210, column `Reading and recreation' divided by column `All items').
Between 1967 and 1997, data on recreation prices comes from BLS (series `MUUR0000SR6'). Start-
ing from 1993, BLS provides a new series on recreation prices, encoded as `CUUR0000SAR'. The
BLS data is deflated using the all-item CPI series, encoded as `CUUR0000SA0'.


Hours, wages and population         Early data on average weekly hours is from Bureau of the Census
(1975) (series `D765' and `D803'). For the postwar sample, the data is available from FRED of St.
Louis Fed (series `PRS85006023'). Early data on total hours worked is from Kendrick (1961) (table
A-X) and Kendrick et al. (1973) (table A-10). Early data on population by age is from Carter
et al. (2006) (Table Aa125-144; we focus on population of 14 years or older). Recent data on hours
worked and population is from ASEC. Early data on labor productivity (wages) is from Kendrick
(1961) (table A-I; real gross national product, normalized by hours worked). From 1929, FRED
provides data on compensation of employees (series `A033RC1A027NBEA'), which we normalize
by total hours worked and CPI (FRED series `CPIAUCNS').


                                                 45
Consumption and labor income              To construct figures in Section 3.1, we use data from the
NIPA tables. Consumption data is from Table 2.5.5 "Personal Consumption Expenditures by
Function". Recreation consumption is the sum of rows 75, 77, 78, 82, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94. We
              row 76
subtract   row 75+row76   × row 77 to exclude a computer-related component from row 77 ("Services
related to video and audio goods and computers"). Total consumption expenditures is row 1. Data
on personal income is from Table 2.1 "Personal Income and Its Disposition". We use row 1 (total
personal income) and row 2 (compensation of employees).


A.2      Cross-country data

   Our final sample includes 38 countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Colombia, Croa-
tia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, U.K., U.S.A.


Prices     For the majority of countries, the price data is from the OECD database, category "Prices
and Purchasing Power Parities". For a few countries, longer price series are obtained from differ-
ent sources. The U.S. price data is described above. For Australia, the data comes from the
Australian Bureau of Statistics, Catalogue Number 6401.0. For Canada, the data comes from
Statistics Canada, Table 18-10-0005-01. For a few European countries (Austria, Belgium, Croatia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey),
the data comes from the Eurostat's Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) dataset. This
data usually covers slightly longer sample than the OECD database.


Other data       Data on hours worked is from the Conference Board Total Economy Database.
Consumption data is from the OECD. Total consumption expenditure is encoded as `P31DC',
recreation consumption is encoded as `P31CP090'. To obtain non-recreation consumption, we
subtract recreation consumption from total consumption. Compensation of employees is from the
OECD, series encoded as `D1'. GDP is from the OECD, series encoded as `B1 GA'. All nominal
series but recreation consumption are deflated by all-item CPIs. Recreation consumption is deflated
by recreation price index. Population data is from the OECD (`Demography and population'
category). We focus on population between 15 and 64 years of age.


A.2.1      Summary Table

   Table 9 provides summary statistics for our multi-country dataset.




                                                  46
                                              Hours                                   Real wages                 Real recreation prices
                            Growth rate [%]                    Starting          Growth         Starting           Growth         Starting
                                                                 year            rate [%]         year             rate [%]         year
                           Per capita Per worker
Australia                     -0.05             -0.26            1950               1.54           1960             -1.41           1989
Austria                       -0.30             -0.37            1950               1.61           1970             -1.20           1996
Belgium                       -0.42             -0.51            1950               1.54           1970             -1.19           1996
Canada                        -0.14             -0.37            1950               0.90           1970             -0.95           1950
Colombia                       0.30             -0.19            1960               2.06           2001             -1.42           2009
Costa Rica                    -0.07             -0.25            1987               2.31           1993             -3.56           1995
Czech Republic                -0.03             -0.24            1993               2.44           1993             -1.56           1995
Denmark                       -0.50             -0.63            1950               1.85           1967             -1.42           1996
Estonia                        0.17             -0.40            1995               4.92           1998             -1.67           1998
Finland                       -0.64             -0.40            1950               1.21           2000             -1.12           2000
France                        -0.84             -0.73            1950               3.02           1955             -1.81           1990
Germany                       -0.85             -0.91            1950               1.98           1970             -1.02           1991
Greece                        -0.23             -0.15            1950               1.70           1970             -1.31           1996
Hungary                       -0.80             -0.18            1980               1.84           1995             -1.72           1996
Iceland                       -0.38             -0.53            1964               2.45           1977             -1.23           1996
Ireland                       -0.63             -0.53            1950               2.71           1976             -0.40           1983
Israel                         0.55             -0.01            1981               1.01           1995             -1.74           1985
Italy                         -0.31             -0.33            1950               1.28           1970             -0.90           1996
Japan                         -0.23             -0.31            1950               1.78           1971             -0.57           1970
Korea                         -0.12             -0.64            1960               6.57           1972             -2.57           1985
Latvia                         0.63             -0.17            1996               5.43           1995             -2.04           1995
Lithuania                      0.90              0.31            1995               4.91           1995             -2.28           1993
Luxembourg                     0.97             -0.37            1970               2.18           1970             -0.47           1995
Mexico                         0.33             -0.10            1950              -0.86           1971             -1.30           2003
Netherlands                   -0.26             -0.57            1950               1.01           1969             -1.42           1996
New Zealand                   -0.08             -0.17            1970               0.59           1972             -2.41           2007
Norway                        -0.38             -0.69            1950               2.35           1970             -0.51           1979
Poland                         0.37             -0.04            1993               2.67           1993             -1.51           1996
Portugal                       0.00             -0.38            1950               1.62           1970             -1.03           1955
Slovak Republic               -0.34             -0.20            1990               2.11           1993             -1.62           1996
Slovenia                       0.11             -0.28            1995               1.81           1995             -0.84           1996
South Africa                  -0.84             -0.66            2001               3.61           2001             -2.74           2008
Spain                         -0.53             -0.44            1950               1.73           1970             -1.94           1996
Sweden                        -0.23             -0.29            1950               1.72           1970             -1.68           1980
Switzerland                   -0.26             -0.40            1950               1.30           1970             -0.86           1983
Turkey                        -0.75             -0.19            1970               3.37           1998             -2.77           1996
United Kingdom                -0.40             -0.43            1950               1.90           1970             -1.64           1988
United States                  0.02             -0.21            1950               1.05           1971             -0.70           1950
Average                       -0.16             -0.35                                2.19                           -1.49
Columns "Growth rate [%]" report log-linear trend coefficients. The series are available between the starting year given in the "Starting year"
column and 2018. The earliest starting year is 1950--the first year for hours worked in the Total Economy Database.


                                 Table 9: Summary statistics for multi-country sample.

                                                                     47
B      Production side of the economy
    Our empirical analysis relies on the system of equations (17). As such, it is agnostic about how
prices are determined in equilibrium as long as they grow at constant rates. In this section, we
provide one example of a production structure that delivers these constant rates, and show how
they depend on underlying productivity processes.
    There are two competitive industries producing non-recreation and recreation goods c and d
using Cobb-Douglas technologies
                                                              1-
                                                  yjt = Ajt ljt kjt ,                                              (20)

where j  {c, d} denotes the industry, ljt is labor, kjt is capital and Ajt is Harrod-neutral total
factor productivity. Consistent with our balanced-growth path framework, we assume that Ajt
grows at an exogenous rate Aj > 0 for j  {c, d}. Labor and capital are perfectly mobile across
industries and their prices are wt and Rt . Firms maximize profits

                                           jt = pjt yjt - wt ljt - Rt kjt ,

where pjt is the price of good j at time t. As before, we use non-leisure consumption as the
numeraire so that pct = 1 for all t, and the price of leisure goods pdt , the wage wt and the interest
rate Rt are in units of non-leisure goods.
    Investment goods are produced by a competitive industry using the production function yit =
Akit . Since these goods trade at a price pit , the investment sector maximizes profits

                                               it = pit Akjt - Rt kjt .

That sector is competitive such that pit A = Rt in equilibrium.
    Market clearing implies that the demand for leisure and non-leisure goods is equal to their
supply yjt = cjt for j  {c, d}. Similarly, the labor market clears, ht = lct + ldt , and so does the
asset market at = Kt . The total stock of capital Kt = kct + klt + kit must also follow the law of
motion
                                             Kt+1 = yit + (1 -  ) Kt ,

where 0 <  < 1 is the depreciation rate. Finally, the market rate of returns on assets has to equal
the rental rate of capital net of depreciation, such that rt = Rt -  .
    We can now define an equilibrium in this economy.

Definition 2. A dynamic competitive equilibrium, is a time path of household's consumption,
hours worked and asset position {ct , dt , ht , at }; a time path for prices, wages, returns on asset and
returns on capital {pdt , pit , wt , rt , Rt } and a time path of factor allocations {lct , ldt , kct , kdt , kit } which
satisfies household and firm optimization, perfect competition, resources constraints and market

                                                           48
clearing.
     The following proposition shows that, on a balanced-growth path, the growth rates of the leisure
price pdt and the wage wt are constant and linked to the growth rates of the productivity processes
Ac and Ad .

Proposition 2. On a balanced-growth path, the growth rates of pdt and wt are

                                         log pd = log Ac - log Ad ,
                                                                                                             (21)
                                          log w =  log Ac .

     This proposition shows that, since pd is denominated in units of non-leisure goods, its growth
rate captures how fast technological improvements occur in the leisure sector compared to the
non-leisure sector. Similarly, productivity growth in the non-leisure sectors push wages higher.50
     Combining (21) with (17) provides the growth rates of c, d and h has a function of the primitives
Ac and Ad .


C        Additional empirical results
     This appendix provides various robustness tests of the results in the body of the paper as well
as several additional exercises


C.1      United States

C.1.1       Regressions by U.S. regions and demographic bins

     To control for demographic changes across the four U.S. regions, we split population by age
(3 categories: 25-34 years old, 35-49 years old, 50-64 years old), sex (2 categories), education (5
categories: less than high school, high school, some college, four years of college, more than college)
and then run regression (1) on the region-demographic bin level. The results, given in Table 10,
are quite similar to those we find from regressions on the regional level.


C.1.2       Hours per worker as the dependent variable

     Table 11 shows the results of estimating (1), where we use hours per worker as the dependent
variable, instead of hours per capita. The coefficients are broadly consistent with those of Table 1
but their magnitudes are somewhat smaller. From this exercise, we conclude that both extensive
and intensive margins are affected by the decline in recreation prices.



    50
     While Ad does not show up in the equation for w , improvements in the leisure technology still lower pd which
increases the purchasing power of each unit of the wage.


                                                       49
                                                   (1)                   (2)                (3)                                      (4)
Dependent variable                                               Growth rate of hours per capita  log h
 log p                                          0.55                        0.32                       0.61                       0.56
 log w                                          0.13                         0.03                      0.24                        0.11
Averaging window                                 n=3                        n=3                         n=5                        n=5
Business cycle controls                           N                          Y                            N                          Y
Region FE                                         Y                          Y                            Y                          Y
Demographic group FE                              Y                          Y                            Y                          Y
R2                                               0.15                       0.22                        0.28                       0.33
# observations                                   1440                       1440                         840                        840
Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 and n = 5 years. Real per capita output is used as a business cycle control. Errors
are clustered at the demographic-bin level.  , , indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


Table 10: Regressions across U.S. regions: impact of wage and recreation price growth on hours per worker.

                                                   (1)                  (2)               (3)                                        (4)
Dependent variable                                              Growth rate of hours per worker  log h
 log p                                          0.18                      0.12                        0.19                      0.16
 log w                                           0.07                     -0.16                        0.03                     -0.18
Averaging window                                 n=3                        n=3                        n=5                         n=5
Business cycle controls                           N                          Y                          N                           Y
Region FE                                         Y                          Y                          Y                           Y
R2                                               0.33                       0.81                       0.43                        0.78
# observations                                    48                         48                         28                          28
Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 and n = 5 years. Real per capita output is used as a business cycle control. Errors
are robust to heteroscedasticity.  , , indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


Table 11: Regressions across U.S. regions: impact of wage and recreation price growth on hours per worker.


C.1.3       More granular geographic data for prices

     Starting from 1975, the BLS provides recreation price indices for a set of metropolitan areas.
We verify that the results presented in Table 1 in the main text remain similar if we use more
granular geographic data. Table 12 shows that the association between growth in real recreation
prices and growth in hours per capita is significantly positive. At the same time, we find quite
weak association between real wage growth and hours growth.


C.1.4       Separate estimation of the three equations (17)

     In Section 4.2.1, we estimate the three-equation system (17) imposing model-implied restric-
tions on the coefficients. Using data not only on hours but also on recreation and non-recreation
consumption gives us more power to estimate the structural parameters  and  . In this Appendix,
we analyze the three equations separately. Table 13 shows the results. Despite the consumption



                                                                      50
                                                   (1)                  (2)                (3)                                       (4)
Dependent variable                                              Growth rate of hours per capita  log h
 log p                                          0.13                        0.09                      0.35                        0.33
 log w                                          -0.00                      -0.08                      -0.00                       -0.05
Averaging window                                 n=3                        n=3                        n=5                         n=5
Business cycle controls                            N                          Y                          N                           Y
Area FE                                            Y                          Y                          Y                           Y
R2                                               0.03                       0.12                       0.22                        0.25
# observations                                    337                        337                        178                         178
Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 and n = 5 years. Real per capita output is used as a business cycle control. Errors
are clustered at the area level.  , , indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


Table 12: Regressions across U.S. metropolitan areas: impact of wage and recreation price growth on hours
worked.


data is noisy, the coefficients from the univariate regressions are broadly consistent with what our
model implies. First, the coefficients on growth in recreation price are much higher in the regres-
sions of hours and non-recreation consumptions than in the regression of recreation consumption
(recall that the model implies that the first two should be  while the latter one should be  - 1).
Second, growth in wages is much more substantially associated with growth in recreation and non-
recreation consumption (model-implied coefficient is  ) than with growth in hours (model-implied
coefficient is  - 1). When we use all data in a joint estimation, we therefore are able to get fairly
precise estimates of the two structural coefficients.


                                     (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)
Dependent variable                           log c                                  log d                                  log h
 log p                              0.22               0.37               0.16                0.33              0.60                0.79
 log w                             0.28               0.65               0.43                0.86               -0.08                0.12
Averaging window                    n=3                  n=5               n=3                n=5                n=3                 n=5
Region FE                            Y                    Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                   Y
R2                                  0.12                 0.50              0.11               0.28               0.23                0.74
# observations                       48                   24                48                 24                 48                  24
Dependent variables are growth in non-recreation consumption per capita, growth in recreation consumption per capita and growth in hours per
capita. Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 and n = 5 years. Errors are robust to heteroscedasticity.  , , indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


Table 13: Regressions across U.S. regions: impact of wage and recreation price growth on hours per capita,
recreation and non-recreation consumption.




                                                                      51
C.1.5       Estimation of the three equations (17) with hours per worker

     Table 14 shows the results of the estimation of the three-equation system (17) using hours per
worker as the measure of hours.51 We find somewhat larger values of  that are very close to 1
for all the specifications. The estimated coefficient  is positive and statistically significant but is
smaller than when hours per capita are used. We conclude that the intensive margin of adjustment
of hours contributes to the overall results but does not entirely explain them.

                                                 (1)                        (2)                         (3)                        (4)
                                               0.14                       0.20                       0.21                       0.20
                                           (0.07, 0.21)               (0.11, 0.29)               (0.13, 0.29)               (0.15, 0.26)
-1                                             0.00                      -0.04                      -0.04                       0.04
                                          (-0.04, 0.05)              (-0.10, 0.00)              (-0.09, 0.01)               (0.00, 0.08)
h                                               --                       0.002                      0.002                      0.001
                                                                     (0.001, 0.003)             (0.001, 0.003)             (-0.001, 0.002)
Averaging window                               n=3                         n=3                        n=3                        n=5
Intercepts                                      N                           Y                          Y                          Y
Region FE                                       N                           N                          Y                          Y
Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 (columns 1 to 3) and n = 5 (column 4) years. Measure of hours worked is hours per
worker. 90% confidence intervals, constructued using heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors, are reported between parentheses. The parameters
are estimated using maximum-likelihood approach assuming that the error terms are jointly normal with a diagonal variance-covariance matrix.


Table 14: Joint estimation of the system 18 using cross-country data: intensive margin of hours adjustment.



C.1.6       Non-recreation price index

     The model uses non-recreation consumption as the numeraire, but a price index for these items
is not readily available for all the countries in our sample. To test whether the all-item CPI is an
appropriate substitute, we construct a non-recreation consumption index for the U.S. by using the
all-item CPI together with the weight attached to the recreation category in the overall consumption
basket. That information is available in the booklets `Relative Importance of Components in the
Consumer Price Indexes' published by the BLS. Since the relative importance of the recreation
category is fairly small (around 5% of the overall basket), the non-recreation price index is virtually
identical to the easily available all-item CPI. As an example Figure 11 shows the two time series
for the Midwest region. The correlations between the two inflation rates are above 99.9% in all the
four regions. Where possible, redoing the empirical exercises using the non-recreation price index
as a deflator yields almost the same results. We therefore deflate the nominal price series by the
all-item CPI index since, unlike our constructed measured, it is available for all our exercises.



   51
     Notice that we use hours and wages from the ASEC dataset in this Appendix because it is not clear how to
define the employment status of households in the CE data.


                                                                      52
                    Annual growth rates of non-recreation and all-item price indices for Midwest region. Source: BLS.


                      Figure 11: Non-recreation and all-item inflation rates for Midwest.


C.1.7       Alternative price indices

   Throughout the paper, we argue that the real price of recreation goods and services has been
declining for at least a century, and that this movement is likely to have had a large impact on the
long-run dynamics of hours worked. In somewhat similar fashion, Greenwood et al. (2005) argue
that a decline in the price of household durable goods has had a substantial impact on households'
labor supply decisions. Are these two trends related? A large part of recreation consumption comes
in the form of durables (e.g. TV-sets, photo cameras, etc.); so is the recreation price trend just a
manifestation of a more general decline in price of durables? To address this concern, we add the
growth rate of price of durables in the regression 1. The results are given in Table 15.52 First,
we indeed see that changes in the price of durables are significantly and positively associated with
changes in hours worked (column 2). When both recreation and durable prices are added in the
regression simultaneously (column 4), the coefficient on durable price becomes much smaller and
is statistically indistinguishable from zero. At the same time, the coefficient on recreation price
barely changes. This result shows that the effect of recreation prices on hours worked is not only
due to the fact that recreation price happens to be correlated with durables price.
   Another potential concern is related to the classification of various goods and services. Of
course, a clear-cut classification of many goods and services by their function is impossible. In
fact, the BLS occasionally reassesses its classification and revise it to reflect the changing nature
of consumer spendings and arrival of new goods and services. A major revision directly related to
the `Recreation' group took place in 1998.53 The most substantial change is that video and audio

  52
       While we provide the results for averaging window of n = 3 years, the results are very similar for larger n.
  53
       As we discuss in more details in A, the U.S.-wide price indices were updated earlier, in 1993. The detailed


                                                                  53
equipment and services (including cable TV) were moved from `Housing-household furnishings and
operations' to `Recreation'.54 To see whether this change in classification has any impact on our
result, we also estimate a version of (1) in which we include housing prices as a covariate. The
results are presented in Table 15. We see that housing prices have an overall positive impact on
hours worked but that including it in the regression does not change our main conclusion that lower
recreations prices are significantly associated with fewer hours worked.


                                         (1)             (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)                                   (7)
Dependent variable                                          Growth rate of hours per capita  log h
 log precreation                      0.67                                                     0.57           0.72       0.62       0.49
 log pdurables                                        0.29                                      0.14                      0.14       0.16
 logphousing                                                           -0.04                                   0.25       0.25      0.47
 log w                                0.20            0.36             0.40                    0.21           0.16       0.17       -0.45
Business cycle controls                  N               N                  N                    N                 N       N            Y
Region FE                                Y               Y                  Y                    Y                 Y       Y            Y
R2                                      0.45            0.32               0.18                 0.48              0.47    0.49         0.85
# observations                           48              48                 48                   48                48      48           48
Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 years. Real per caipta output is used as a business cycle control. Errors are robust
to heteroscedasticity.  , , indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


                       Table 15: Regressions across U.S. regions: role of durables and housing.




C.1.8       Derivation of equation (3)

     We show here how to derive equation (3) in Section 2.1.2. We start from the definition of wages
in a locality c for a demographic group d at time t:

                                                                                i eiglt
                                                             wglt =                       .
                                                                                i higlt

It follows that we can write the growth rate of wages as

                                                             i eiglt+1
                                                                                              eiglt eiglt+1
                                           wglt+1              i eiglt
                                                                                    i         j ejglt eiglt
                                                  =              higlt+1
                                                                           =              higlt higlt+1
                                                                                                              .
                                            wglt             i
                                                                 i higlt
                                                                                    i     j hjglt higlt




recreation price data is not available on the regional level, so we cannot construct consistent recreation price index
over the entire sample on the regional level. However, even when we use the consistent price indices on the national
level, as in Section 2.1.2, we still find a highly significant positive association between hours worked and recreation
prices.
   54
      Sewing-related goods and recreational reading materials were also moved to `Recreation'. See here for more
details.


                                                                           54
The key idea behind our instrumental strategy is to replace the local growth in earnings and hours
in the equation above by their national equivalent. We therefore write, after taking the log,

                                   IV
              IV          wglt+1                               eiglt eigt+1                    higlt higt+1
         log wglt = log                 = log                                    - log
                           wglt                                j ejglt eigt                    j hjglt higt
                                                  i                                        i

We can also write that expression as

            IV                     eiglt eigt+1 - eigt                                    higlt higt+1 - higt
       log wglt = log 1 +                                             - log 1 +
                              i    j ejglt    eigt
                                                                                    i     j hjglt    higt
                          eiglt eigt+1 - eigt                       higlt higt+1 - higt
                                              -
                     i    j ejglt    eigt
                                                          i         j hjglt    higt
                          eiglt                                    higlt
                                   log eigt+1 -                             log higt+1
                     i    j ejglt                     i            j hjglt


where we have used the fact that log (1 + x)  x and so

                                                      xit+1           xit+1 - xit                 xit+1 - xit
          log xit+1 = log xit+1 - log xit = log             = log 1 +                                         .
                                                       xit                xit                         xit

C.1.9    Recreation consumption share across education levels

   Figure 12 shows how recreation consumption baskets vary by the level of education attainment
of household heads. We do observe substantial variation, with households with low-educated heads
consuming disproportionally more of "Audio-video" items, and households with highly-educated
heads consuming disproportionally more of "Other services" items.


C.1.10     Analysis using household heads instead of all individuals

   In the baseline analysis, our measures of wages and hours from the Census are at the individual
level. The CE data, however, is at the household level, and we use the demographic characteristics
of reference persons to construct demographic-specific consumption baskets. In this Appendix,
we construct measures of hours and wages using the Census data on the household heads only
(variable `RELATE'=1). To control for potentially very different consumption and labor supply
choices across married and non-married households, we run regressions for married and non-married
households separately. Table 16 shows the results; they are fairly similar to our baseline ones, albeit
with a somewhat stronger evidence against the income effect of wages.




                                                              55
                                        (1): OLS            (2): OLS       (3): IV      (4): IV         (1): OLS     (2): OLS      (3): IV                                                     (4): IV
     Dependent variable                                                 Growth in hours per capita  log h between 1990 and 2010
                                                              All household heads                                         Married only
      log p                               0.91                0.40                 0.18                0.18                       0.94                0.53                0.64                0.59
      log w                                0.03               -0.02               0.63                 0.63                       0.07                 0.03               0.34                0.18
     1980 manuf. ES                                          -0.60                                     -0.00                                         -0.49                                   -0.29
     Locality F.E.                          Y                    Y                    Y                  Y                          Y                    Y                    Y                  Y




56
     Addtl. dem. cont.                      Y                    Y                    Y                  Y                          Y                    Y                    Y                  Y
     F -statistics                          --                   --                 196.8               64.0                        --                   --                 272.3               84.9
     R2                                    0.25                 0.27                 --                  --                        0.24                 0.25                 --                  --
     # observations                        8140                 8140                8140                8140                       8124                 8124                8124                8124
     The regressions are across people sorted by locality/education-age group. Controls include manufacturing hours share in 1980, and a set of additional demographic controls (fractions of males and whites
     and their growth rates between 1990 and 2010 in each locality/education-age group). Errors are clustered at location level. F -statistics are Kleibergen-Paap.  , , indicate significance at the 10%,
     5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


       Table 16: Regressions across people sorted by location and education-age groups: impact of wage and recreation price growth on hours worked.
            (a) No high school diploma, 1980-1988                                      (b) More than college, 1980-1988




            (c) No high school diploma, 2010-2018                                      (d) More than college, 2010-2018

Shares of different items in total recreation consumption. Shares are constructed by pooling observations for the two periods, 1980-1988 and
2010-2018. Source: CE.


       Figure 12: Composition of recreation consumption baskets across education groups over time.


C.2       Cross-country sample

C.2.1       Figures for the entire cross-section of countries

     In the main text, we present the time series of hours worked, recreation prices and wages for
a selected group of countries. Figure 13 shows the same graphs for the entire cross-section of 38
countries. The bold black lines show log-linear trends, constructed by regressing the log of variables
of interest on the year and a set of country fixed effects.
     Figure 14 shows total consumption expenditures over labor income (panel (a)) and recreation
consumption share (panel (b)) for the entire cross-section of countries. The bold black lines show
log-linear trends, constructed by regressing the log of variables of interest on the year and a set of
country fixed effects. The consumption-labor income ratio does not trend upwards or downwards



                                                                    57
                       (a) Hours per capita                                                     (b) Hours per worker




                    (c) Real recreation prices                                                     (d) Real wages

Panel (a): Annual hours worked over population between 15 and 64 years old. Source: Total Economy Database and OECD. Panel (b): Annual
hours worked over number of employed. Source: Total Economy Database. Panel (c): Price of consumption for OECD category `Recreation and
culture', normalized by price index for all consumption items. Base year = 2010. Source: see Appendix A.2. Panel (d): Real compensation of
employees divided by hours worked. Base year = 2010. Black lines represent log-linear trends, constructed by regressing log of the variable of
interest on time and country fixed effects.


                     Figure 13: Hours, wages and recreation price in the international sample.


(the trend coefficient is virtually 0). The recreation consumption share does exhibit a very small
positive trend. However, excluding just one country--Korea--makes the trend coefficient statisti-
cally insignificant (on 5% level). A large increase in the recreation consumption share in Korea is
hardly surprising given its postwar development has started from an extremely low point, when a
large fraction of population consumed only basic necessities.


C.2.2       Hours per worker as dependent variable

     Table 17 shows the results of estimation of 6, where we use hours per worker as the dependent
variable. The coefficients are broadly consistent with those for hours per capita (Table 3), however,
their magnitudes are smaller. These results are similar what we have found for the U.S.: the

                                                                     58
    (a) Consumption over income: International sample                                     (b) Recreation consumption share

Panel (a): Total consumption expenditures over compensation of employees. Source: OECD. Panel (b): Fraction of recreation consumption in
total consumption. Source: OECD.


          Figure 14: Income, consumption, and recreation consumption in the international sample.


intensive margin of adjustment of hours contributes to the overall results but does not entirely
explain them.

                                                   (1)                  (2)               (3)                                        (4)
Dependent variable                                              Growth rate of hours per worker  log h
 log p                                          0.06                       0.03                       0.14                       0.09
 log w                                          -0.04                     -0.12                       -0.03                     -0.10
Averaging window                                 n=3                        n=3                        n=5                         n=5
Business cycle controls                            N                          Y                          N                           Y
Country FE                                         Y                          Y                          Y                           Y
R2                                               0.26                       0.41                       0.49                        0.55
# observations                                    290                        290                        144                         144
Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 and n = 5 years. Real per capita output is used as a business cycle control. Errors
are clustered at the country level.  , , indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


  Table 17: Cross-country regressions: impact of wage and recreation price growth on hours per worker.



C.2.3       Separate estimation of the three equations (17)

     Analogously to Appendix C.1.4, here we estimate the three equations (17) separately using the
cross-country data. Table 18 shows the results. For averaging windows of n = 3 years, they are
very similar to their U.S. analogues given in Table 13. For n = 5 years, the coefficient estimates
are in the univariate regressions are quite noisy. Nevertheless, the joint estimation for both n = 3
and n = 5 years yields very similar results (see Table 6 in the main text).




                                                                      59
                                     (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)                (6)
Dependent variable                           log c                                 log d                                 log h
 log p                            0.24                 0.34             -0.03                0.64              0.25                 0.18
 log w                            0.67                 0.73             0.91                0.87               0.15                0.16
Averaging window                   n=3                 n=5                n=3               n=5                 n=3                n=5
Region FE                            Y                   Y                  Y                 Y                   Y                  Y
R2                                 0.63                0.78               0.62              0.75                0.15               0.21
# observations                      240                 115                240               115                 290                144
Dependent variables are growth in non-recreation consumption per capita , growth in recreation consumption per capita and growth in hours
per capita . Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of and years. Errors are clustered at the country level.  , , indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


Table 18: Cross-country regressions: impact of wage and recreation price growth on hours per capita,
recreation and non-recreation consumption.


C.2.4       Estimation of the three equations (17) with hours per worker

     Table 19 shows the results of the estimation of the three-equation system (17) using hours per
worker as the measure of hours. Similar to our baseline results with hours per capita, estimate of 
is very close to 1. The estimated coefficient  is positive and statistically significant but is smaller
than when hours per capita are used. Again, we find that the intensive margin of adjustment of
hours contributes to the overall results but does not entirely explain them.

                                                 (1)                        (2)                        (3)                        (4)
-1                                             -0.07                    -0.06                      -0.07                       -0.05
                                           (-0.11, -0.03)           (-0.11, -0.01)             (-0.11, -0.02)              (-0.1, -0.01)
                                                0.08                     0.07                       0.09                        0.17
                                            (0.05, 0.12)             (0.02, 0.12)               (0.05, 0.14)                (0.11, 0.24)
h                                                --                    -0.001                     -0.000                       0.000
                                                                    (-0.002, 0.001)            (-0.001, 0.001)             (-0.001, 0.001)
Averaging window                               n=3                        n=3                        n=3                        n=5
Intercepts                                      N                          Y                          Y                          Y
Country FE                                      N                          N                          Y                          Y
Growth rates are constructed using averaging windows of n = 3 (columns 1 to 3) and n = 5 (column 4) years. Measure of hours worked is hours
per worker. 90% confidence intervals, constructed using errors clustered an the country level, are reported between parentheses. The parameters
are estimated using pseudo-maximum-likelihood approach.


Table 19: Joint estimation of the system 18 using cross-country data: intensive margin of hours adjustment.




D       Proofs
     This section contains the formal results establishing restrictions on the shape of the utility
function so that it be consistent with a balanced-growth path. The proofs follow mostly the same
steps as Boppart and Krusell (2020) but must take care of an additional variable in the utility

                                                                     60
function.
   The proof of Proposition 1 relies on the following two lemmata.

Lemma 1. If u (c, h, d) satisfies (12) and (13) for all t > 0, w > 0 and pd > 0, and for arbitrary
c > 0, w > 0 and pd > 0, then its marginal rate of substitution functions, defined by uh (c, h, d) /
uc (c, h, d) and ud (c, h, d) /uc (c, h, d) must be of the form

                                       uh (c, h, d)  c
                                                    = x c1-- h d                                                   (22)
                                       uc (c, h, d)  h

and
                                       ud (c, h, d)  c
                                                    = y c1-- h d                                                   (23)
                                       uc (c, h, d)  d
where x and y are arbitrary functions, and  and  are arbitrary numbers.

Proof. We beginning by showing how to derive (22). Set t = 0 in (12) to find -uh (c, h, d) /
uc (c, h, d) = w. Using that equation with (12) yields

                             uh c µ , h-1 µ , d µ -1   uh (c, h, d)
                                         -1       -1
                                                     =              .                                              (24)
                             uc (c µ , h µ , d µ )     uc (c, h, d)

                   t and µ =  t to simplify the expression. This equation must hold for every
where we denote  = w         pd
                                                                                   -1/
 and µ.55 For any given c and h, set  = h/c and µ = c1- h                                . These imply that c µ = 1,
                                           1
                                       -1+   (1- )
h-1 µ = 1 and d µ -1 = dh c                            . From (24), we can therefore write

                                                         1
                               uh 1, 1, dh  c-1+  (1-)                     h uh (c, h, d)
                                                       1
                                                                       =                  .
                                uc 1, 1, dh c   
                                                   -1+   (1- )             c uc (c, h, d)


                                      uh (1,1,t1/ )
Now, define the function x (t) =      uc (1,1,t1/ )
                                                      . We can rewrite this last equation as (22) which is the
result.
   We now turn to (23). Set t = 0 in (13) to find ud (c, h, d) /uc (c, h, d) = pd . Combining with
(13) yields
                             ud c µ , h-1 µ , d µ -1     ud (c, h, d)
                                         - 1      - 1
                                                      =µ                                                           (25)
                             uc (c µ , h µ , d µ )       uc (c, h, d)
               t and µ =  t . Since this most old for any  and µ, Set µ = d/c and  =
where again  = w         pd
          -1/                                                                                              1
                                                                                                  -1+(1- ) 
 d c1-          to find that c µ = 1, d µ -1 = 1 and h-1 µ = hd  c                                             . We can
therefore write (25) as
                                                         1
                                                -1+(1- ) 
                                ud 1, hd  c                       ,1         ud (c, h, d)
                                                         1             =µ
                                uc 1, hd c   
                                                -1+(1- ) 
                                                                  ,1         uc (c, h, d)

  55
     Changing µ and  involves changing a mixture of t, w and p . Changing t is innocuous as Definition 1 must
hold for every t. Changing w or p would affect the interest rate r, but r does not show up here.


                                                             61
                                         uh (1,t1/ ,1)
Now, define the function y (t) =         uc (1,t1/ ,1)
                                                         . We can rewrite this last equation as (23) which
completes the proof.

   We now turn to a Lemma that characterizes the second derivatives of u.

Lemma 2. Under Definition 1, the second derivative of u must satisfy

                                      cucc (c, h, d)
                                     -               = z1 c1-- h d                                    (26)
                                       uc (c, h, d)
                                      huch (c, h, d)
                                    -                = z2 c1-- h d                                    (27)
                                       uc (c, h, d)
                                      ducd (c, h, d)
                                    -                = z3 c1-- h d                                    (28)
                                       uc (c, h, d)

for arbitrary functions z1 , z2 and z3 .

Proof. Since (14) must hold for all t, we can differentiate it with respect to t, divide the differentiated
equation by (14) and set t = 0. Doing so we find


                                                       -1                           -1
       ucc (c, h, d) c log w pd + uch (c, h, d) h log w  pd + ucd (c, h, d) d log w p d
                                                                                                 =
                                                   uc (c, h, d)
                     -1        -1             
       ucc cw pd , hw  pd , dw p d cw pd log w p d
                                                                                                      (29)
                               -1        -1
                  uc cw pd , hw  pd , dw p d
                          -1        -1    -1        -1 
            uch cw pd , hw  pd , dw p d hw  pd log w  p d
        +
                                     -1        -1
                        uc cw pd , hw  pd , dw pd
                          -1        -1    -1       -1
            ucd cw pd , hw  pd , dw pd dw pd log w p d
        +                                                                 .
                                    -1        -1
                       uc cw pd , hw  pd , dw p d


   Now differentiating (22) and (23) with respect to c, we find that h uhc (c,h,d)     udc (c,h,d)
                                                                       uc (c,h,d) and d uc (c,h,d) are
                                ucc (c,h,d)
functions of c1-- h d and       uc (c,h,d) c   only. We can write

                              uhc (c, h, d)                 ucc (c, h, d)
                            h               = f1 c1-- h d ,               c
                              uc (c, h, d)                  uc (c, h, d)
                              udc (c, h, d)                 ucc (c, h, d)
                            d               = f2 c1-- h d ,               c
                              uc (c, h, d)                  uc (c, h, d)

and, since these equations holds for any c, h and d,




                                                           62
                          -1                                                              -1 
                                    -1
                                                                                                    -1
                                                                                                                          
            uhc cw pd , hw  pd , dw pd                                      ucc cw pd , hw  pd , dw p d
  -1 
hw  pd                                             = f1 c1-- h d ,                                                    
                                                                                                                   cw pd
                                -1        -1                                                -1        -1
             uc       cw pd , hw  pd , dw p d                               uc    cw pd , hw  pd , dw p d
                           -1                                                             -1 
                                     -1
                                                                                                    -1
                                                                                                                          
             udc cw pd , hw  pd , dw pd                                     ucc cw pd , hw  pd , dw p d
   -1
dw p d                                             = f2 c1-- h d ,                                                    
                                                                                                                   cw pd .
                                -1        -1                                                -1        -1
             uc       cw pd , hw  pd , dw p d                               uc    cw pd , hw  pd , dw p d

   Plugging into (29) implies that

                                                                  -1 
                                                                            -1
                                                                                                        
                ucc (c, h, d) c                     ucc cw pd , hw  pd , dw p d
                                = f3 c1-- h d ,                                                     
                                                                                                 cw p d ,         (30)
                 uc (c, h, d)                                1-    -    - ~ g ( )
                                                       uc   cw  , hw , dw

where f3 is an arbitrary function. This equation must hold for every w and p (r would also need
to be adjusted, but r does not show up here). We can therefore set w = 1 and p = 1, and we find
       ucc (c,h,d)c
that    uc (c,h,d)    only depends on c1-- h d .

Proposition 1. The utility function u (c, h, d) is consistent with a balanced-growth path (Definition
1) if and only if (save for additive and multiplicative constants) it is of the form

                                                                            1-
                                                  c1- d v c1-- h d                -1
                                  u (c, h, d) =                                                                   (15)
                                                             1-

for  = 1, or
                                u (c, h, d) = log c1- d + log v c1-- h d                                          (16)

for  = 1, and where v is an arbitrary twice continuously differentiable function and where 0 < 
and 0 <  .

Proof. We first consider the "if" direction of the proof and then turn to the "only if" part. Consider
the case with 1 -  -  = 0. From Lemma 2 we have

                   log (uc (c, h, d))
                                      = -z1 (exp ((1 -  -  ) log (c) +  log (h) +  log (d))) .                    (31)
                       log (c)
Integrating with respect to log c we find that

                                     uc (c, h, d) = f4 c1-- h d m1 (h, d)                                         (32)

where f4 is a new function of c1-- h d , and m1 is an arbitrary function of h and d.
                                                            huhc (c,h,d)         dudc (c,h,d)
   Now we can restrict m1 since, from Lemma 2,               uc (c,h,d)    and    uc (c,h,d)    are also only functions
of c1-- h d . Taking the derivative of (31) with respect to h, multiplying by h and dividing by


                                                       63
uc we obtain
                          huhc (c, h, d)  f c1-- h d c1-- h d  hm1,h (h, d)
                                         = 4                  +             .
                           uc (c, h, d)        f4 (c1-- h d )   m1 (h, d)
Similarly, we can take the derivative of (31) with respect to d, multiplying by d and dividing by uc
to find
                          dudc (c, h, d)  f c1-- h d c1-- h d    dm1,d (h, d)
                                         = 4        1- -    
                                                               +              .
                           uc (c, h, d)        f4 (c     h d )    m1 (h, d)
          huhc (c,h,d)         dudc (c,h,d)                                                          hm1,h (h,d)         dm1,d (h,d)
So that    uc (c,h,d)    and    uc (c,h,d)     only depend on c1-- h d , it must be that              m1 (h,d)     and    m1 (h,d)
are constants and therefore m1 (h, d) = A2 h d . We can rewrite (32) as

                                              uc (c, h, d) = f4 c1-- h d A2 h d .                                              (33)

Since 1 -  -  = 0 we can rewrite that equation as

                                                                            
                                       uc (c, h, d) = f5 ch 1-- d 1-- A2 h d .

We can integrate this equation with respect to c to find

                                                                                     
                                                                        - 1-     - 1-
                         u (c, h, d) = f6 ch 1-- d 1-- h                     -   d    -      + m2 (h, d)                       (34)

where f6 is another arbitrary function.
   To further restrict m2 (h, d), we combine Lemma 1 together with (33) to find

                                                                                                 
                                                                               -1- 1-        - 1-
                           uh (c, h, d) = f7 ch 1-- d 1-- A2 h                        -      d    -                            (35)

and

                                                                                                
                                                                               - 1-       -1- 1-
                           ud (c, h, d) = f8 ch 1-- d 1-- A2 h                      -    d       -                             (36)

where f7 and f8 are appropriately defined functions.
   We can now compare the derivatives of u, from (34), to these last two expressions. First, taking
the derivative of (34) with respect to h we find


                                                  
                                                           - 1-
                                                                  -1 - 1-              
          uh (c, h, d) = f9 ch 1-- d 1-- h                      -       d -
                                                                                     1--
                                                  
                                                           - 1-
                                                                  -1 - 1-                   
                         + f6 ch 1-- d 1-- h                    -       d -          -                  + m2,1 (h, d)
                                                                                          1--
                                                                         
                                                           - 1-   -1 - 1-
                         = f10 ch 1-- d 1-- h                   -       d -          + m2,1 (h, d)




                                                                 64
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                          - 1-   -1 - 1-
For this to work with (35) for all c, h and d, it must be that m2,1 (h, d) = A3 h                              -  d      -   .
Similarly, taking the derivative of (34) with respect to d we find

                                                                                
                                                                - 1-        - 1-   -1
                 ud (c, h, d) = f11 ch 1-- d 1-- h                   -     d     -            + m2,2 (h, d)

                                                                                               
                                                                               - 1-        - 1-   -1
For this to work with (36), it must be that m2,2 (h, d) = A4 h                      -     d     -           .
                                                                                                                   
    We can integrate m2,1 and m2,2 to find m. Let us first handle the case with  =                               1- -   and
      
=   1- - .   Integrating, we find

                                                                      
                                                     - 1-         - 1-
                                  m2 (h, d) = A5 h        -      d     -       + g3 (d)                                 (37)
                                                                      
                                                     - 1-         - 1-
                                  m2 (h, d) = A6 h        -      d     -       + g4 (h)

For these two equations to be jointly true it must be that A5 = A6 , and that g3 and g4 are the
same constant. That constant can be set arbitrarily as it does not affect choices. In this case, we
can merge m2 in (34) and find

                                                                                     
                                                                      - 1-       - 1-
                        u (c, h, d) = f12 ch 1-- d 1-- h                   -    d     -          + A7 .                 (38)

Since  = 0, we can write

                                                             
                                                                         1- 1- -
                                                                                        -  
                         u (c, h, d) = f13 ch 1-- d 1-- c                           d         + A7 .

which is equivalent to
                                                                                1-
                                              c1- d v c1-- h d                          -1
                                u (c, h, d) =                                                                           (39)
                                                         1-
where

                                                                       1--
                                      (1 -  ) (1 - ) = 1 - 
                                                                         
                                                         
                                            (1 -  )  =  - 
                                                         
                                                                                   
                                                                     - 1-   -1 - 1-
    If instead  =     1- - ,   integrating m2,1 (h, d) = A3 h             -         d
                                                                                    -              yields

                                                            
                                                        - 1-
                                   m2 (h, d) = A5 d          -       log h + g3 (d) ,                                   (40)

                                                                           
                                                        - 1-           - 1-   -1
and if  =    1- - ,   integrating m2,2 (h, d) = A4 h         -       d      -           yields

                                                            
                                                        - 1-
                                   m2 (h, d) = A6 h          -       log d + g4 (h) .                                   (41)




                                                         65
                                         
If only one of  =     1- -   or  =     1- -        is true, it must be that m2 = A7 , where A7 is a constant.
                            
Suppose that only  =      1- - ,   (34) becomes

                                                                                  
                                                                              - 1-
                             u (c, h, d) = f6 ch 1-- d 1-- d                       -   + A7

so we find (39) with

                                                      =1
                                                                  
                                             1- =-                  .
                                                                1--
               
If only  =   1- - ,   (34) becomes

                                                                             
                                                                         - 1-
                         u (c, h, d) = f6 ch 1-- d 1-- h                      -     + m2 (h, d)

which we can rewrite as

                                                         
                                                                    1- 1- -      
                                                                                      - 
                  u (c, h, d) = f14 ch 1-- d 1-- c                            d 1--        + m2 (h, d)

so we find (39) with

                                                              1--
                                      (1 -  ) (1 - ) = 1 - 
                                                                
                                                                 
                                                (1 -  )  =      - 
                                                           1--   
                                  
If both  =    1- -    and  =    1- -      it must be, from (40) and (41), that

                                   m2 (h, d) = A8 log h + A9 log d + A7 ,

in which case we can write (34) as

                                                            
                      u (c, h, d) = f6 ch 1-- d 1--                  + A8 log h + A9 log d + A7 .

We can use
                                                                             
                  log ch 1-- d 1--              = log c +          log h +     log d,
                                                               1--         1--
to write

                                                               1--                 
           u (c, h, d) = f15 ch 1-- d 1--             + A8         log c + A9 - A8                log d + A7 .
                                                                                   

Since the utility function is invariant to multiplication by a constant we can normalize the sum of


                                                               66
the powers on c and d to 1, and get

                      u (c, h, d) = (1 - ) log c +  log d + log v c1-- h d .                              (42)

We now turn to the case in which 1 -  -  = 0.
   We now turn to the case with 1 -  -  = 0. The characterization of ucc in Lemma 2 can be
written as
                                   log (uc (c, h, d))
                                                      = -z1 (h d ) .
                                       log (c)
Integrating with respect to log c we find that

                          log (uc (c, h, d)) = - log (c) z (h d ) + m3 (h, d)                             (43)

where m3 is an arbitrary function of h and d. Differentiating with respect to h and multiplying by
h yields
                       huch (c, h, d)
                                      = - log (c) z (h d ) h + hm3,1 (h, d) .                             (44)
                        uc (c, h, d)
Similarly, differentiating with respect to d and multiplying by d yields

                        ducd (c, h, d)
                                       = - log (c) z (h d )  d + dm3,2 (h, d) .                           (45)
                         uc (c, h, d)

                              huhc (c,h,d)         dudc (c,h,d)
From Lemma 2 we know that      uc (c,h,d)    and    uc (c,h,d)    are only functions of h d . For (44) and (45)
to hold true for every c it must therefore be that z (h d ) = 0 (note that a and b cannot both be
equal to 0 since 1 -  -  = 0) so that z = - is a constant. Similarly, it must be that hm3,1 (h, d) =
g5 (h d ) and dm3,2 (h, d) = g6 (h d ). Integrating, we find that m3 (h, d) = f16 (h d ) for some
function f16 . By exponentiating on both sides of (43), we can therefore rewrite

                                     uc (c, h, d) = c- m4 (h d ) .                                        (46)

We can integrate this equation with respect to c to find

                                             (cv (h d ))1- - 1
                            u (c, h, d) =                      + m5 (h, d)                                (47)
                                                   1-

if  = 1, or
                           u (c, h, d) = m4 (h d ) log (c) + log (v (h d ))                               (48)

otherwise.
   For the case with  = 1, combine (46) with Lemma 1 that

                                                   1
                               uh (c, h, d) =        x (h d ) c1- m4 (h d )
                                                   h

                                                        67
and
                                                   1
                                  ud (c, h, d) =     y (h d ) c1- m4 (h d ) .
                                                   d
Differentiating (47) yields

                                                                    h d
                         uh (c, h, d) = (cv (h d ))- cv (h d ) a        + m5,1 (h, d)
                                                                     h

and
                                                                    h d
                         ud (c, h, d) = (cv (h d ))- cv (h d ) b        + m5,2 (h, d) .
                                                                     d
Since  = 1 it must be that m5 is a constant that can be set to 0 as it does not affect decisions.
(47) is therefore a special case of (39).
   For the case with  = 1, we can again combine (46) with Lemma 1 to find the two equations

                                                  1
                                    uh (c, h, d) =  x (h d ) m4 (h d )
                                                  h
                                                  1
                                    ud (c, h, d) = y (h d ) m4 (h d ) .
                                                  d

Differentiating (48) yields

                                                     h d            v (h d ) h d
                          uh (c, h, d) = m4 (h d ) a      log (c) +          a
                                                       h            v (h d )   h
                                                      
                                                     h d            v (h d ) h d
                                                                               
                          ud (c, h, d) = m4 (h d ) b      log (c) +          b   .
                                                      d             v (h d )   d

For these equations to be consistent it must be that m4 is a constant so we find (42) again.
   This completes the proofs that if u satisfies Definition 1 then it must be of the form (15)­(16).
We now show that if u is defined as (15)­(16) then Definition 1 is also satisfied.
   First notice that if we evaluate the function c1-- h d along a balanced-growth path, i.e. at
                     t                  t                t
                               -1                  -1
a point   c0 w p d       , h0 w  p d        , d0 w pd        , we get


                              t 1- -                    t                 t         - -  
                     
                 c0 w pd                        -1 
                                            h0 w  p d              -1
                                                              d0 w p d          = c1
                                                                                   0   h0 d0 .

In other words, c1-- h d is invariant along a balanced-growth path.
   The derivatives of u are




                                                        68
                                           - 1-                                   c1-- h d
 uh = c1- d v c1-- h d                         c       d v c1-- h d 
                                                                                      h
                                           -          c1- d                                c1-- h d
 ud = c1- d v c1-- h d                                      v c1-- h d + c1- d v c1-- h d 
                                                        d                                      d
                                           -
 uc = c1- d v c1-- h d                         ×
                      c1- d                                                                        c1-- h d
             (1 - )              v c1-- h d + c1- d v c1-- h d (1 -  -  )
                           c                                                                           c

      Taking the ratio of uh and uc and evaluating the expression at a point on a balanced-growth
                           t                   t                  t
                                     -1                   -1
path,       c0 w p d           , h0 w  p d         , d0 w pd           , we find that


                                             - -          - -  
               uh                     v c1 0    h0 d0 c1 0    h0 d0                    c0 t
                  =                                                                      
               uc             1
                    (1 - ) v c0-  -   
                                     h0 d         1-  -  
                                                        h0 d              1 - -   
                                                                                 h0 d  h0 w
                                         0 + v c0           0 (1 -  -  ) c0          0


so that uh /uc grows at rate w and so (12) is satisfied.56
      Similarly,      taking        the    ratio        of   ud   and        uc    and   evaluating   the      expression     at
                                      t
      t                     -1                   -1 t
 c0 w pd , h0              w  pd          , d0 w p d          we find


                                1- -               - -           - -  
              ud           v c0       h0 d0 + v c10     h0 d0  c1
                                                                0   h0 d0         c0 t
                 =                                                                  p
              uc             1
                   (1 - ) v c0 - -   
                                    h0 d   + v c1-  -
                                                      h
                                                        d (1 -  -  ) c 1-  -
                                                                             h
                                                                               d d0 d
                                        0       0      0 0             0      0 0


so that ud /uc grows at rate pd and (13) is satisfied.
                                                                       t                 t                t
                                                                                 -1                 -1
      Finally, dividing uc evaluated at                  c0 w pd           , h0 w  p d       , d0 w p d       by uc evaluated
                     t+1                       t+1                    t+1
                                 -1                          -1
at        c0 w p d         , h0 w  pd                 , d0 w p d              we find

                                                        uc     -(1- )( -)
                                                           = w p d
                                                        uc

which is an expression independent of c, d and h, as required by 14, and that defines r.

Proposition 2. On a balanced-growth path, the growth rates of pdt and wt are

                                                      log pd = log Ac - log Ad ,
                                                                                                                            (21)
                                                      log w =  log Ac .


     56
     Note that by Definition 1 we can adjust h0 to match the wage so that -uh /uc matches the arbitrary wage w.
This requires v = 0, but if v = 0 hours does not enter the utility function and the only possible wage is w = 0.


                                                                      69
Proof. The first-order conditions of the firms are

                                            pjt yjt = wt ljt                                     (49)

and
                                         (1 - ) pjt yjt = Rt kjt                                 (50)

so that
                                  
                                    Rt (kct + kdt ) = wt (lct + ldt )                            (51)
                                 1-
and
                                         lct   ldt   lct + ldt
                                             =     =           .
                                         kct   kdt   kct + kdt
Combining (50) for j = c with pit A = Rt , the production function (20) and using the fact that
pct = 1 yields the price of investment
                                                                     
                                                 Act     lct + ldt
                                  pit = (1 - )                          .                        (52)
                                                 A       kct + kdt

With pit A = Rt , this equation also pins down the interest rate
                                                                     
                                                         lct + ldt
                                  Rt = (1 - ) Act                       .                        (53)
                                                         kct + kdt

   Doing the same operations with j = d instead, and combining with (52) we find that the price
of recreation goods and services, measured in units of non-recreation prices, is the ratio of sector c
and sector d productivities:
                                                       Act
                                              pdt =        .
                                                       Adt
It follows that the growth rate pd of pdt is such that log pd = log Ac - log Ad .
   Combining (53) with (51) yields
                                                                        
                                  1-                          1
                                 Rt  = (1 - ) Act                           .
                                                           1 -  wt

Since the first-order conditions of the household imply a constant Rt , this last equation yields that

                                          log w =  log Ac ,

which completes the proof.




                                                   70
