                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  SOCIAL FINANCE: CULTURAL EVOLUTION, TRANSMISSION BIAS AND MARKET
                              DYNAMICS

                                            Erol Akcay
                                          David Hirshleifer

                                        Working Paper 27745
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27745


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                              August 2020, December 2020




We thank participants at the Conference on Evolutionary Models of Financial Markets, MIT
Laboratory for Financial Engineering (virtual, June 2020), Siew Hong Teoh, Sheridan Titman,
Jeffrey Zwiebel, and especially the discussant, Simon Levin and an anonymous referee for
insightful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Erol Akcay and David Hirshleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Social Finance: Cultural Evolution, Transmission Bias and Market Dynamics
Erol Akcay and David Hirshleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 27745
August 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. D03,D15,D21,D25,D53,D8,D82,D83,D84,D85,D9,D91,D92,G02,G1,G11,G12,G14,G28,
G3,G31,G32,G34, G35,G4,G41,G5,G51,G53,O31

                                          ABSTRACT

The thoughts and behaviors of financial market participants depend upon adopted cultural traits,
including information signals, beliefs, strategies, and folk economic models. Financial traits
compete to survive in the human population, and are modified in the process of being transmitted
from one agent to another. These cultural evolutionary processes shape market outcomes, which
in turn feed back into the success of competing traits. This evolutionary system is studied in an
emerging paradigm, social finance. In this paradigm, social transmission biases determine the
evolution of financial traits in the investor population. It considers an enriched set of cultural
traits, both selection on traits and mutation pressure, and market equilibrium at different
frequencies. Other key ingredients of the paradigm include psychological bias, social network
structure, information asymmetries, and institutional environment.


Erol Akcay
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
eakcay@sas.upenn.edu

David Hirshleifer
The Paul Merage School of Business
University of California, Irvine
4291 Pereira Drive
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
david.h@uci.edu
1    Introduction
Financial market participants employ a variety of learning strategies and heuristics,
and are subject to different biases in judgements and decisions. These dispositions are
shaped by the cultural traits that people adopt from others. These include macrocul-
tural traits, such as national, religious, ethnic and political beliefs; and more specific
information signals, beliefs, financial strategies, and folk models of how the economy
or financial markets work. As financial traits spread from person to person, they com-
pete for survival in the population. Financial traits are also modified in the process of
being transmitted--intensifying, lessening, or changing qualitatively.
    The resulting population distribution of investor traits determines financial out-
comes, such as project choices, market prices and trading profits. These market out-
comes feed back into the evolutionary success of competing cultural traits. So financial
markets and traits are parts of a dual cultural evolutionary and market system.
    We argue here for a new paradigm for understanding financial markets which we
call social finance. Social finance studies the cultural evolution of financial traits, the
transmission biases that shape this process, and resulting market dynamics. It draws
upon concepts from classical and behavioral finance, evolutionary finance, and cul-
tural evolutionary theory. We review the cultural evolution of beliefs, investment,
and price-setting in financial markets, in the context of social network structure and
institutional environment. We also highlight connections between general evolution-
ary theory and financial applications, and suggest directions for future research.
    Cultural evolution is a shift in the distribution of cultural traits in a population
over time (Mesoudi et al., 2006). Cultural traits increase or decrease in frequency,
and are modified through individual and social learning. Financial economics has
long studied learning by observing market price. Evolutionary finance recognizes that
beliefs and behaviors are also transmitted via social interaction and observation. Social
finance is distinguished by an explicit and broader examination of social transmission
processes, cultural traits, and evolutionary dynamics.
    There is growing evidence that culturally-transmitted investor ideas or folk models
affect trading behavior and price outcomes. This includes both macrocultural traits, as
mentioned above, and microcultural traits, such as a belief in Bitcoin as a trading op-
portunity. Market participants, such as managers and investors, acquire and transmit
understandings about how the economy and markets work--what Hirshleifer (2020)
refers to as folk economic and financial models. Folk financial models often reflect shal-


                                            2
low cognition, as encapsulated in catch-phrases such as `dead-cat bounce' and `Don't
fight the Fed.' Folk models are also sometimes attached to vivid narratives that help
them spread from person to person (Shiller, 2017).
    Despite a long history of evolutionary approaches to economics and finance (Alchian,
1950), evolutionary finance, including "econophysics" (surveyed by (Slanina, 2014)),
has largely remained separate intellectual lineage from the rest of the finance field.
However, a growing number of `calls to arms' endorse the study of social interactions
and, in some cases, evolutionary processes in financial markets (Farmer and Lo, 1999;
Lo, 2017; Shiller, 2017; Hirshleifer, 2020).
    Existing evolutionary and agent-based approaches to financial markets, including
the econophysics literature, typically derive or simulate the aggregate consequences
of zero-intelligence rules for how agents behave. These approaches provide valuable
insights, but do not address the effects of having agents how thoughtfully seek to
optimize (even if imperfectly). Social finance encompasses agent-based modeling of
transmission biases, but goes further to allow for the effects of transmission bias when
agents form beliefs and choose actions thoughtfully.
    Building on previous advances in evolutionary finance and other disciplines, social
finance offers several distinctive features and potential contributions.

1. Social finance nests classical and behavioral finance as special cases, and endog-
enizes traits that are typically taken as given.
    Social transmission helps explain how private signals are distributed across in-
vestors; in classical finance this distribution is often taken as given. Furthermore, so-
cial transmission of financial traits, including financial folk models, shapes the heuris-
tics and biases taken as given in behavioral finance (as reviewed in (Hirshleifer, 2015)),
and shapes how these traits vary across agents and over time.
    For example, in behavioral finance investor belief in continuation or reversal of
price trends is taken as given, as in the literature on positive feedback trading (DeLong
et al., 1990). The new evolutionary perspective seeks to explain how investors come
to possess such beliefs or decision rules. In this approach, investors acquire trend-
chasing or contrarian traits from others in a process of cultural transmission. The folk
model that return trends tend to continue competes for investor attention and belief
with the "buy on the dips" folk model that returns tend to reverse. Similarly, empirical
behavioral finance research often takes investor sentiment to be an exogenous driver of
behavior (Lee et al., 1991; Baker and Wurgler, 2007). Social finance regards shifts in


                                            3
sentiment as an endogenous outcome of microevolutionary cultural processes.
    Behavioral finance considers the special case of social finance in which psycholog-
ical biases are effectively innate (for analytical purposes). Similarly, classical finance
considers the special case in which investor traits such as discount rates and risk toler-
ance are fixed. In social finance, financial traits spread from person to person, so that
the distribution of these traits in the population evolves.
    Econophysics and evolutionary finance models that assume mechanistic trading
rules do not endogenize the belief formation or preferences of classical finance. Other
models allow only for given or mechanistically generated beliefs. Social finance allows
for both social transmission of beliefs, and the possibility of active thought processes
on the part of decision makers.1
2. Social finance considers a wider universe of investor beliefs and strategies.
    Previous literature on evolutionary finance often focuses on the competition be-
tween trend-chasing versus fundamental trading behaviors, or optimism versus pes-
simistic beliefs (see the reviews of (Evstigneev et al., 2009) and (Blume and Easley,
2010)). Building upon these advances, social finance widens application of the evo-
lutionary perspective to the rich diversity of actual financial traits and folk economic
models. Examples include belief in the value versus growth investment philosophies,
or belief in the use of the payback criterion for managerial project decisions.
3. Social finance studies evolution of the cross-investor distribution of traits, not
just wealths.
    Most research mentioned in point 2 studies shifts in the distribution of wealth over
time across investors with given investment strategies. Social finance emphasizes that
investors adopt and modify their financial traits, such as saving propensities, trading
strategies, or belief in different investor philosophies. So the distribution of traits in
the investor population, not just wealths, evolves.
4. Social finance recognizes that investors thoughtfully, though imperfectly, ana-
lyze alternatives, which affects market outcomes.
    Econophysics and other pioneering evolutionary finance models have often em-
ployed mechanistic assumptions about investor behavior or price determination. This
can be a fruitful modeling strategy. Social finance recognizes that investors analyze
alternatives, often in reasonable ways, as active processors of information.
   1
     Also, one of the agendas of social finance is to analyze the social transmission of heuristics and
biases that have been the focus of interest in behavioral finance, such as overconfidence, attention to
different kinds of information signals, loss aversion, and so forth.



                                                  4
5. Social finance studies a richer set of social transmission biases.
    A subset of evolutionary finance models allow for on social interaction. An im-
portant ingredient of existing evolutionary finance, as in many models of cultural
evolution, is payoff-biased transmission--the copying of traits that have performed well
((Boyd and Richerson, 1985); for financial markets, see (LeBaron, 2006; Hommes and
Wagener, 2009)). Social finance seeks to systematically delineate and explore a wide
range of relevant social transmission biases (as analyzed, e.g., in (Boyd and Richer-
son, 1985)). These include greater transmission of actions that are more observable
and salient to others, of ideas that are easier to understand, of folk models that are
more heavily cued in the environment, and of traits that bearers have an incentive to
disseminate to others.
6. Social finance accounts for mutation pressure, not just copying and selection.
    Social finance recognizes that new financial traits appear routinely and are often
systematically modified as they are transmitted from one agent to another. In genetic
evolution, such newly generated or modified inheritance is called mutation pressure.
In cultural evolutionary applications, mutation pressure is commonplace. For exam-
ple, when investors who have favorable information about a stock buy it, they often
communicate with positive "spin" to others in the hope of driving up its price.
7. Social finance considers a wider set of applications and range of time scales than
much of past evolutionary finance.
    Econophysics and evolutionary models have often been applied to high frequency
trading and market microstructure, financial power laws, time-decay in volatility and
covariances, and chaotic dynamics (see the review of (Lux and Alfarano, 2016)). So-
cial finance widens the scope of financial phenomena and empirical puzzles to be
addressed. These include medium and low frequency patterns of trading and asset
pricing, long-term capital market equilibrium, the pricing of factor risk, bubbles and
crashes, asset pricing anomalies, and managerial and regulatory policy. Since such ap-
plications have been of great interest to financial economists and practitioners, greater
focus on these topics promises to build bridges with an intellectual lineage that has
been largely disjoint from econophysics and evolutionary finance.


2    Financial markets as culturally evolving systems
A financial market consists of a population of agents who transact based upon their
preferences, beliefs, and folk models of how markets work. These cultural traits, and

                                           5
resulting financial strategies, are transmitted, potentially with modification, from per-
son to person. Examples include trading strategies such as dollar cost averaging, tech-
nical strategies, and diversification versus stock-picking. Investors copy, debate, mod-
ify, and persuade each other of these strategies and folk models.
     The transmission of traits from one investor to another is a kind of inheritance--
similarity in traits between an agent (or set of agents) that, for some set of social trans-
actions, is designated as culturally ancestral, and an agent (or set of agents) that is
designated as descendant. In cultural evolution, selection and mutation pressure are
often directional drivers of change. An example of selection is the high recent trans-
missibility of the idea that Bitcoin is a fabulous investment opportunity. Pro-Bitcoin
ideas have recently had high fitness--many cultural descendants. An example of mu-
tation pressure mentioned earlier is "spin" about purchased stocks.
     Analytically, these cultural evolutionary forces can be precisely quantified. The
evolution of such traits in a single generation can be decomposed into a selection com-
ponent and a nonselection component (reflecting mutation pressure) using the Price
Equation (Price, 1970; el Mouden et al., 2014; Aguilar and Akçay, 2018).


3     Basic insights from cultural evolution, with examples
      from finance
The study of cultural evolution is highly interdisciplinary. We highlight some theoret-
ical and empirical insights from this literature that are especially relevant for financial
markets.


3.1   Cultural transmission is biased
Transmission biases influence both the intensity of a transmitted trait (mutation pres-
sure), or whether a trait is transmitted from one person to another (selection). Shennan
(Shennan, 2011) distinguishes three types of bias in the transmission of cultural traits.
Under results bias, transmission depends upon the results of neighbors' traits, as with
payoff-biased imitation. Another type of results bias is visibility bias, wherein some ac-
tions have consequences that are more attention-grabbing than others. This can result
in undersaving (Han et al., 2020b).
    Content bias is a direct influence of the content of the trait on transmission. For ex-
ample, ideas that are vivid, fun, useful, or easy to understand are highly transmissable


                                             6
(Heath, 1996). The ease of transmitting simple ideas can cause very naive financial
strategies to predominate.
    Context bias is the influence of the context of the interaction, such as the credibility
or prestige of the sender, and the degree of arousal of the receiver (Berger, 2011).
These are agent characteristics (traits of senders versus receivers of signals). Context
also includes features of the environment (the type of asset market, or current market
conditions). With respect agent traits, transmission bias can derive from the sender
(or observation target), the receiver or both. For example, a sender may bias reports
in favor of a financial product because the sender is trying to sell it.
    Under conformist-biased transmission ((Boyd and Richerson, 1985)), observers
copy the most popular traits. In a financial context, this suggests that once a folk
model or activity (such as a faith in Bitcoin, high tech startups, or corporate diversifi-
cation) becomes sufficiently popular, a boom can persist until big news forces people
to reconsider.
    Payoff-biased transmission has beneficial effects, such as promoting investment
a low-fee over a comparable high-fee mutual fund. However, explicit modeling of
payoff-biased transmission reveals possible dysfunctional effects, such as investor chas-
ing of random short-term price trends.


3.2   Cultural evolution can promote either functional or dysfunctional
      traits
Darwinian selection in biology promotes adaptation, wherein organisms function well
in some environment. Selection and adaptation are among the key premises of what
Lo (Lo, 2017) calls the adaptive markets hypothesis. In cultural evolution, too, adap-
tation is about differential reproductive success--of cultural traits rather than genes.
Adaptation of financial traits does not always promote the success of the vehicles that
bear them (such as investors or managers), either in terms of welfare or reproduction.
Even fallacious folk financial models often persist in the population of amateurs and
professionals.
    Nevertheless, there are myriad examples of cultural traits that spread owing to
benefits conferred upon their bearers. Examples include belief in stock market par-
ticipation, and various quantitative methodologies used by investment professionals.
Crucially, the conferred benefits need not be correctly understood by the bearer (Hen-
rich, 2015).


                                            7
    For example, popular books and websites almost uniformly recommend that bor-
rowers refinance their fixed rate mortgages prematurely--as soon as the present value
of doing so turns positive. Obeying would ensure that the borrower's gain from re-
financing is virtually zero! However, the simplicity of this rule-of-thumb makes it
highly transmissible. Furthermore, it may actually help borrowers, since many are
prone to excessive delay and inertia. `Dollar cost averaging" is another strategy that
might be beneficial for reasons that investors do not correctly understand (Brennan
et al., 2005).
    Financial beliefs that are detrimental to their bearers can also be highly transmis-
sible. For example, Rantala (Rantala, 2019) provides evidence that participation in a
major Finnish Ponzi scheme was mediated by social interaction between participants.
The payback criterion for discounting projects causes mistaken investment decisions
by ignoring the time value of resources, yet survives.
    The transmissibility of a trait often depends on how common it is, one reason being
that payoffs to the bearer are frequency-dependent. For example, congestion costs in
investing strategies are ubiquitous--adopting a strategy reduces the benefit to com-
petitors of doing so. So security trading is an ecological interaction between different
investor types whose activities influence each other's profitability via market price
(Farmer, 2002). Owing to frequency dependence, a diversity of traits (or investment
strategies) can be maintained in a population.
    Owing to frequency-dependence and payoff interactions, a diversity of folk models
can coexist in the population adapted to distinct ecological niches. In financial markets
these niches are filled by retail investors and a variety of financial institutions and
players. Indeed, Lo (Lo, 2017) refers to the panoply of specialized adaptations of
hedge funds as the "Galapagos islands of finance."
    Strategic complementarities can be positive as well as negative, and can induce
multiple equilibria, an example being either liquid or illiquid financial markets. Soci-
eties can pass through critical transitions between very different financial equilibria.
Historically, some societies have evolved to attain thriving financial markets, legal
systems that underpin such markets, and extensive financing of business innovation.
This involves a coordinated shift in the beliefs and expectations of financial agents and
regulators. It will be valuable to model the cultural evolutionary determinants of the
critical transition from financial autarky to financial development.




                                           8
3.3   Financial traits evolve cumulatively
Cultural evolution can consolidate assemblies of traits that complement each other to
promote their joint success. This is an example of epistasis, the interaction between
units of inheritance in determining transmission success.
    For example, the value investing philosophy is a coadapted assembly of several
distinct ideas: that it is best to invest in stocks that have low price relative to measures
of fundamental value, that it is best to trade infrequently ("buy-and-hold"), and that it
is best to avoid being swayed by other investors (contrarianism). The linkage of these
ideas is not logically compelling. If stock mispricing fluctuates, then trading from
overpriced to underpriced stocks is in conflict with buy-and-hold. But these ideas are
emotionally complementary.
    Assemblies of financial traits are often connected by shallow reasoning, and by
emotional motivations, including moral attitudes (Hirshleifer, 2008; Shiller, 2017). For
example, the value philosophy prizes the personal virtues of thrift, long-term plan-
ning, and independence of thought. However, logic is also an important source of
linkage, as in the conceptual structures underlying the quantitative models of sophis-
ticated professionals.
    Empirically, the evolutionary history of descent with modification of various types
of cultural traits, such as design features of canoes, has been traced out using phylo-
genetic methods (Mace and Holden, 2005). These methods apply even when there
is cross-lineage borrowing, as is common in cultural evolution. A promising further
direction for evolutionary financial research is to trace the evolution of folk economic
models empirically through textual analysis of investment discussions.


3.4   Cultural evolution operates at multiple time scales
The evolutionary dynamics of financial traits play out at multiple time scales. At a
high frequency, there is microevolutionary rise and fall of beliefs about specific se-
curities, strategies, and philosophies (such as optimism about cryptocurrencies). At
a fast-to-medium frequency, regulations and financial organizations evolve. Special-
ized advisors and intermediaries tailor products and services (useful or otherwise)
for either retail investors or financial institutions. Investment methodologies develop,
such as fundamental analysis and quant investing.
    At an even longer time scale, the preferences and mindsets of financial actors (risk
preference, time preference, beliefs about how the world works) are influenced by

                                             9
slow-moving traits such as religious, ethnic and national culture (Guiso et al., 2006).
Cumulative evolution shapes assemblies of folk economic models, such as investment
philosophies. Finally, at the longest time scales, culture and genes can coevolve to
influence economic attitudes and preferences (Barnea et al., 2010).
    Most models of cultural evolution have been at the fastest and slowest of the time
scales described above. At the highest frequency, there is extensive modeling of how
the spread of behavior is is influenced by transmission biases and social network struc-
ture (Jackson, 2009).
    At lower frequencies, cultural evolutionary models of behavioral change across
generations have captured the interplay between cultural and genetic selection (Rich-
erson and Boyd, 1978; Bisin and Verdier, 2001; Aguilar and Akçay, 2018). There is an
opening for greater study of the intermediate time scales mentioned above in evolu-
tionary finance.


4       Models of evolutionary dynamics in finance
We now discuss models of the evolution of financial markets. We start with biased
transmission of cultural traits, and then turn to compartmental models and to avenues
for empirical testing.


4.1     Biased transmission of financial traits
4.1.1    Payoff-biased trait transmission

Econonophysics models and early models in evolutionary finance focus on the effects
of mechanistic rules of investors for updating beliefs, trading, and rules for market
price setting. Such models can generate interesting system dynamics, such as bub-
bles and cycles, autoregressive second return moments (Lux, 1997), and power laws
in returns and volatility (Alfarano and Lux, 2007). Several papers examine settings in
which investors choose between different heuristic belief updating functions based
upon the past performance of each heuristic (Brock and Hommes, 1997; Chiarella
et al., 2013). This can result in instability and complex dynamics.
    Such models generally assume that information about strategy payoffs is trans-
mitted without bias. However, evidence indicates that individual and professional
investors talk more about their high than about their low return experiences (Heimer
and Simon, 2015; Escobar and Pedraza, 2019; Lane et al., 2020)--self-enhancing trans-


                                            10
mission bias. This is a specific kind of payoff-biased transmission in which the payoff
reports are subject to selection bias.
    In (Han et al., 2020a), investors adopt one of two strategies: A ("Active") or P
("Passive"), where A has either higher variance or higher skewness. Investors are
randomly selected to meet in pairs over time. In each meeting, the probability that
the Sender reports the Sender's strategy and return to the Receiver is increasing with
that return. This self-enhancing transmission creates an upward selection bias in the
returns seen by receivers--especially for the high-variance strategy.
    Receivers fail to adjust for this selection bias, and also think that reported past per-
formance is indicative of future performance. So the high-variance strategy spreads
through the population, even if its payoff distribution is inferior. This evolutionary
pressure toward the A strategy causes it to become overpriced. This offers a possible
explanation for the puzzle of retail investor nondiversification and active investing,
and some well-known return predictability anomalies.
    If, in addition, extreme returns are highly salient, positive skewness strategies also
tend to spread through the population. This is because positively skewed strategies
generate the high-return outcomes that are heavily transmitted, attended to, and per-
suasive to receivers. This implication is consistent with evidence of investor prefer-
ence for positive skewness, and apparent overpricing of "lottery stocks." Also, these
effects are predicted to be stronger for more socially connected investors.
    The multiplicative interaction of the sending and receiving functions implies that
the rate of evolution toward A is an increasing convex function of past return. There
is evidence that stock market entry, investor flows into mutual funds, and reallocation
by investors from safe to risky assets are increasing in portfolio returns (Chevalier and
Ellison, 1997; Kaustia and Knüpfer, 2012).
    Counteracting the selection for riskier strategies is a well-known evolutionary ef-
fect favoring lower variance strategies called bet hedging (Gillespie, 1973). Brennan
and Lo (Brennan and Lo, 2011) find that evolutionary bet hedging can explain a range
of psychological effects, such as loss aversion, risk aversion, and probability matching.
These financial traits can counteract the transmission biases towards risky strategies
discussed above.

4.1.2   Salience-biased trait transmission

To be influenced by another's behavior, an agent usually needs to observe and pay
attention to it. So behaviors that are more visible and salient to others tend to spread.

                                            11
Han et al. (Han et al., 2020b) argue that such visibility bias reduces saving, because
consumption activities, such as carrying wearable electronics, generate sensory cues
that are more salient to others than the non-event of not consuming. People neglect
this observation selection bias, and perceive that others are consuming heavily, which
leads them to infer that others have information favoring high consumption. So the
trait of high consumption tends to spread in a positive feedback loop.
    In this theory, overconsumption is an emergent social outcome; it does not de-
rive from a direct preference for immediate consumption (as in (Laibson, 1997)). As
a result, the empirical and policy implications differ from the behavioral economics
approach. For example, in the visibility bias model, overconsumption is driven by
mistaken belief updating, so accurate disclosure about others' consumption can re-
duce overconsumption, which is not the case in a direct preference approach. There
is evidence that such disclosure does indeed help (D'Acunto et al., 2020).
    In the model of Hirshleifer and Plotkin 2020, successful investment projects are
more salient to observers than unsuccessful ones. Everyone is familiar with Microsoft
and Google, whereas many failed startups are forgotten. Observers fail to discount for
this observation selection bias. As a result, there is overadoption of risky projects--
especially "moonshot" projects with a low ex ante probability of success and high
payoff conditional upon success.

4.1.3   Private information, trait modification and intensification

Financial agents often exchange ideas, which they use to update their beliefs and select
actions. This has usually been modeled assuming rational Bayesian agents (Duffie
and Manso, 2007; Özsöylev and Walden, 2011). The evolutionary approach further
considers the possibility that culturally transmitted financial traits, such as signals or
beliefs, can "mutate," i.e., be modified, intensified or lessened during transmission.
    Beliefs are subject to mutation pressure even under rational Bayesian updating.
For example, the beliefs of the receiver of a signal may be a weakened version of the
beliefs of the sender, owing to transmission noise or receiver skepticism. Imperfect
rationality induces further transmission bias, and can cause populations to evolve to
systematically mistaken assessments (Bohren, 2016).
    Turning to actions, research on information cascades (also called `herding') studies
how agents learn from the actions of others (Banerjee, 1992; Bikhchandani et al., 1992).
This induces a mimetic transmission bias--a tendency to adopt the traits and, to some
extent, beliefs, of observation targets. Since actions are coarse indicators of the beliefs

                                            12
of the observation target, information is aggregated poorly even when agents are ra-
tional. Owing to information cascades, society often fixes upon mistaken behaviors,
despite extensive privately available information.
    Furthermore, small shocks to the system often cause the population to swing from
one trait to the other ("fragility"). Investment cascades are also subject to sudden
booms owing to agents waiting to see what others will do (Chamley and Gale, 1994).
In several other models, information cascades and related phenomena induce failures
of information aggregation and sudden market crashes (Lee, 1998)
    Several models examine the rational diffusion of private information through so-
cial networks of investors in securities markets, and how network position and net-
work structure affects investment performance, liquidity, volume, investor welfare,
and the informativeness of market prices (Özsöylev and Walden, 2011; Walden, 2019).
Models of information percolation consider sequential sharing of information when
agents are randomly selected over time from a population to meet and share their
signals (Duffie and Manso, 2007).
    In application to financial markets (Andrei and Cujean, 2017), if investors are ra-
tional, accumulating signals tends to cause beliefs and prices to correspond to the true
state of the world. So social transmission bias induces a beneficial mutation pressure
toward correct beliefs. However, if investors are imperfectly rational and if signals are
distorted in the transmission process, there can be pernicious mutation pressure. In
either case, mutation pressure in social learning models can potentially be captured
by the nonselection term in the Price Equation (Price, 1970; Hirshleifer and Plotkin,
2020).
    Biased information transmission and mutation pressure can also cause market
bubbles and crashes. In the biased percolation model of (Hirshleifer, 2020), a constant
bias b is added to each private signal about the asset payoff each time a signal is trans-
mitted from one investor to another. With repeated sharing, the number of signals
per investors grows exponentially. Bias compounds recursively, where the input of a
biased average signal results in an output of an average signal with additional bias.
If naive receivers fail to discount for transmission bias, then as signal biases accumu-
late, on average price bubbles start to grow. On average these start slowly, and then
accelerate; the effects of bias at first grow exponentially. However, at each discrete
date, public signals of growing informativeness arrive, which oppose and eventually
correct the action boom or price bubble.
    This results in oscillatory dynamics that are most pronounced at the peak of the

                                           13
bubble. So the model may potentially help explain the empirical puzzle of short
term negative return autocorrelations (Jegadeesh, 1990). Furthermore, owing to the
otherwise-smooth and hump-shaped expected price path, the model can also generate
momentum and long-run reversal return patterns, consistent with evidence of lower-
frequency return predictability ((DeBondt and Thaler, 1985; Jegadeesh and Titman,
1993)).
    Such dynamics illustrate how the cultural evolutionary approach can explain the
"beyond all reason" flavor of many bubble episodes, such as the swings in Bitcoin
prices in recent years. Speculative investor trading also rises and falls with the bubble.
This is a cultural evolutionary effect; investors do not have any direct bias, such as
overconfidence, "for" trading aggressively.


4.2   Compartmental models of trait transmission
There is growing evidence of contagion via social interaction for a wide array of eco-
nomic behaviors (e.g. Glaeser and Scheinkman, 2003). This includes contagion of the
beliefs and behaviors of retail and professional investors (see the review of Hirshleifer
and Teoh, 2009), such as retirement saving, market participation and selection of in-
dividual stocks (Kelly and O'Grada, 2000; Duflo and Saez, 2002; Hong et al., 2004;
Brown et al., 2008; Shive, 2010; Massa and Simonov, 2011). General trading strategies
also spread from person to person, such as the tendency of investors to sell winners
more often than losers (Heimer, 2016).
    The biased transmission of such discrete cultural traits can be captured using epi-
demiological models of disease transmission, often called compartmental models (Ker-
mack and McKendrick, 1927). In such models, agents are typically viewed as ran-
domly meeting over time, where in a mixed pair, there is some probability that an in-
fectious agent transmits an initially-rare cultural trait to the partner. There is usually
also a spontaneous rate of `recovery' from infection with the cultural trait. In the most
famous compartmental model, the SIR model, there are susceptibles (S ) who can be-
come infected, infectious agents (I ) who can recover, and recovered or "removed"
agents (R) who never change.
    Shiller (Shiller, 2017) suggests applying the SIR model to explain the spread of
investor ideas and bubbles. In several papers, being infected is viewed as being op-
timistic about the prospects of a financial asset. In the SIR and related models, the
infection rate contains a term that is proportional to the product of the fractions of the


                                           14
population that are infectious and susceptible. This generates a positive feedback ef-
fect. Shive (Shive, 2010) provides evidence consistent with such a multiplicative effect
in the trading behavior of investors in Finland.
    The rise-and-fall epidemic curve in SIR-related models can induce price overshoot-
ing and bubbles. Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (Burnside et al., 2016) apply
a modified compartmental model to bubbles in real estate markets. In their model,
there are optimists, skeptics, and what we will call susceptibles. Optimists expect
fundamentals to improve; skeptics and susceptibles do not. In a meeting, each type
has some probability of converting to the type of the meeting partner. Susceptibles
have the highest probabilities of being converted, and are the least contagious. Over
time, in the absence of conclusive news, the population evolves to the beliefs of the
most contagious type. If the optimists have the second-highest contagiousness, then
their fraction temporarily rises (by persuading susceptibles) before collapsing (owing
to persuasion by skeptics). This results in a bubble and crash.
    In the basic versions of compartmental models, the contagion parameter, which
captures the probability that a meeting generates a new infection, is exogenous. Hir-
shleifer (Hirshleifer, 2020) describes a modified SIRS setting (the final S indicating
that recovered agents can become susceptible again) in which "buzz," the degree of
excitement about the folk model, makes the folk model more contagious. Buzz is pro-
portional to the rate of growth in the number of adherents of a folk model. When
many are jumping aboard the pro-Bitcoin bandwagon, Bitcoin becomes "hot," and
meetings with Bitcoin adopters are more persuasive. When the popularity of a folk
model is declining, there is negative buzz, so that meetings trigger abandonment of
Bitcoin--an endogenously negative contagion parameter. Buzz effects can exacerbate
the boom/crash pattern in prices.
    Overshooting in the model (similar to epidemics) implies that when a bubble col-
lapses, the infected fraction falls below its long-run equilibrium value, and exhibits
dampened cyclical fluctuations thereafter. So the compartmental approach is poten-
tially consistent with a rich serial correlation pattern in asset returns at different lags.
Chinco (Chinco, 2020) estimates a compartmental model in which social interaction
induces stock market bubbles, and finds that industries with a high intensity of social
interaction have more frequent bubbles.
    The compartmental approach offers a possible explanation for the stylized fact that
bubbles and panics repeatedly co-occur with the sudden popularity of "New Era"
investment folk models (Shiller, 2000). "New Era" folk models occasionally mutate

                                            15
to become highly infectious. When a mutation induces a high contagion parameter,
the popularity of the investment folk model grows explosively, for a period, inducing
a market bubble.


4.3   Empirical avenues in social finance
A basic empirical implication of social finance is that outcomes depend on the trans-
missibility of different strategies, which in turn depend on the characteristics of the
financial trait, investor characteristics in their roles as senders and receivers, and the
structure of social interactions (social network structure and the intensity of social
interaction). Below, we discuss each of these factors.
    Characteristics of the financial trait include whether it is easily observable to oth-
ers, it is vivid or fun to talk about, it is simple to observe or communicate, it has high
prevalence of relevant environmental cues, and whether its potential senders or re-
ceivers have an incentive to discuss it. Textual analysis of folk economic models in
blogs and traditional and social media can be used to measure such characteristics.
    Relevant investor characteristics include communication incentives, psychological
communication propensities, and position in the social network. For example, in-
vestors differ in sociability, and in how strongly their incentives or personality favor
censoring or distorting the messages sent to others. Investors also differ in their skep-
ticism toward verbal reports of others, and in their propensity to adjust for reporting
selection biases. Datasets from social media, as well as survey evidence, have been
used to estimate individual social network position and sociability (Hong et al., 2004;
Bailey et al., 2018). Such network position data can also provide insight into whether
different investors are locked into "echo chambers," resulting in sharp cross-investor
divergence in financial traits.
    Changes over time in communication technologies (such as the rise of the print-
ing press and mass media, electronic communication, and later the internet, blogs,
and social media) also provide natural experiments that can be used to test how the
structure of social transmission affects financial behavior. Relevant characteristics in-
clude the connectivity of the social network, how homophilous it is (homophily being
the tendency for investors with similar traits to be linked), and how intensely investors
tend to communicate about their investment strategies or performance.
    Many cultural evolutionary models predict stronger effects for more socially ac-
tive agents and those who are more central in the social network. Similarly, the ef-


                                           16
fects of transmission bias on market outcomes will be stronger in networks that are
more connected. In sharp contrast, in rational information sharing models (Duffie
and Manso, 2007; Özsöylev and Walden, 2011; Walden, 2019), more intense social in-
teraction causes the system to evolve more quickly toward greater market efficiency.
    In the model of Han et al. (Han et al., 2020a), sociability and connectedness are as-
sociated with more active investing, as measured by variance and skewness. Consis-
tent with this, Heimer (Heimer, 2014) documents that social interaction is more preva-
lent amongst active investors (who buy and/or sell stocks) than passive investors
who hold U.S. savings bonds. Furthermore, proxies for sociability or connectedness
are associated with greater stock market participation (Hong et al., 2004; Kaustia
and Knüpfer, 2012; Georgarakos and Pasini, 2011) and investment in more volatile
or skewed stocks (Kumar, 2009). The model also implies that convexity of investment
flows derives from social interaction, consistent with evidence on social influence on
stock market participation in Finland (Kaustia and Knüpfer, 2012).


5    Policy and regulation
Regulation evolves as policymakers learn about the effectiveness of different regula-
tory systems. Greater heterogeneity in regulatory systems across principalities can
promote effective regulation via mutation, in the form of experimentation, and se-
lection of superior outcomes (Romano, 2014). Sunsetting of existing regulations also
promotes experimentation, and can prevent regulatory drift in the form of large mu-
tations at the time of rare crises (Romano and Levin, 2020). Both heterogeneity and
sunsetting can potentially help regulators adapt to rapidly changing environments,
avoid the extinction of beneficial policies via random drift, and compete more effec-
tively in the evolutionary arms race with investors (whose strategies evolve quickly).
    The cultural evolutionary approach also suggests new directions for promoting
financial literacy and prudent investor behavior. Evolutionary design can be used to
increase the transmissibility of accurate or functional investor beliefs and behaviors.
    For example, a way to help people save more can be to increase cues about saving
(or low spending) by others (D'Acunto et al., 2020). This is because ideas that are
cued more heavily by the environment tend to spread more readily (Berger and Heath,
2005). Cues about saving can help offset the many daily cues (such as social media
posts) about new purchases of others.



                                           17
6    Conclusion and new directions for social finance
Learning from others is central in financial markets, as both classical and behavioral
finance has long recognized. However, to fully understand the learning and transmis-
sion of financial traits, we need an evolutionary perspective that clarifies the nature
of transmission biases and the coevolution of cultural traits and financial outcomes.
The perspective that we advance, social finance, provides such a paradigm shift. It goes
beyond behavioral finance (the application of psychology to markets) in focusing ex-
plicitly on how social interaction shapes thought and behavior, and on the selection,
mutation pressure and drift processes by which these traits evolve. Social finance
studies these issues with a broadened set of financial traits, transmission biases, and
focal applications.
    Social finance has promise to help explain important financial phenomena, such
as bubbles and stock return predictability anomalies at different time horizons. For
example, commentators have long argued that market bubbles crashes, and swings
in market sentiment are social phenomena, and reflect contagion of emotions as well
as ideas. This perspective contrasts with the classical finance view that (apart from
highly restrictive theoretical scenarios) bubbles do not exist. It also contrasts with be-
havioral theories in which bubbles result from individual level misperceptions, wherein
social interaction only occurs via observation of market price. In contrast, in social fi-
nance, bubbles derive from the transmission of financial ideas, feelings, and behaviors
through conversation, mass media and social media, and personal observation; and
explicitly analyzes biases in this transmission process. This approach can therefore
capture extreme amplification of misperceptions.
    Furthermore, social finance offers a natural line of attack for addressing the in-
creasingly dynamic nature of empirical anomalies in trading and returns in finance
research. For example, there are behavioral models of the momentum anomaly (Je-
gadeesh and Titman, 1993), but in recent years the further puzzle has been why mo-
mentum is sometimes especially strong, and in other periods there are predictable
"momentum crashes" wherein momentum reverses (Daniel and Moskowitz, 2016).
There have also been notable swings in the returns on value versus growth stocks. The
usual high returns on value stocks relative to growth stocks (e.g. Fama and French,
1992) were strongly reversed, for example, at the time of the millennial tech bubble,
and during the recent pandemic period. The dynamics of booms and busts in corpo-
rate financial behaviors, such as takeover and restructuring waves, is another natural


                                           18
domain for the social finance approach.
     Another major underexplored topic is how and why investor interest has shifted
toward and between different kinds of investment funds, such as mutual funds, ETFs,
and hedge funds. Given the efficiencies of fund investing relative to individual stocks,
the slowness of the historical rise over decades in fund investing is a major phenomenon
to be explained. Finally, social finance is uniquely suited for the study of the evolution
and spread of both narrow investment ideas, such as the recommendation to "buy on
the dips," and wider assemblies of investment ideas, such as the value and growth
investment philosophies.
     Finance scholars have devoted vastly greater attention to how investors learn from
market price than on how they update beliefs by talking to each other (including tex-
tual communication). Research has also focused far more on rational than on biased
social updating. Evolutionary modeling of biased transmission of private signals is a
promising new direction.
     A major topic of evolutionary biology is the study of how adaptations as func-
tional systems, such as the eye, evolve through sequential accumulation of traits. A
little-explored direction in social finance is to model how coadapted assemblies of folk
models, such as the value investing or growth investing philosophies, evolve. Study-
ing this requires paying attention to complementarities between financial ideas, which
can arise for various reasons. The ideas underlying portfolio theory are transmissible
among sophisticated investors owing to their logic and usefulness. Other financial
ideas combine effectively by appealing to the same moralistic emotions, as with the
value philosophy. Moral intuitions may also explain why macrocultural traits, such
as religion, affect financial behaviors (Guiso et al., 2006).
     Another rich direction suggested by social finance is the study of how emotions
bias the transmission of different kinds of investment narratives and behaviors (Lo,
2017; Shiller, 2017), and how this influences bubbles and swings in market sentiment.
For example, when a bubble starts to feel precarious, does fear cause investors to start
transmitting danger-related instead of opportunity-related narratives?
     Finally, financial applications have the advantage of extensive datasets on prices
and actions, along with textual and social network data from the business press and
social media. Financial markets also have a very well-defined and measurable payoff
score, trading profits, that influences the spread of investor traits. So financial mar-
kets are an attractive domain for testing and refining general cultural evolutionary
hypotheses.

                                           19
References
Aguilar, E. G. and E. Akçay (2018, September). Gene-culture co-inheritance of a be-
 havioral trait. The American Naturalist 192(3), 311­320.
Alchian, A. A. (1950, June). Uncertainty, evolution and economic theory. Journal of
  Political Economy 58(3), 211­221.
Alfarano, S. and T. Lux (2007, November). A noise trader model as a generator of
  apparent financial power laws and long memory. Macroeconomic Dynamics 11(S1),
  80­101.
Andrei, D. and J. Cujean (2017, March). Information percolation, momentum and
 reversal. Journal of Financial Economics 123(3), 617­645.
Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, J. Stroebel, and A. Wong (2018, August). Social con-
  nectedness: Measurement, determinants, and effects. Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives 32(3), 259­280.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2007, Spring). Investor sentiment in the stock market. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 21(2), 129­151.
Banerjee, A. (1992, September). A simple model of herd behavior. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 107(3), 797­817.
Barnea, A., H. Cronqvist, and S. Siegel (2010, December). Nature or nurture: What
  determines investor behavior? Journal of Financial Economics 98(3), 583­604.
Berger, J. (2011, July). Arousal increases social transmission of information. Psycho-
  logical Science 22(7), 891­893.
Berger, J. A. and C. Heath (2005, March-April). Idea habitats: How the prevalence of
  environmental cues influences the success of ideas. Cognitive Science 29(2), 195­221.
Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch (1992, October). A Theory of Fads,
  Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades. Journal of Political
  Economy 100(5), 992­1026.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2001, April). The economics of cultural transmission and the
  dynamics of preferences. Journal of Economic Theory 97(2), 298­319.
Blume, L. and D. Easley (2010, September). Heterogeneity, selection, and wealth dy-
  namics. Annual Review of Economics 2, 425­450.
Bohren, J. A. (2016, May). Informational herding with model misspecification. Journal
  of Economic Theory 163, 222­247.
Boyd, R. and P. J. Richerson (1985). Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago, IL:
  University of Chicago Press.

                                          20
Brennan, M. J., F. Li, and W. N. Torous (2005, December). Dollar cost averaging. Review
  of Finance 9(4), 509 ­ 535.
Brennan, T. J. and A. W. Lo (2011, March). The origin of behavior. Quarterly Journal of
  Finance 1(1), 55­108.
Brock, W. A. and C. H. Hommes (1997). Models of complexity in economics and
  finance. In C. Heij, H. Schumacher, B. Hanzon, and K. Praagman (Eds.), System
  Dynamics in Economic and Financial Models, Chapter 1, pp. 3­41. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Brown, J. R., Z. Ivkovi, P. A. Smith, and S. Weisbenner (2008, June). Neighbors matter:
  Causal community effects and stock market participation. Journal of Finance 63(3),
  1509­1531.
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. T. Rebelo (2016, August). Understanding booms
  and busts in housing markets. Journal of Political Economy 124(4), 1088­1147.
Chamley, C. and D. Gale (1994, September). Information revelation and strategic de-
  lay in irreversible decisions. Econometrica 62(5), 1065­1085.
Chevalier, J. and G. Ellison (1997, December). Risk taking by mutual funds as a re-
  sponse to incentives. Journal of Political Economy 105(6), 1167­1200.
Chiarella, C., R. Dieci, X.-Z. He, and K. Li (2013, May). An evolutionary CAPM under
  heterogeneous beliefs. Annals of Finance 9(2), 185­215.
Chinco, A. (2020, January). The madness of crowds and the likelihood of bubbles.
  Working paper, University of Chicago.
D'Acunto, F., A. Rossi, and M. Weber (2020, June). Crowdsourcing peer information
  to change spending behavior. Working paper, Boston College.
Daniel, K. D. and T. J. Moskowitz (2016, November). Momentum crashes. Journal of
 Financial Economics 122(2), 221­247.
DeBondt, W. F. M. and R. H. Thaler (1985). Does the stock market overreact? Journal
 of Finance 40(3), 793­808.
DeLong, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann (1990). Positive feedback
 investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation. Journal of Finance 45(2),
 375­395.
Duffie, D. and G. Manso (2007, May). Information percolation in large markets. Amer-
 ican Economic Review 97(2), 203­209.
Duflo, E. and E. Saez (2002, July). Participation and investment decisions in a retire-
 ment plan: The influence of colleagues' choices. Journal of Public Economics 85(1),
 121­148.


                                          21
el Mouden, C., J.-B. André, O. Morin, and D. Nettle (2014, February). Cultural trans-
   mission and the evolution of human behaviour: A general approach based on the
   Price equation. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 27(2), 231­241.
Escobar, L. and A. Pedraza (2019). Active trading and (poor) performance. Working
  paper, World Bank.
Evstigneev, I. V., T. Hens, and K. R. Schenk-Hoppé (2009). Evolutionary finance. In
  T. Hens and K. R. S. Hoppé (Eds.), Handbook of Financial Markets: Dynamics and
  Evolution, Chapter 9, pp. 507­566. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1992, June). The cross-section of expected stock returns.
  Journal of Finance 47(2), 427­465.
Farmer, J. D. (2002, November). Market force, ecology, and evolution. Industrial and
  Corporate Change 11(5), 895­953.
Farmer, J. D. and A. W. Lo (1999, August). Frontiers of finance: Evolution and effi-
  cient markets. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
  America 96(18), 9991­9992.
Georgarakos, D. and G. Pasini (2011, October). Trust, sociability, and stock market
 participation. Review of Finance 15(4), 693­725.
Gillespie, J. (1973, June). Polymorphism in random environments. Theoretical Popula-
  tion Biology 4(2), 193­195.
Glaeser, E. L. and J. A. Scheinkman (2003). Nonmarket interactions. In M. Dewa-
  tripont, L. P. Hansen, and S. J. Turnovsky (Eds.), Advances in Economics and Econo-
  metrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress, Volume I, pp. 339­365. Cam-
  bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2006, Spring). Does culture affect economic
 outcomes? Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2), 23­48.
Han, B., D. Hirshleifer, and J. Walden (2020a). Social Transmission Bias and Investor
 Behavior. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. Forthcoming.
Han, B., D. Hirshleifer, and J. Walden (2020b, June). Visibility Bias in the Transmission
 of Consumption Beliefs and Undersaving. Working paper, University of Toronto.
Heath, C. (1996). Do people prefer to pass along good or bad news? Valence and rel-
 evance as predictors of transmission propensity. Organizational Behavior and Human
 Decision Process 68, 79­94.
Heimer, R. (2016, November). Peer pressure: Social interaction and the disposition
 effect. Review of Financial Studies 29(11), 3177­3209.



                                           22
Heimer, R. and D. Simon (2015, October). Facebook finance: How social interaction
 propagates active investing. Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Heimer, R. Z. (2014, November). Friends do let friends buy stocks actively. Journal of
 Economic Behavior & Organization 107(B), 527­540.
Henrich, J. (2015). The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human Evolution,
 Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
 sity Press.
Hirshleifer, D. (2008, November). Psychological Bias as a Driver of Financial Regula-
  tion. European Financial Management 14(5), 856­874.
Hirshleifer, D. (2015, December). Behavioral Finance. Annual Review of Financial Eco-
  nomics 7, 133­159.
Hirshleifer, D. (2020, August). Presidential Address: Social Transmission Bias in Eco-
  nomics and Finance. Journal of Finance 75(4), 1779­1831.
Hirshleifer, D. and J. Plotkin (2020, May). Moonshots, investment booms, and selec-
  tion bias in the transmission of cultural traits. Working paper, University of Cali-
  fornia, Irvine.
Hirshleifer, D. and S. H. Teoh (2009). Thought and Behavior Contagion in Capital
  Markets. In T. Hens and K. Schenk-Hoppe (Eds.), Handbook of Financial Markets:
  Dynamics and Evolution, Handbooks in Finance, Chapter 1, pp. 1­46. Amsterdam,
  The Netherlands: North-Holland.
Hommes, C. H. and F. O. Wagener (2009). Complex evolutionary systems in behav-
 ioral finance. In T. Hens and K. R. Schenk-Hoppé (Eds.), Handbook of Financial Mar-
 kets: Dynamics and Evolution, Chapter 4, pp. 217­276. Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Hong, H. G., J. D. Kubik, and J. C. Stein (2004, February). Social interaction and stock
 market participation. Journal of Finance 59(1), 137­163.
Jackson, M. O. (2009, June). Networks and economic behavior. Annual Review of
  Economics 1, 489­511.
Jegadeesh, N. (1990, July). Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns. Jour-
  nal of Finance 45(3), 881­898.
Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman (1993). Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
  Implications for stock market efficiency. Journal of Finance 48(1), 65­91.
Kaustia, M. and S. Knüpfer (2012, May). Peer performance and stock market entry.
  Journal of Financial Economics 104(2), 321­338.
Kelly, M. and C. O. O'Grada (2000). Market contagion: Evidence from the panics of
  1854 and 1857. American Economic Review 90(5), 1110­1124.

                                          23
Kermack, W. O. and A. G. McKendrick (1927, August). A contribution to the mathe-
  matical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical
  & Engineering Sciences 115, 700­721.
Kumar, A. (2009, April). Who gambles in the stock market? Journal of Finance 64(4),
  1889­1933.
Laibson, D. (1997, May). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 112(2), 443­477.
Lane, J. N., S. S. Lim, and B. Uzzi (2020, April). Biased information transmission
  in investor social networks: Evidence from professional traders. Working paper,
  Harvard University.
LeBaron, B. (2006). Agent-based computational finance. In L. Tesfatsion and K. L.
  Judd (Eds.), Handbook of Computational Economics, Volume 2, Chapter 24, pp. 1187­
  1233. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier.
Lee, C., A. Shleifer, and R. Thaler (1991). Investor sentiment and the closed-end fund
  puzzle. Journal of Finance 46, 75­109.
Lee, I. H. (1998, October). Market crashes and informational avalanches. Review of
  Economic Studies 65(4), 741­759.
Lo, A. W. (2017). Adaptive Markets: Financial Evolution at the Speed of Thought. Princeton,
  NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lux, T. (1997, November).      Time variation of second moments from a noise
  trader/infection model. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 22(1), 1­38.
Lux, T. and S. Alfarano (2016, July). Financial power laws: Empirical evidence, mod-
  els, and mechanisms. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 88, 3­18.
Mace, R. and C. J. Holden (2005, March). A phylogenetic approach to cultural evolu-
 tion. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 20(3), 116­121.
Massa, M. and A. Simonov (2011, October). Is college a focal point of investor life?
 Review of Finance 15(4), 757­797.
Mesoudi, A., A. Whiten, and K. N. Laland (2006, November). Towards a unified sci-
 ence of cultural evolution. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29(4), 329­347.
Özsöylev, H. N. and J. Walden (2011, November). Asset pricing in large information
 networks. Journal of Economic Theory 146(6), 2252­2280.
Price, G. R. (1970, August). Selection and covariance. Nature 227, 520­521.
Rantala, V. (2019, October). How do investment ideas spread through social interac-
  tion? Evidence from a Ponzi scheme. Journal of Finance 74(5), 2349­2389.

                                            24
Richerson, P. J. and R. Boyd (1978, April). A dual inheritance model of the human
  evolutionary process I: Basic postulates and a simple model. Journal of Social and
  Biological Structures 1(2), 127­154.
Romano, R. (2014). For diversity in the international regulation of financial institu-
  tions: Critiquing and recalibrating the Basel architecture. Yale Journal on Regula-
  tion 31(1), 1­76.
Romano, R. and S. Levin (2020, July). Sunsetting as an adaptive strategy. Working
  paper, Yale University.
Shennan, S. (2011, April). Descent with modification and the archaeological record.
  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 366(1567), 1070­
  1079.
Shiller, R. J. (2000). Irrational Exuberance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Shiller, R. J. (2017, April). Narrative economics. American Economic Review 107(4),
  967­1004.
Shive, S. (2010, February). An epidemic model of investor behavior. Journal of Financial
  and Quantitative Analysis 45(1), 169­198.
Slanina, F. (2014). Essentials of Econophysics Modelling. Oxford University Press.
Walden, J. (2019, October). Trading, profits, and volatility in a dynamic information
 network model. Review of Economic Studies 86(5), 2248­2283.




                                           25
