                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                  INVESTOR TAX CREDITS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
                           EVIDENCE FROM U.S. STATES

                                        Matthew R. Denes
                                        Sabrina T. Howell
                                        Filippo Mezzanotti
                                           Xinxin Wang
                                             Ting Xu

                                       Working Paper 27751
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27751

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020

We thank Jim Albertus, Tania Babina, Laurent Bach (discussant), Greg Brown, Jesse Davis,
Ryan Decker, Mike Ewens (discussant), Joan Farre-Mensa, Paolo Fulghieri, Andra Ghent, Juanita
Gonzales-Uribe (discussant), Will Gornall, Apoorv Gupta, Arpit Gupta, Thomas Hellmann, Yael
Hochberg, Yunzhi Hu, Jessica Jeffers (discussant), Simone Lenzu, Josh Lerner, Song Ma, David
Matsa, Arnobio Morelix, Holger Mueller, Ramana Nanda, Daniel Paravisini (discussant), Andrea
Passalacqua, David Robinson, Pian Shu, Morten Sorenson, Denis Sosyura, Chester Spatt, Luke
Stein (discussant), Kairong Xiao, Linghang Zeng, Eric Zwick, and seminar participants at the 3rd
Junior Entrepreneurial Finance and Innovation Workshop, 8th HEC Paris Workshop on
Entrepreneurship, ASU Sonoran Winter Finance Conference, Carnegie Mellon University, Duke-
UNC Innovation and Entrepreneurship Research Symposium, Finance in the Cloud II, Jackson
Hole Finance Group Conference, Kenan Institute Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Conference,
MFA, NYU Stern Corporate Governance Seminar, Southern California PE Conference, UCLA,
UVA Darden, UNC Entrepreneurship Working Group, and WFA for helpful comments. We
thank Will Gornall for data assistance, and Abhishek Bhardwaj, Grant Goehring, Michael
Gropper, Sunwoo Hwang, Nick McMonigle, Danye Wang, and Jun Wong for excellent research
assistance. We also thank Jeff Cornwall, Gwen Edwards, Jeff Sohl, Krista Tuomi and other state
officials for providing helpful details about the angel market and angel investor tax credits.
Howell's research on this project was funded by the Kauffman Foundation and the Kenan
Institute Frontiers of Entrepreneurship grant program. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27751.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matthew R. Denes, Sabrina T. Howell, Filippo Mezzanotti, Xinxin Wang, and Ting
Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Investor Tax Credits and Entrepreneurship: Evidence from U.S. States
Matthew R. Denes, Sabrina T. Howell, Filippo Mezzanotti, Xinxin Wang, and Ting Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 27751
August 2020
JEL No. G0,G14,G28,H0,H25,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

Angel investor tax credits are used globally to spur high-growth entrepreneurship. Exploiting the
staggered implementation of these tax credits in 31 U.S. states, we find that while they increase
angel investment, they have no significant effect on entrepreneurial activity. Tax credits induce
entry by inexperienced, local investors and are often used by insiders. A survey of 1,411 angel
investors suggests that a "home run" investing approach alongside coordination and information
frictions explain low take-up among experienced investors. The results contrast with evidence
that direct subsidies to firms have large positive effects, raising concerns about using investor
subsidies to promote entrepreneurship.

Matthew R. Denes                                Xinxin Wang
Carnegie Mellon University                      University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill
Tepper School of Business                       4115 McColl Building
5000 Forbes Avenue                              Chapel Hill, NC 27599
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                            xinxin.wang@anderson.ucla.edu
denesm@andrew.cmu.edu
                                                Ting Xu
Sabrina T. Howell                               University of Virginia
NYU Stern School of Business                    100 Darden Blvd
KMC 9-93                                        Charlottesville, VA 22903
44 West 4th Street                              xut@darden.virginia.edu
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
showell@stern.nyu.edu

Filippo Mezzanotti
Kellogg School of Management
4389 Global Hub
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60201
filippo.mezzanotti@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1. Introduction

Fostering high-growth entrepreneurship is crucial for long-term economic success. As a
result, governments around the world deploy tools such as grants, loan guarantees, prize
competitions, and tax subsidies. This paper studies a popular policy that has been adopted
by more than 13 countries around the world and by the majority of U.S. states: angel investor
tax credits.1 These programs offer personal income tax credits equal to a certain percentage
of the investment, regardless of the investment outcome. While this tax policy has attracted
much attention and debate, we know little about its effects on investors and startups.2
         Tax subsidies targeting angel investors have several attractive features. First, there is
no need for the government to "pick winners," which requires policymakers to be informed
about firm quality and could lead to regulatory capture (Lerner (2009)). Tax credits retain
market incentives, leaving investors with skin in the game. Second, the administrative
burden of tax subsidies is relatively low for the government. Third, angel investor tax credits
are a more precise tool than lowering capital gains taxes broadly (Poterba (1989)). However,
stimulating local high-growth entrepreneurship requires that investors with the experience
and skill to allocate capital to high-quality startups increase their investment activity in
response to the policy. That is, while tax credit programs offer attractive flexibility, there is
no guarantee that they will support the startups that policymakers target.
         To assess the effect of angel investor tax credits, we exploit their staggered
introductions and terminations from 1988 to 2018 across 31 states in the U.S. Importantly
for our empirical analysis, we find that state-level economic, political, fiscal, and
entrepreneurial factors do not predict the implementation of angel investor tax credits, which
suggests that the timing of a program appears to be unrelated to relevant local economic
conditions. Based on available data for programs in our sample, subsidized investors
received $8.1 billion in tax credits, which is large relative to state funding for
entrepreneurship and local angel investment in states with these programs. The programs



1
  Angels are wealthy individuals who invest in early-stage startups in exchange for equity or convertible debt.
Countries with angel tax credits include Canada, England, France, Germany, Ireland, Portugal, Singapore,
Spain, Sweden, China, Japan, Brazil, Australia, and 31 states in the U.S.
2
  See, for example, "Should Angel Investors Get Tax Credits to Invest in Small Businesses?," Wall Street
Journal, 3/9/2012; "The Problem with Tax Credits for Angel Investors," Bloomberg, 8/20/2010; "Angel
Investment Tax Credit Pricey but Has Defenders," Minnesota Star Tribune, 10/31/2015.
                                                      1
also have a high take-up rate of 88% on average. Given an average tax credit percentage of
34%, these tax credits support up to $23.8 billion of angel investment over our sample period.
We evaluate the impact of angel tax credit programs using data on angel activity from
Crunchbase, VentureXpert, VentureSource, Form D filings, and AngelList. For a subset of
states, we also received data from state governments on the identity of firms and investors
benefiting from these tax credit programs.
       In our baseline analysis, we use a difference-in-differences framework at the state-
year level to identify the effect of tax credits. We find that angel tax credits increase the
number of angel investments by approximately 18%. This effect is amplified when programs
impose fewer restrictions and when the supply of alternative startup capital is more limited.
Relatedly, angel tax credits increase the number of individual angel investors by about 31%.
       Furthermore, we document that these new investments primarily flow to low-growth
potential firms, measured by pre-investment employment, employment growth, and founder
experience. Average ex-ante growth characteristics of angel-backed firms also deteriorate
after the implementation of angel tax credits, which may be expected if relaxing financial
constraints reduces the quality of firms financed at the margin (Evans and Jovanovic (1989)),
and does not imply that the investments are not privately or socially valuable. However, the
large declines raise concerns about the ability of angel tax credits to reach high-growth
startups and have a significant impact on the local economy.
       We test whether angel tax credits achieve the objectives stated in legislation, which
typically include increasing employment, startup entry, and innovation. We find that the
policies have no significant effect on a plethora of entrepreneurial activity metrics, including
young-firm employment, job creation, startup entry, successful exits, and patenting. Across
many specifications, subsamples, and measures, we consistently find that the angel tax
credits have an economically small and statistically insignificant effect on local
entrepreneurship. At the firm level, we similarly find no effect when we compare firms
backed by subsidized investors to firms certified for investors to receive a tax credit but
whose investors never received a tax credit, suggesting that the aggregate results do not
reflect small program scale.
       These economically small null effects are informative. Abadie (2020) shows that
insignificant results are more informative than significant results when there is a prior on


                                               2
finding a significant effect and sufficient power. Our analysis fits this framework well. First,
since many studies of other innovation tax credits find large positive effects, a positive effect
is a natural prior. 3 Indeed, the programs' popularity suggests that policymakers expect
positive effects. Second, we follow Burlig, Preonas, and Woerman (2020) and calculate the
power of our analysis, i.e., the probability of rejecting the null across all outcomes when the
policy impacted at least one of the outcomes. We find sufficiently high power. Therefore,
the null results offer useful new information about angel tax credits.4 As DellaVigna and
Linos (2020) discuss, reporting null results reduces publication bias in policy evaluation
towards effective and significant policies, at the expense of evaluating ineffective ones.
         To understand why angel tax credits increase investment yet have no effect on real
activity, we study how they change investor behavior. A commonly cited goal of angel tax
credit programs is to increase external investment by professional investors who would
otherwise not invest in local firms. Professional investors may have access to high-quality
deals and the ability to screen deals more effectively than less experienced investors. Also,
non-professional investors may be more likely to invest for non-pecuniary reasons (Huang
et al. (2017)) or to exploit tax credits to minimize their tax burdens. The ability of these
programs to stimulate high-growth entrepreneurship could therefore depend on whether they
attract professional, experienced angel investors.
         We find that the increase in angel activity appears to be largely explained by more
investment among non-professional investors. First, using data from the state tax credit
programs, we examine characteristics of investors who have received the tax credits. We
find that they are primarily younger, more local, and less experienced than the average angel
investor. Second, we examine how angel tax credits affect the composition of investors.
Following the introduction of these programs, we find that there is a surge of in-state, new,
and inexperienced investors, while there is little entry of professional, arms-length angels.
This suggests that non-professional investors respond to these tax incentives, while
professional investors do not. Since non-professional investors have less access to high-


3
  This literature includes Hall (1993), Mamuneas and Nadiri (1996), Hall and Van Reenen (2000), Bloom,
Griffith, and Van Reenen (2002), Klassen et al. (2004), Wilson (2009), Clausen (2009), Agrawal, Rosell, and
Simcoe (2014), Dechezlepretre et al. (2016), and Balsmeier, Kurakina, and Fleming (2018).
4
  While there are likely some externalities of the programs both on government spending and on unsubsidized
firms, these are beyond the scope of this paper. However, the null effects, particularly on measures of job and
firm churning, suggest that such externalities are not first order for our analysis.
                                                      3
quality deals and lower ability to screen deals, the insignificant aggregate effect is consistent
with investments in projects that are on average zero NPV without the tax subsidy.
       Professional investors might have lower take-up if they use a different investment
approach than non-professional investors. We consider two investment frameworks. The
first relies on financial metrics such as IRR and NPV to evaluate deals. This framework is
appropriate when cash flows can be forecast with reasonable accuracy, and it should lead
investors to be sensitive to tax credit availability. However, professional angel investors
considering potentially high-growth and very early-stage startups face expected returns that
are extremely skewed and uncertain in the Knightian sense. Investors in this type of startup
may find financial metrics less useful and instead focus on qualitative measures, such as the
quality of the management and business model, which are perceived to be correlated with
the right tail of outcomes. Angel tax credits may not change the selection of startups among
investors employing this "Home Run" framework. Nevertheless, even if tax credits do not
change angels' investment behavior ex ante, they might still be used ex post if their benefits
exceed coordination, administrative, and information costs.
       To assess how an investor's approach relates to the importance and use of angel tax
credits, we conduct a survey of angel investors. Among 1,411 respondents, about 11% are
from the state tax credit recipient data and the remainder are AngelList investors. We
examine the importance of nine factors, one of which is angel tax credits. We find that 51%
of respondents rate tax credits as not at all important (the lowest of five options), which
increases to 71% among the most experienced investors. This contrasts with all other factors.
For example, 97% of investors rate the management team as very or extremely important.
When prompted to explain why credits are unimportant, 57% report that it is because they
invest based on whether the startup has the potential to be a home run. In the words of one
respondent, "I'm more focused on the big win than offsetting a loss." Among investors who
never use angel tax credits, 15% selected coordination or administrative burdens as the
reason, which increases among experienced investors. The survey results contribute to
existing work on how early-stage investors make decisions (Bernstein, Korteweg, and Laws
(2017), Ewens and Townsend (2019), and Gornall and Strebulaev (2019)).
       An additional channel that can explain why tax credits increase angel investment yet
have no significant real effects is relabeling. Investors may relabel transactions that would


                                               4
have happened regardless of the program as an angel investment in order to obtain the tax
credit.5 While this is relevant for all investors, it is particularly applicable to investors who
are also firm insiders. They face negligible coordination frictions when investing in their
own firms and may invest for non-financial reasons, particularly because tax credit programs
do not restrict how firms use subsidized capital. We find that 35% of beneficiary companies
have at least one investor who is also a company executive or a family member of an
executive, which is large relative to the 8% of angel-backed firms on AngelList with at least
one insider investor. The substantial share of insiders using angel tax credits indicates that
relabeling may partially explain the contrasting findings.
         Taken together, our results suggest that U.S. state angel tax credits fail to reach the
investor-startup pairs that would generate the impact intended by policymakers. Our findings
point to a tradeoff between program flexibility and effective targeting. Angel tax credits do
not appear to reach investors who have a comparative advantage in allocating capital to
startups with high-growth potential. Sophisticated angels do not respond to intensive margin
incentives and face coordination and information frictions to using tax credits. Instead, angel
tax credits attract individuals with lower barriers to accessing the programs, for example
because they are local or connected to firms. This is consistent with evidence from public
economics that informational and transaction costs to accessing government programs can
deter precisely the individuals that the programs wish to target (Chetty and Finkelstein
(2020), Bhargava and Manoli (2015), Deshpande and Li (2019), and Zwick (2020)).
         This paper contributes to the growing literature on early-stage financing, especially
angel investment (e.g., Kerr, Lerner and Schoar (2011), Hellman and Thiele (2015), and
Lerner et al. (2018)). To our knowledge, our survey offers the first large-scale evidence of
how angel investors make decisions. In a related paper, Lindsey and Stein (2020) find that
the Dodd-Frank Act reduced angel investment, leading to a decline in firm entry and a
contraction in employment. 6 Also related is González-Uribe and Paravisini (2019), who




5
  Such relabeling would represent moral hazard due to information asymmetry between the investor and the
government (Holmstrom (1979)).
6
  In Lindsey and Stein (2020), marginal investors are wealth constrained, but are experienced before losing
accreditation status. In our context, marginal investors tend to be non-professional. This explains why a positive
angel capital shock generates a null effect in our paper but a positive effect in Lindsey and Stein (2020).
                                                        5
study the combined effects of investor and capital gains tax credits on firm decisions in the
U.K. They document a low take-up rate but large responses among beneficiary firms.7
         More broadly, our paper is related to work on sources of financing for early-stage
firms (Robb and Robinson (2012), Adelino, Ma, and Robinson (2017), Hochberg, Serrano,
and Ziedonis (2018), Davis, Morse, and Wang (2019), Xu (2019), Babina, Bernstein, and
Mezzanotti (2020), and Ma (2020)). Relative to this literature, our paper highlights the
importance of angel investor heterogeneity. Differences between professional, sophisticated
angels and inexperienced or insider investors create opportunities for individuals to use tax
credits for reasons besides the intended purpose of additional investment in high-growth
startups. While we are among the first to analyze this issue systematically, it is thought to be
a challenge facing entrepreneurship policy (Acs, Astebro, Audretch, and Robinson (2016)
and Lerner (2020)).
         Finally, we contribute to the literature on government investment incentives, which
overwhelmingly finds positive effects. For example, Zwick and Mahon (2017) show that tax
incentives increase investment, particularly for small firms, and Curtis and Decker (2018)
show that lower corporate taxes spur new business formation. R&D grant programs have a
positive effect on high-tech startups (Lach (2002), Bronzini and Iachini (2014), and Howell
(2017)). Accelerators and new venture competitions ­ both of which often benefit from
public funds ­ are also useful for startups (Cohen et al. (2019), Fehder and Hochberg (2019),
González-Uribe and Leatherbee (2017), Howell (2019), and McKenzie (2017)). The above
policies are diverse, yet they have a key feature that distinguishes them from angel investor
tax credits: Rather than targeting investors or financial intermediaries, they target firms
performing real investment directly.8 Despite being attractive to policymakers, the flexibility
of tax incentives for investors could also limit its impact.


2. Angel Investor Tax Credits



7
   Unlike the U.S. programs, the U.K. policy specifically targeted new, external investors and included
reductions in capital gains taxes. Additionally, the policy targeted a broader population of firms.
8
  In contrast, the literature on government-backed venture capital, where the investor rather than the firm is
subsidized, is more mixed (Brander, Egan, and Hellmann (2010), Lerner (2009), Brander, Du, and Hellmann
(2015), and Denes (2019)).
                                                      6
This section describes angel investor tax credit programs (Section 2.1) and assesses whether
local economic or political conditions predict their implementation (Section 2.2).

2.1 Background on U.S. State Angel Investor Tax Credit Programs
Over the last three decades, 31 states in the U.S. have introduced and passed legislation to
provide accredited angel investors with tax credits.9 Figure 1 shows the annual allocated
expenditure on angel tax credits from 1989 to 2019, which totals $8.1 billion.10 Take-up is
high, at 88% of allocated funding by state legislatures. Based on an average tax credit
percentage of 34%, these tax credits support up to $23.8 billion in angel investment.
Furthermore, while the programs are typically small relative to overall state budgets, they
often represent a significant portion of funding allocated to supporting entrepreneurship or
small businesses.11
         Figure 2 (Panel A) provides a map of states with angel tax credit programs. The blue
shading indicates the tax credit percentage, with darker shades representing larger tax credits.
The figure highlights that angel tax credits are prevalent across the U.S. The extent of these
programs is particularly notable since they do not occur in the seven states with no income
tax, which are shaded in grey. Panel B of Figure 2 shows the introduction and termination
of these programs. The earliest was Maine's Seed Capital Tax Credit Program, introduced
in 1988. A steady progression of states launched programs during the following three
decades. Colorado, Maryland, Minnesota, North Dakota, and Ohio passed more than one
version of an angel tax credit. Though the pace of adoption increased recently, the geography
is dispersed, and program duration varies from just one year to three decades.
         Tax credits are available to accredited investors and their pass-through entities.12
They require both the firm and the investor to be certified by the state ex-ante as eligible for
the credit, and then the investor may apply after the deal is complete. This requires



9
  In addition to these 31 states, Massachusetts and Delaware have also introduced these programs, but both
states failed to launch them or attract qualified firms as of the time of this paper.
10
   New York and Oklahoma do not provide data on funds received by subsidized investors.
11
   For example, funding for angel tax credit programs in Ohio, Minnesota, and Wisconsin are respectively 19%,
58%, and 86% of annual state funding for high-tech jobs or small businesses.
12
   We refer to accredited angel investors as angels throughout the paper. An accredited investor is defined as a
person who earned income of more than $200,000 ($300,000 with a spouse) or has a net worth over $1 million.
Since July 2010, net worth excludes home equity (Lindsey and Stein (2020)). The tax implications might differ
for accredited investors compared to pass-through entities. Angel investor tax credits are more likely provided
to individuals because most programs include investment caps.
                                                       7
substantial coordination between the firm and the investor over, typically, a months-long
period. State-level angel tax credits reduce the state income tax of an investor. For example,
suppose that an investor earns $250,000 in a particular year and invests $20,000 in a local
startup. If the state tax rate is 5% on all income, then the investor pays annual state taxes of
$12,500. Assuming that the state introduced an angel tax credit of 35%, the investor can
reduce her state taxes by $7,000, which is a decline of 56% relative to her annual state
taxes.13 Unlike capital gains tax credits that require positive returns, angel tax credits are not
contingent on the startup's outcome. Therefore, angel tax credits are a fixed subsidy to
investors after making an investment.
        Policymakers state that they implement angel tax credits to increase local economic
activity, particularly employment of high-skill workers. For example, Wisconsin notes that
"the Qualified New Business Venture (QNBV) Program helps companies create high-paying,
high-skill jobs throughout Wisconsin." The Louisiana program goals are: "To encourage
third parties to invest in early stage wealth-creating businesses in the state; to expand the
economy of the state by enlarging its base of wealth-creating businesses; and to enlarge the
number of quality jobs available." The stated goal of Maine's angel tax credit program is "to
spur venture capital investment in Maine startups and ultimately create more jobs in the
state."14 Since most programs cite spurring new investment and job creation as their goals,
the analysis in subsequent sections focuses on financing outcomes and employment.
        Table 1 provides summary statistics on the angel tax credit programs. Tax credit
percentage is the share of an investment that can be deducted from an investor's tax liability.
The mean (median) tax credit percentage is 34% (33%). Programs often have eligibility
criteria for both beneficiary companies and investors. They frequently do not allow investors
to request cash in lieu of the credit if they do not have local state income tax liability (72%)
or to transfer the credit (72%). Other restrictions include firm age caps (31% of programs),
employment caps (39%), revenue caps (47%), assets caps (22%), and minimum investment
holding periods (50%). Most programs target the high-tech sector, which guides our
empirical design. While many programs do not allow participation by owners and their


13
  The tax credit available to a particular investor will depend on her state tax liability.
14
  See Wisconsin Economic Development Corporation 2013 Qualified New Business Venture Program Report;
Louisiana legislation (http://www.legis.la.gov/Legis/Law.aspx?d=321880 ); "Startup investor camp out for
Maine tax credit" (https://www.pressherald.com/2019/01/02/startup-investors-camp-out-for-maine-tax-credit).
                                                    8
families (61%), most states permit full-time employees, executives, and officers to receive
tax credits. Tax credits reduce income tax liability for the current year, but most programs
have a carry-forward provision (89%). Appendix Table A1 provides comprehensive details
for all programs.


2.2 Predictors of Angel Tax Credit Program Implementation
Angel tax credit programs have often been touted as "relatively simple and cost-effective for
states" (Kousky and Tuomi (2015)) and proponents argue that they promote job creation,
innovation, and economic growth.15 In light of this, states may introduce angel tax credit
programs in times of local economic stagnation, which could pose a threat to our
identification strategy. We assess whether economic, political, fiscal, and entrepreneurial
factors explain the introduction of angel tax credit programs using a predictive regression.
The outcome, ATC, is an indicator variable equaling one if a state introduces an angel tax
credit program in a given year. We include year fixed effects and omit the years after a
program starts. Appendix A defines the state-level variables included in each specification.
         Table 2 presents the results. In column 1, we find that lagged state economic, political,
and fiscal measures do not significantly predict the introduction of angel tax credit programs,
except for the state income tax indicator. Column 3 incorporates entrepreneurship variables,
which include establishment entry and exit rates, net job creation rate, and venture capital
volume. We find that these variables do not have significant predictive power. When we
include state fixed effects (even columns), there is an economically small relation between
the maximum state personal income tax rate and ATC. We obtain similar estimates when we
use Tax credit percentage as an outcome (columns 5 to 8). Overall, state economic, political,
fiscal, and entrepreneurial conditions do not seem to drive the passage of angel tax credit
programs.
         The lack of predictability is consistent with the presence of considerable frictions in
the passage and implementation of these programs. Several states passed legislation for
angel tax credits after years of failed initiatives and amid persistent lobbying efforts.16 Some

15
   Tuomi and Boxer (2015) conduct case studies of two angel tax credit programs in the U.S. (Maryland and
Wisconsin) and find suggestive evidence that these programs generate benefits that outweigh the costs.
16
   Local businesses and trade associations advocated for angel investor tax credits in Kentucky for many years,
which were eventually adopted in 2014 (Campbell (2014)). In New Jersey, Governor Chris Christie signed
legislation for angel investor tax credits in 2013, despite vetoing the bill two years earlier (Linhorst (2013)).
                                                       9
states discussed introducing these programs, but never proposed a law (e.g., Idaho and
Montana). Other state legislatures proposed bills, but did not pass them (e.g., Mississippi
and Pennsylvania). Even if a state legislature passed a program, several states failed to
implement the program due to lack of funding or resistance after its passage (e.g., Delaware,
Massachusetts, Michigan, and Missouri).17


3. Data
This section explains the data we use to assess state-level outcomes (Section 3.1) and firm-
level outcomes (Section 3.2). Last, it describes the angel investor survey that we conduct
(Section 3.3).

3.1 Angel Deals, Investors, and State-level Real Outcomes
Angel investments are difficult to observe in the U.S. as there is no comprehensive data set
on angel investments, and much of what is known about the size of the angel market relies
on estimates from surveys (Shane (2009)). To overcome this challenge, we combine data
from Crunchbase, Thomson Reuters VentureXpert, and Dow Jones VentureSource, which
we collectively refer to as "CVV," and Form D filings available through the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC).
         Crunchbase tracks startup financings using crowdsourcing and news aggregation.
VentureXpert and VentureSource are commercial databases for investments in startups and
mainly capture firms that eventually received venture capital financing. We identify angel
investments from these two databases based on round type and investor type.18 We also
collect angel investment data from Form D filings. Form D is a notice of an exempt offering
of securities under Regulation D and allows startups to raise capital from accredited investors
without registering their securities (Ewens and Farre-Mensa (2019)). 19 To identify angel




17
   For example, the Missouri House of Representatives passed legislation in 2014, but it did not advance
because of a controversial amendment barring companies that do stem cell research (Moxley (2014)).
18
   In Crunchbase, we include round types "pre-seed," "seed," "convertible note," "angel," or "equity
crowdfunding," and investor types "angel," "micro," "accelerator," or "incubator." In VentureXpert, we keep
rounds when the investment firm or fund type is identified as "individual," "angel," or "angel group." In
VentureSource, we incorporate round types identified as "seed," "pre-seed," "crowd," "angel," or "accelerator."
19
   Offerings under Regulation D preempt state securities law. Before March 2008, Form D filings were paper
based. We use a FOIA request to obtain non-electronic Form D records from 1992 to 2008.
                                                     10
rounds, we drop all financial issuers and focus on the first Form D filing that is not a VC
round.20
         We combine angel investments from the above data sources and disambiguate the
data to eliminate duplicate coverage of the same investments in multiple sources. 21 This
process generates 123,399 angel investments from 1985 to 2017. While not all angel
investments trigger a Form D filing or appear in the databases described above, our data set
represents one of the most comprehensive sources of angel deals available.
         We match these angel investments to the National Establishment Time-Series (NETS)
database, based on firm name, address, and founding year. This allows us to observe the
characteristics of 88,200 angel-backed firms over time. We only use actual, non-imputed
employment and employment growth in the year before angel investment to address
concerns about estimated data (Crane and Decker (2020)).22 For firms in the CVV sample,
we also observe entrepreneurs' prior founder experience at the time of investment, which we
use as another measure of startup growth potential (Hsu (2007) and Lafontaine and Shaw
(2016)).23
         We collect data from AngelList to study the effect of angel tax credits on investor
composition. While AngelList is largely self-reported, it is the most comprehensive data
available about the identities and locations of investors for angel investments. The drawback
of AngelList is that the coverage increases in more recent years.
         Lastly, we employ data on state-level real outcomes from the U.S. Census Bureau's
Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS), Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI), and County
Business Patterns (CBP). Our main measures are job creation and destruction by young firms
and establishment entry and exit rates. We also examine other dimensions of state-level
activity, such as innovation (based on patent applications from USPTO), entry of high-


20
   Specifically, we drop all financial issuers and pooled investment funds. Further, we match all first rounds in
Form D with VC rounds in CVV based on firm name, location, and round date within three months of each
other. We discard rounds that are identified as VC rounds.
21
   We use the following order of VentureXpert, VentureSource, Crunchbase, and Form D filings. We find
similar results using different orderings to disambiguate our data.
22
   We do not use sales from NETS because 90% of the sales data are imputed.
23
   The NETS-matched sample period is 1993 to 2016. We start the sample in 1993 because Form D data is
incomplete in 1992. Additionally, we require up to two years of pre-investment data from NETS to measure
ex-ante growth characteristics. Given that NETS covers 1990 to 2014, our sample ends in 2016. The CVV
sample period is 1985 to 2016. We start this subsample in 1985 because the coverage of CVV is relatively poor
before 1985 and the first angel tax credit program began in 1988.
                                                       11
growth firms (based on Startup Cartography data from Fazio, Guzman, and Stern (2019)),
and number of successful startup exits (based on CVV data). Since tax credit programs
primarily target the high-tech sector (information technology, biotech, and renewable
energies), our analyses generally focus on angel investments in these sectors. The sample
for the baseline specification is collapsed to a state-year panel of angel investment volume
and average deal characteristics in the high-tech sector. Additional details on the data,
variables, and sample periods for this analysis are in Section 4.1.
           Table 3 contains summary statistics for the state-year level data. Appendix A
provides detailed definitions of all variables. In our main sample from 1993 to 2016, about
25% of state-years have an active angel tax credit program. The average angel-backed firm
has eight employees and an employment growth rate of 39% in the year before investment.
On average, 5% of the founders on a founding-team are serial entrepreneurs.


3.2 Applicant Company and Investor Data
We obtain data on startups receiving subsidized investment ("beneficiary companies") for
12 states from public records or privately from state officials. Among these, we also received
identities of tax credit recipient investors for seven states. For ten states, we also observe
companies that were certified to receive subsidized investment, but for which no investor
was awarded a tax credit. We refer to these firms as "failed applicants." The sample period
for these data is 2005 to 2018. The data are complete for a given program-year, though we
do not observe all years for all programs. Appendix Table A2, Panel A, shows the number
of unique companies by state. In total, there are 1,823 beneficiary companies and 1,404
failed applicants. Using name and location, we match 1,227 firms to financing data and 808
startups to NETS.


3.3 Angel Investor Survey
Our final data source is a survey of angel investors. We develop the sample from two sources
described above: the state-provided list of angel tax credit recipients and all investors on
AngelList as of early 2020 who had made at least one investment.24 We sent each investor
an email containing a personalized survey link. This email is in Appendix D, and the


24
     The authors are grateful to Will Gornall for his willingness to share these AngelList data.
                                                         12
complete survey is in Appendix E.25 In total, we emailed just over 12,000 individuals and
obtained 1,411 responses, out of which 1,384 are complete, representing a response rate of
11.6%, which is in line with other recent investor surveys.26 Among respondents, about 11%
are from the state tax credit recipient data and the remainder are from AngelList. Details on
responsiveness are in Appendix Table A7, Panel A.
         While the survey allows us to directly test for mechanisms, a downside of survey
evidence is that it is subject to sample selection. In Appendix Table A7, Panel C, we find no
evidence of selection on key variables related to tax credits, including residing in a state with
a tax credit program or living in the hub states of California and Massachusetts. However,
investors with more deals are more likely to respond and investors who are company insiders
are less likely to respond. In addition, tax credit recipients are less likely to respond. While
these relationships are not large in magnitude, they point towards respondents being
somewhat more experienced investors.


4. Effects of Angel Investment Tax Credits

This section first explains the estimation approach for evaluating state-level effects of angel
tax credits (Section 4.1), and then discusses the results from this analysis on angel investment
(Sections 4.2 and 4.3). Effects on real outcomes are presented in Section 4.4. Last, we
estimate the firm-level effect using data from state program offices in Section 4.5.


4.1. Identification Strategy
Our empirical approach is a difference-in-differences design, exploiting the staggered
introduction and expiration of 36 angel tax credit programs in 31 states from 1988 to 2018.
Specifically, we estimate the following specification:
                            =  +  +    +    ,-1 +  ,                                                        (1)

25
   We obtained approval from the NYU IRB for this survey.
26
   Twenty-seven responses are either incomplete or cannot be matched back to our investor data due to response
from a different email address. Our response rate is in line with the previous literature conducting other large-
scale surveys. Gompers et al. (2020) survey VC investors and obtain a response rate of 8.3%, Bernstein, Lerner
and Mezzanotti (2019) obtain a response rate of 10.3% from PE investors, Graham and Harvey (2001) obtain
a response rate of 8.9% from CFOs, and Da Rin and Phalippou (2014) obtain a response rate of 13.8% from
private equity LPs. Our absolute number of responses is also high relative to other surveys of private equity
investors. For example, Gompers, Kaplan and Mukharlyamov (2016) survey 79 buyout investors and Gompers
et al. (2020) survey 885 VC investors.
                                                       13
where ATCst is an indicator equaling one if state s has an angel tax credit program in year t.
The dependent variable is angel investments or a real outcome. Xs,t-1 is a vector of state-year
controls. 27 We find similar results without including these controls. The specification
includes state (  ) and time (  ) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state
(Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004)). The coefficient of interest is  , which captures
the marginal effect of angel tax credits on angel investments and real outcomes.
         We extend our baseline analysis along two dimensions. First, we estimate the
following dynamic difference-in-differences specification:
                                                            3
          =  +  +   ,-4 +                                         ,+ +
                                                            =-3

                   ,+4 +    ,-1 +  ,                                                                       (2)
where ATCs, t+n are indicator variables for each year in a three-year window around the tax
credit introduction. Additionally, we define ATCs, t-4 as an indicator variable equaling four
or more years before an angel tax credit program starts, and similarly construct ATCs, t+4.
The year before the start of an angel tax credit program is normalized to zero.28 Second, for
robustness, we exploit variation in the size of tax credits across programs by replacing ATCst
in equation (1) with a continuous treatment variable, Tax credit percentagest, which equals
the maximum tax credit percentage available in a state-year with an angel tax credit program,
and zero otherwise.


4.2. Effect of Angel Tax Credits on Angel Investments
We begin by studying the effect of angel tax credit programs on the number of angel
investments. Table 4, Panel A, reports the difference-in-differences estimates using equation
(1). In column 1, we show that the programs increase angel investments by 18.5%.29 In
column 2, we find that a 10-percentage-point rise in the tax credit increases the number of
angel investments by 5.5%. These estimates indicate that angel tax credits lead to an
economically significant in angel activity.


27
   In particular, we include the following controls: lagged Gross State Product (GSP) growth, natural log of
income per capital, natural log of population, an indicator for whether a state has personal income tax, and the
maximum state personal income tax rate.
28
   Section 4.4 discusses additional identification tests, including a triple difference (DDD) approach that
compares the high- and low-tech sectors.
29
   When the outcome is a natural logarithm, we report the exponentiated coefficient minus one.
                                                      14
         A key identifying assumption for our empirical design is that, in the absence of angel
tax credits, there would be parallel trends in states with these programs relative to those
without them. We use equation (2) to estimate a dynamic difference-in-differences
specification to assess this assumption. In Figure 4, Panel A, we find no pre-treatment
differences in angel investment volume before the introduction of angel tax credits. Notably,
the effect only appears in the years following the implementation of these programs.
         We also examine the effect using AngelList data, which include investor identities.
In Appendix Table A3, Panel A, we find that angel tax credits significantly increase the
number of angel investments, the number of angel-backed firms, and the number of unique
angel investors by 27.6% to 32.3%. In addition to validating an increase in angel activity,
these results also suggest that this increase is not solely driven by the same investors
investing in more firms, but rather that the programs induce entry of new angel investors.30
         Next, we evaluate heterogeneity in program design. We define Program flexibility
to measure the presence and strictness of the 17 restrictions in Table 1.31 If the increase in
investment is driven by angel tax credits, we expect more flexible programs to have larger
effects. In Table 4, Panel B, we find that a one-standard-deviation increase in program
flexibility leads to an additional 13.2% increase in the quantity of angel investments (column
1). When we use the tax credit percentage as the treatment, we find similar and significant
results (column 3). These results also highlight the importance of the program design.32
         We also ask whether the supply of local capital is related to the impact of angel tax
credits on angel investment volume. We construct a state-year level measure of venture
capital supply relative to the number of young firms, VC supply, which is the aggregate
venture capital investment amount (excluding angel and seed rounds identified in our main
sample) scaled by the total number of young firms (of age 0 to 5 years) in a state-year. We
standardize VC supply by subtracting its mean and dividing by its standard deviation.


30
   We do not examine investment amount because it is observed for only a relatively small subset of our sample.
Additionally, the data do not distinguish angels and other investors that co-invest in the same round.
31
   For each non-binary restriction, we rank programs from least to most strict and assign the highest rank to
programs without this restriction. These rank values are normalized to the unit interval. We also construct
indicator variables for programs that do not exclude insider investors and for each of the non-refundable, non-
transferable, and no carry forward restrictions. To form the Program flexibility index, we sum these 17
variables and then standardize the index by subtracting its mean and dividing by its standard deviation prior to
interacting it with our treatment variables.
32
   We also examined individual program restrictions, such as firm size, and did not find significant
heterogeneity in these requirements.
                                                      15
Columns 2 and 4 show that angel tax credits have a weaker effect on angel investment
volume in states with an ample supply of venture capital. This is consistent with angel
financing and venture capital being substitutes (Hellmann, Schure, and Vo (2017) and
Ersahin, Huang, and Khanna (2020)) and angel tax credit programs being particularly
effective when firms face more limited options in raising early-stage capital. This could also
suggest that angel tax credits do not support high-growth potential firms, which are more
likely to have access to venture capital funding.
       The results thus far show that angel tax credits significantly affect capital deployment.
Next, we examine the type of firms receiving this additional financing, focusing on measures
of growth potential. We divide angel investments by ex-ante characteristics of the firms
being financed around the median and re-estimate equation (1). In Table 5, columns 1 and 2
find that angel tax credit programs have an insignificant effect on the amount of capital
allocated to high-employment firms, but the programs significantly increase the capital
invested in low-employment firms. Columns 3 and 4 show similar effects for angel-backed
firms with high and low employment growth. An important determinant of startup success
is founders' prior entrepreneurship experience (Hsu (2007) and Lafontaine and Shaw
(2016)). We find that angel tax credits flow to firms founded by fewer serial entrepreneurs
(columns 5 and 6). Consistent with these results, in Appendix Table A3, Panel B , we show
that angel-backed firms on average have lower growth characteristics and fewer serial
entrepreneurs after a state implements angel tax credits.
       It is possible that the average decline in ex-ante growth characteristics reflects higher
risk tolerance or willingness to experiment among investors (Manso (2011) and Kerr, Nanda,
and Rhodes-Kropf (2014)). To assess this, we compare the distributions of angel-backed
firms' ex-ante growth characteristics in state-years with an angel tax credit program to state-
years without a program, conditional on eventually having a program. Appendix Figure A1
shows that, consistent with our regression estimates, the distribution of angel-backed firms
shifts to the left towards lower growth characteristics and exit outcomes. Importantly, this
shift occurs across the distribution without substantial differences in the dispersion of the
distributions or the tails. This implies that higher risk tolerance or experimentation are
unlikely to explain our results.



                                              16
        Overall, we show that tax credits lead to investments in firms with relatively low
growth potential. This result has two important implications. First, the decline in high-
growth investments supports our empirical design. One potential concern about our
identification is that states introduce tax credits in response to a boom in local demand. Since
we find that marginal investments flow to lower-potential firms, our results are more
consistent with angel tax credit programs shifting the supply of angel financing, rather than
reflecting changes in demand. Second, our results suggest that the increase in angel activity
is not driven by the discovery of startups with high-growth potential. This finding raises
questions about whether angel tax credits can have a substantial impact on the local
entrepreneurial ecosystem, which we examine in Section 4.4.


4.3. Robustness of Effect on Angel Investments
We examine the robustness of the effect of angel tax credits on angel investments. Since
angel tax credit programs primarily target the high-tech sector, we use the non-high-tech
sector as a placebo group and estimate a triple-difference (DDD) model. There are two
benefits of DDD. First, the non-high-tech sector serves as a counterfactual as to what would
have happened in the high-tech sector in the absence of angel tax credits. Second, the DDD
specification allows us to additionally include state-year fixed effects to eliminate any
remaining time-varying state-level confounders and compare the impact of angel tax credits
across sectors within the same state-year. Specifically, we estimate the following DDD
model at the state-year-sector level:
                       =  +  +  +     - +  ,                                                    (3)
where High-techj is an indicator for sector j being high-tech, which we define as information
technology, biotech, and renewable energy based on program requirements. We include
state-sector fixed effects (sj), sector-year fixed effects (jt), and state-year fixed effects (st),
which absorb ATCst and the state-year controls Xs,t-1. Standard errors are clustered by state.
        In Appendix Table A3, Panel C, we find that angel tax credits significantly increase
the number of angel investments in the high-tech sector relative to the non-high-tech sector.
The magnitudes are similar to those estimated in Table 4 using the difference-in-differences
specification. Importantly, angel investments do not decline in the non-high-tech sector,



                                                17
suggesting that our results are not driven by a reallocation of existing capital.33 Rather, angel
tax credits induce new investment in the high-tech sector.
         We also evaluate the robustness of our results to several different sample restrictions
in Appendix Table A3, Panel D. First, we limit our sample to 2001 to 2016, when our data
have better coverage of angel investments. The effect on angel investment volume in this
period is similar to the main sample (column 1). Second, we separately estimate our results
for the CVV sample (column 2) and the Form D sample (column 3), and again find similar
             34
estimates.        Third, the main result is robust to dropping angel investments from
VentureXpert and VentureSource, which tend to capture angel-backed firms that eventually
received institutional capital (column 4). Last, column 5 shows that the result is similar
without including California and Massachusetts in the sample.


4.4. The Effect of Angel Tax Credits on Real Outcomes
States introduce angel tax credit programs primarily to stimulate the local economy and
entrepreneurial ecosystem. Support for employment, business creation, and innovation are
often cited as goals of angel tax credits. To evaluate whether these programs achieve their
stated objectives, we use six data sources: first, the Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI)
to measure the total employment by start-ups in a state and year across all industries, in
addition to the high-tech sector; second, the Census' Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS) to
measure job destruction and creation rates for all and young firms as well as establishment
entry and exit rates; third, the Census' County Business Patterns (CBP) to measure
establishment counts of small firms (less than 20 employees) in the manufacturing and high-
tech sectors; fourth, financing data to measure successful exits through IPO or acquisition;
fifth, entry of high-growth firms based on Startup Cartography data (Fazio, Guzman, and
Stern (2019)); and sixth, patent data to measure innovation activity.35 In total, our analysis




33
   This is also consistent with the eligibility criteria of most programs. Further, the null results for the non-
high-tech sector suggest that our findings are not driven by unobserved state economic shocks or by unobserved
trends in local entrepreneurship.
34
   This addresses a concern that the Form D data might capture some investments by other types of investors
or that tax credits may induce investors to file a Form D.
35
   Since there is no information on establishment counts for young firms by industry in the CBP, we split by
size. We find the same effect on establishment across all industries.
                                                       18
uses 13 state-year variables. 36 To interpret the result as a percentage change, we log-
transform all outcomes except the probability of a successful exit.37
        Estimates of equation (1) are in Figure 3 and Appendix Table A4. For each variable,
we report the coefficient and the 95% confidence interval. The models in Figure 3 Panel A
have no controls, while those in Panel B include state-level controls. Across a broad array
of outcomes, we consistently find that an insignificant and economically small impact of the
policy. For instance, based on Panel B, employment in young firms decreases by 0.3%, while
job creation rate in young firms increases by 0.7%, neither of which are statistically different
from zero.
        These results are robust to a variety of alternative specifications and samples. First,
the estimates are similar with and without the inclusion of controls, reducing concern about
omitted variables. Second, the null effects are not driven by angel tax credits reversing a pre-
existing negative trend in entrepreneurial activity. Figure 4 Panels B to F show the results of
a dynamic difference-in-differences model (equation (2)), which demonstrate no pre-trends
and show that the estimates remain statistically and economically insignificant for several
years following the introduction of angel tax credits. Third, the results hold when we drop
California and Massachusetts (Appendix Figure A2), use alternative definitions of the
outcomes (Appendix Figure A3), or use an event study including six years before and after
program introductions (Appendix Figure A4).
        Overall, we do not find evidence that angel tax credits significantly impact state-level
entrepreneurial activity. While we cannot reject the possibility that the policies have some
effect, the null results are informative for two reasons. First, our coefficient magnitudes are
economically small, in stark contrast to estimates of the effects of other tax credits. One
relevant benchmark is the R&D tax credit that many states and the federal government offer
to firms performing R&D. Existing literature documents large positive effects of R&D tax
credits. For example, Balsmeier, Kurakina, and Fleming (2018) find that California's R&D
tax credit increased patents, citations, and the stock market value of patents by 5% to 12%.
Dechezlepretre et al. (2016) show that an R&D tax credit for small firms in the UK increased


36
   These variables and the sample period are described in Appendix A. For each variable, we use the largest
sample available between 1993 and 2017.
37
   The log transformation also makes effect sizes more comparable across outcomes, a feature that is
particularly useful in the power analysis in Appendix C.
                                                    19
patenting by 60%. In both cases, the value of the R&D tax credit relative to payable taxes is
smaller than the average angel tax credit percentage in our data.38
         Second, as shown in Abadie (2020), null effects are especially informative when the
prior is that a policy will be effective, regardless of how tight the confidence intervals are
around zero. Since policymakers implement angel tax credit programs to stimulate the local
economy and tax credits appear to have a large positive effect in other settings, angel tax
credits fit this framework. Furthermore, if the power of the test is sufficiently high (above
0.5), a null effect is actually more informative than a significant effect (Abadie (2020)). We
calculate the power of our analysis across all outcome variables based on Burlig, Preonas,
and Woerman (2020). Under the conservative assumption that the effect is relatively small
(3%), we find that the power ­ i.e., the probability of rejecting the null across all outcomes,
when the policy impacted at least one outcome ­ is substantially higher than 0.5. Appendix
C provides details about this power analysis.
         A final point regarding the aggregate results concerns potential externalities from
angel tax credit programs. While calculating such externalities is beyond the scope of this
paper, they are important to consider. For example, governments might fund angel tax credits
rather than directly support new startups through programs such as R&D tax credits, grants,
or accelerators. Angel tax credits could also be associated with more borrowing or higher
taxes, which have long-term social costs. On the firm side, angel tax credits could cause
reallocation of capital from unsubsidized to subsidized firms. However, we find no negative
impact of these programs on angel investments in the untargeted non-high-tech sector
(Appendix Table A3, Panel C). We also show that there is no effect on job creation or
destruction and firm entry or exit, suggesting that the null effect does not reflect externality-
induced churning. Overall, while they may exist, externalities seem unlikely to have first-
order implications for our analysis.


4.5. Angel Tax Credits and Recipient Firms
         One potential concern about the null aggregate finding is that angel tax credit
programs might not be large enough to generate a significant impact on aggregate outcomes.


38
  Other interventions, such as grants, also have large effects. For example, Howell and Brown (2019) find that
small business grants, which are about five times the average tax credit amount, increase employment by 27%.
                                                     20
As discussed in Section 2, this is unlikely to explain our results since angel tax credits are
large relative to other tax incentives, such as R&D tax credits, and are substantial compared
to local angel investments. However, to further rule out this explanation, we present
additional analyses using firm-level data. If the null aggregate effects simply reflect program
size, we should expect to observe an effect at the firm level.
         We evaluate the effect of angel tax credits on startups by comparing firms financed
by subsidized investors ("beneficiary companies") to firms that were certified but failed to
have an investor receive a tax credit ("failed applicants"). Failed applicants represent a useful
comparison group because they are in the same state and indicate interest in the tax credit.
However, failed applicants are likely to be of relatively lower quality because they either
failed to raise angel financing or applied after the state ran out of funding for the tax credits.39
It is reasonable to assume that if there is bias in comparing these groups, it should be in the
direction of beneficiary companies performing better.40 We estimate the following equation:
                           ,+ =  +  +    + ,+-1 + ,+ ,                                                       (4)
where the dependent variable ,+ is the outcome for startup i in year t+k. Year t is the year
that the startup either first had an investor receive a tax credit or applied for an investor to
receive a tax credit for the first time.  is an indicator for startup i having an investor
receive a tax credit in year t. ,+-1 is the outcome variable in the previous year. The
specification includes sector-year ( ) and state-year ( ) fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by state-year.41
         Table 6 shows the relationship between receiving a tax credit and subsequent venture
capital financing and employment growth, which are common proxies in the literature for
early stage startup success. The outcome variable in column 1 is an indicator equaling one
if a firm raises venture capital funding within two years following the tax credit application
year. We find that receiving subsidized angel investment has no impact on subsequently
raising venture capital. In column 2, we show that angel tax credits do not impact the
probability of a successful exit based on an IPO or acquisition. In columns 3 to 5, we examine


39
   In some states, there is no time limit on when a qualified business can receive an investment that can claim
a tax credit, while in other states it is limited to one year (Appendix Table A1).
40
   Appendix Table A2, Panel B, provides summary statistics on beneficiary firms and failed applicants.
41
   We cluster by state-year because there are limited clusters by state. The results are quite similar with other
approaches, including robust standard errors.
                                                       21
several measures of firm-level employment. Subsidized investment has no effect on the
probability of having at least 10 employees in the second year after the tax credit (column
3), at least 25 employees (column 4), or employment greater than the 75th percentile among
certified companies (column 5). In Appendix Table A5, we show similar results using a
matching estimator comparing beneficiary companies to similar control firms in nearby
states without tax credit programs.
        In sum, beneficiary companies do not raise more money or grow more than certified
companies in which no investor received a tax credit. This suggests that angel tax credits
support investments in poor quality projects or reflect tax arbitrage. The results imply that,
conditional on applying, receiving subsidized investment does not alleviate constraints
relative to certified firms that did not receive subsidized capital. This does not mean that
firms in states with tax credits are not constrained. Instead, it indicates that firms applying
for tax credits are relatively less constrained compared to their investment opportunities.
More importantly, these findings are consistent with the null effect of angel tax credits on
local economic activity and demonstrate that the scale of these programs is not responsible
for the null effect.


5. Mechanism

To understand why angel tax credits have no real effects despite increasing angel
investments, this section examines the effect of angel tax credits on investor behavior.
Program success depends on subsidized investors allocating funds effectively. A commonly
cited goal of angel tax credit programs is to attract professional angel investors who would
otherwise not invest in local firms. A large response by non-professional investors may limit
the effectiveness of these programs in spurring entrepreneurship. These investors tend to be
inexperienced and may have lower ability to screen deals or less access to high-quality deals.
As a result, investments by non-professional investors may fail to reach firms with high-
growth potential. This is consistent with our findings in Section 4.2 that angel tax credits
flow to low-growth firms. Furthermore, non-professional investors may invest for non-
pecuniary reasons (Huang et al. (2017)) or may be better positioned to utilize tax credits to
minimize their tax obligations due to their close connection with the firm.


                                              22
          We first study which investors use and respond to angel tax credits (Section 5.1). We
then use survey and observational data to understand the heterogenous response and to shed
light on how angels make investment decisions (Section 5.2). We conclude with a discussion
of these results (Section 5.3).


5.1. Investor Heterogeneity in Take-up and Response
We examine investor heterogeneity in who uses angel tax credits (take-up) and whether the
programs change investment decisions (response). To start, we examine investors who
received angel tax credits. For seven states, we obtain data on the identities of subsidized
investors and connect them with LinkedIn information on investor characteristics. Table 7
reports the statistics for the 5,637 tax credit recipients who are individuals.42 We find that
87% of the subsidized investors are male and 95% are white, consistent with the findings in
Ewens and Townsend (2019) that the vast majority of angel investors are white males.43 The
average angel investor is 42 years old, which is somewhat younger than the average age of
58 years for angel investors in Huang et al. (2017).
          Subsidized investors appear to be relatively non-professional. Just 0.7% self-identify
on LinkedIn as professional investors. Only 6.2% have prior entrepreneurial experience. In
contrast, Huang et al. (2017) find that 55% of angels have entrepreneurial experience, and
these investors tend to finance more companies, take a more active role in their portfolio
companies, and earn higher returns. The majority of tax credit recipients in our data are
corporate executives (82%), and the next largest groups are doctors (7.3%) and lawyers
(4.1%).
          A large fraction (79%) of subsidized investors are located in the same state as the tax
credit program, which is much higher than if startups were targeted randomly by angels
(Huang et al. (2017)). This is partly by design as many programs restrict investors to be in-
state. This restriction may limit the ability of the programs to attract sophisticated investors.
In-state investors are less likely to come from entrepreneurial hubs, as California and
Massachusetts do not have tax credit programs. Overall, we find that the average angel


42
  This excludes investors who provide capital through a fund.
43
   We coded the ethnicity or race using pictures. We also coded as Hispanic individuals who our web
researchers identified as "white" but who had names among the top 20 Hispanic names in the U.S.
(https://names.mongabay.com/data/hispanic.html).
                                                23
investor who receives tax credits is younger, more local, and less entrepreneurial than the
typical angel investor.
        To quantify the relative importance of different types of investors in explaining the
increase in angel investment, we use AngelList data to examine the effect of angel tax credits
on the composition of investors.44 In Table 8, Panel A, we estimate equation (1) at the state-
year level, where each dependent variable is the log number of investors making investments
that year and who are in the particular category. Columns 1 and 2 show that angel tax credits
increase in-state angel investors by 31.9%, while there is no effect on out-of-state investors.
Column 3 finds that the programs increase the number of investors with no more than one
year of investing experience by 30.0% and have no effect on more experienced investors.
We observe a similar pattern for investors who had a portfolio company with a successful
exit (columns 5 and 6) and with past entrepreneurial experience (columns 7 and 8).45 Given
that most professional angels have prior entrepreneurial experience and are active in making
investments (Huang et al. (2017)), these results are consistent with an increase in non-
professional investors.
        In Panel B, we examine these results at investment level, rather than state-year level.
For these specifications, the dependent variable is an indicator equaling one if the
characteristic in the column header describes an investor in the financing round. We weight
observations by the inverse of the number of deals in a state, which gives each state an equal
weight and accounts for the overrepresentation of hub states. In column 1, we find that angel
tax credits increase the likelihood of an in-state investor by 8.7 percentage points. We also
show that the probability of new investors increases by 5.8 percentage points in column 2.
Additionally, angel tax credits increase the likelihood that investors have no successful exit
(column 3) and no entrepreneurial experience (column 4).
        In sum, the increase in angel investments in Section 4.2 seems to be driven primarily
by local, inexperienced angel investors, whereas professional, arms-length angels do not
respond to tax incentives. These results suggest that a change in investor composition
explains why marginal investments flow to lower-growth firms. While subsidies might


44
   We find similar results if we restrict the sample to start in 2010 to mitigate a potential concern about
backfilled data.
45
   We verify in Appendix Table A6 that our measures of non-professional investors are correlated with worse
startup exit outcomes.
                                                    24
weaken an investor's incentive to find potentially high-growth companies, it is not the case
that the tax credits simply lead the same set of investors to alter their investing approach.
Instead, we observe a change in composition, and high take-up among individuals who do
not appear to be representative of U.S. angel investors described in prior research. Since
non-professional investors have less access to high-quality deals or lower ability to screen
deals, the null aggregate effects suggest that they invest in projects that have a limited impact
on the growth of the firm and small or null spillovers in the rest of the economy.


5.2. What Explains Investor Heterogeneity?
Why do sophisticated, professional investors not respond to tax credits? Answering this
question sheds light on why angel tax credits do not have their desired effects. It also
provides new insights on how angel investors make decisions.
        We hypothesize that differences in investment approaches could be one explanation.
We consider two investment frameworks. In the first approach, which we term "Financial
Metrics," investors use financial calculations such as IRR and NPV to evaluate deals and
correspondingly invest if the returns are above a certain threshold. This framework is
suitable when cash flows can be forecast such as when the firm has an operating history.
        When investors are looking for the next Google, this approach may be less useful.
For potentially high-growth and very early-stage startups, it is difficult to use financial
metrics because returns are highly skewed and there is considerable Knightian uncertainty.
Investors may instead focus on selecting firms using qualitative measures such as startup
team and business model, which they believe to be correlated with the right tail of exit
outcomes. We refer to this as a "Home Run" approach, since it leads to a binary decision
process in which a startup either has the potential to be a huge success or not. In the latter
case, the startup does not merit investment regardless of the particular deal terms. In this
framework, changes in expected returns induced by angel tax credits may not impact startup
selection.46
        Importantly, the "Home Run" approach does not imply that investors leave money
on the table. They may take up the tax credit ex post, even if the credit does not change their


46
  This does not imply that a tax credit never changes investment decisions using the "Home Run" approach.
Rather, the sensitivity of investment decisions to tax credits is lower in this approach.
                                                   25
selection of startups ex ante. Investors using the "Home Run" approach likely apply for tax
credits if the benefits exceed the costs, which include coordination, administrative, and
information frictions.


5.2.1. Survey of Angel Investors
       To assess how these investing approaches relate to tax credit use, we conduct a
survey of angel investors. The survey is described in Section 3.3 and shown in Appendix E.
The survey offers several insights. First, it indicates that investors do not consider angel tax
credits to be important when evaluating investments. Investors were shown nine factors
(randomly sorted for each investor) and asked to assign each factor one of five ratings,
ranging from not at all to extremely important in affecting the decision to invest in a startup.
Figure 5, Panel A shows that 51% of respondents rate tax credits as not at all important, and
only 7% rate them as either very or extremely important. This distribution contrasts starkly
with the other eight factors. For example, consistent with Bernstein, Korteweg, and Laws
(2017), 97% rate the management team as very or extremely important, and 0% rate the team
as not at all important. Only 2% rate valuation and gut reaction as not at all important, while
over 50% rate these factors as very or extremely important.
       Figure 5, Panel B, shows how the importance of the credits varies across respondent
types. The top graph includes angel tax credit recipients based on data from state programs.
Most of these respondents rate the credits as either slightly or moderately important, in
contrast to those that have never used the credits in the second graph. The subsequent graphs
of Panel B show that as we shift towards more professional investors, tax credits become
more irrelevant to their investment decisions. Among respondents who identify as
professional investors, 64% rate the tax credits as not at all important. For investors in the
top decile by number of deals, 71% rate credits as not at all important. We also estimate the
relationship between the importance of tax credits and being a professional investor. Table
9, Panel A, finds that there is a significant negative association between how important
investors rate tax credits and a variety of proxies for investor sophistication and experience
(columns 1-3). For example, being a professional investor reduces tax credit importance by
0.38, which is a 21% decrease relative to the sample mean.



                                              26
           The second insight from the survey concerns why angels do not view tax credits as
important. If an investor rates tax credits as unimportant, we ask them to select one of five
options to explain their answer.47 Figure 5, Panel C, shows that the majority (57%) report
that tax credits are unimportant because they invest based on whether the startup has the
potential to be a home run or not. This view is summarized by many text-based responses,
such as "If the deal is bad a tax credit will not make it good" and "If I believe in the business
model/technology then a tax credit is largely irrelevant. Conversely, if I don't believe in the
model then the tax credit is also irrelevant." Importantly, Table 9, Panel B, shows that there
is a positive and significant correlation between investors with above-median deal
experience and the choice of "Home Run" as the reason for why angel tax credits are
unimportant (column 1). In sum, tax credits are not viewed by angel investors ­ especially
professional ones ­ as relevant to their decision to invest in a startup in part because they use
a "Home Run" investing approach, which explains our previous findings that professional
investors do not use tax credits and why these programs do not promote high-growth
entrepreneurship.
           Third, the survey sheds light on barriers to using tax credits, conditional on deciding
to invest in a particular startup. There are both administrative costs, such as coordinating
certification with the startup and submitting forms to the state agencies, and information
frictions, as an investor may not be aware of tax credits. Of the investors rating tax credits
as unimportant, 11% report that the reason they are unimportant is coordination costs (Figure
5, Panel C). In the survey, we also ask whether an investor used angel tax credits and, if not,
why. Figure 5, Panel D, shows that and 15% do not use tax credits because of coordination
costs, and 60% are unaware the programs exist; indeed, even among investors whose states
have a program, 19% report that tax credits are not available and 60% do not know about
their availability, suggesting considerable information barriers. The importance of
coordination and information frictions are corroborated by text responses, such as "The state
is slow to act on applications and they do not have a system to remind you about the
requirement for annual certifications" and "Tax credits seem so difficult to navigate and
receive. Too many stars need to align for that to work!"



47
     They can also choose "Other" and fill in a text box.
                                                        27
         Coordination costs are likely to be higher for professional arm-length investors as
they typically do not have close ties with the startups before investing, face a fast-paced deal
cycle, or have higher opportunity costs of their time. Consistent with this, Table 9 Panel B
column 2 shows that professional investors are more likely to report coordination frictions.
To illustrate, a respondent with a history of 21 deals and 5 successful exits (both above the
90th percentile of our sample) wrote that: "I work with startups because I don't like dealing
with red tape and bureaucracy. Tracking investments for tax credits sounds like a headache."
         The final insight from the survey is that there is a significant and large positive
association between the importance of tax credits and focus on financial returns (Table 9
Panel A column 4). The bottom graph in Figure 5, Panel C, shows that, among the few
investors who found tax credits to be important, 81% report that tax credits make an
investment financially viable (i.e., change the NPV from negative to positive). These results
are consistent with use of the financial metrics approach among tax credit recipients.


5.2.2. Insider Investors
         The survey results indicate that professional investors face larger information and
coordination frictions. At the other end of the spectrum are firm insiders who face low
information and coordination frictions when they invest in their own companies and claim
tax credits. These investors should be in an advantageous position to use angel tax credits.
However, they are not the ideal group of investors targeted by policymakers, in part because
insiders may use the programs to take advantage of a tax arbitrage opportunity or because
they have non-financial motives such as private benefits of control.
         To explore this possibility, we assess the prevalence of insider investors in our tax
credit recipient data.48 Our data include 628 unique firms and 3,560 investors from 5 states.49
In Table 10, we find that 35% of firms have at least one investor who is an executive or



48
   We observe these data for Ohio, New Jersey, Maryland, New Mexico, and Kentucky. These five states are
reasonably representative of states that employ angel tax credits, including some high-tech clusters (New Jersey
and Maryland), as well as rural areas (Kentucky and New Mexico), and the Rust Belt (Ohio). We identify an
investor as an insider if the person is an executive on a Form D filing, listed as an employee on LinkedIn, or
shares a last name with an executive. Appendix B provides additional details for identifying insiders.
49
   Interestingly, many states explicitly permit the investor to be employed at the company (Appendix Table
A1). Ohio, New Jersey, Kentucky and Maryland do not exclude executives, but do exclude owners with above
a certain threshold of pre-investment ownership stake, ranging from 5% for Ohio to 80% for New Jersey. New
Mexico excludes executives but has no limits for owners, families, or employees.
                                                      28
family member of an executive. The share is 24% or higher in all states except Kentucky,
where it is just 4%. As a benchmark, only 8% of startups in AngelList have at least one
investor who is also employed at the company in which they are investing. At the investor
level, 14% of subsidized investors are the executives of the invested company or their family
members. The corresponding benchmark in AngelList is only 2%. The take-up of angel tax
credits by insider investors is consistent with insiders facing fewer information and
coordination frictions.


5.3. Discussion

The evidence above, while from disparate sources and different perspectives, yields a single,
coherent reason for why tax credits fail to increase local startup entry and growth: they have
little impact on sophisticated, professional investment. First, angel tax credits depend on
investors using financial metrics such as NPV to gauge returns, with investments occurring
when expected returns exceed a particular threshold. We document for the first time that
professional investors tend to use a "Home Run" approach when selecting startups, reducing
their sensitivity to tax incentives.
        Non-professional investors residing in-state who have both local tax liabilities and
information about the programs appear primarily responsible for take-up. They likely face
lower coordination costs, especially when they are firm insiders. This group likely has access
to lower quality deals and may be more likely to invest for non-pecuniary or tax planning
reasons. Since tax credits increase investment returns, non-professional investors who both
respond to the tax credit program by investing more and who focus on NPV to make
investment decisions are likely select projects that they perceive to be negative NPV without
the subsidy. To the degree the types of projects selected by these NPV-focused investors are
relatively low-growth, this pattern helps to explain why the impact on the local economy
might be limited.
        Another channel that can reconcile the increase in angel investment with the null real
effects is relabeling. Investors may relabel transactions that would have happened regardless
of the program as an angel investment in order to receive the tax credit. This seems
particularly applicable to firm insiders, but it could also apply to other investors. Investors
using a state tax credit may be more likely to file a Form D because they are required to

                                              29
demonstrate that a legal equity round occurred. While Form D filing is in many cases
technically necessary to exempt an equity round from national security registration
requirements, it is widely known that many startups do not file, in large part to avoid the
accompanying disclosure.50 Ewens and Malenko (2019) show that no Form D is ever filed
for more than 20% of VC-backed startups. Relabeled investments would appear in our
sample as an angel investment when they might not have otherwise. The sizeable proportion
of insiders, who might be relatively more likely to relabel, highlights that relabeling may
also partially explain these contrasting findings.
        It is crucial to note that our results cannot tell us about startups' financial constraints.
There may be constrained, potentially high-growth startups in states with tax credits, but
investors who select them do not appear to use the credits. The results also are not
informative about the financing capacity of angels broadly (Lindsey and Stein (2020)). Since
there are frictions to using the tax credits and they are not available in states with the highest
concentrations of angels and startups (Massachusetts and California), we cannot know
whether alternative policy implementations that involved no frictions would affect
investment differently.
        Our mechanism analysis does shed light on how angel investors make decisions. To
the best of our knowledge, the survey is the first to elicit novel information about investment
approaches among a wide and arguably representative swathe of angel investors, a group
known to be important to early-stage entrepreneurial finance but that is difficult to observe
with conventional data sets. While we have surveys about how VCs make decisions
(Gompers et al. 2020), we know relatively little about angel decision making.


6. Conclusion

There is substantial government interest in supporting startups, with investor incentives
being a particularly appealing option. Understanding angel tax credits is important for both
academics and policymakers, as more regions propose implementing such tax credits and


50
  See https://techcrunch.com/2018/11/07/the-disappearing-form-d. While there could be penalties for failing
to file a Form D, they appear to be rarely enforced. Additionally, U.S. courts and the SEC have ruled that
failing to file a Form does not cause a startup to lose its security exemption status. See
https://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/guidance/securitiesactrules-interps.htm. Our results on angel
investments are robust to using only deals from CVV and not from Form D.
                                                    30
the global angel market is rapidly expanding (OECD (2011)). For example, Senator
Christopher Murphy recently proposed legislation to establish a federal angel investor tax
credit in the U.S.51 Yet there has been no systematic evidence on the effectiveness of these
policies.
           This paper offers the first analysis of U.S. angel tax credits and presents three main
results. First, we find that angel tax credits significantly increase state-level angel investment.
This increase is connected to a decline in the ex-ante growth characteristics of marginal
startups funded by angels. Second, we find no evidence that these policies had any
significant impact on the real effects that policymakers focus on, such as new business starts
or young firm employment. Third, we show that the increase in angel investments is mostly
driven by a surge in inexperienced, young, and new investors, with no change in professional
angel activity. Non-professional investors may face fewer frictions in accessing tax credits
and may be driven by non-pecuniary or tax arbitrage motives. Consistent with this concern,
we find that a substantial share of subsidized investors are firm insiders.
           A survey helps to explain these results. We find that angel tax credits are a relatively
unimportant factor for professional investors when deciding whether or not to invest in a
startup. Instead, experienced investors focus on whether or not a startup has the potential to
be a home run. These investors tend not to use tax credits even when they are available
because of information, coordination, and administrative costs.
           Taken together, our findings raise questions about the ability of tax credits to
stimulate entrepreneurial activity. Angel tax credits, relative to direct programs such as
grants, have the attractive feature of being more market-based tools that do not require the
government to identify which companies deserve subsidy. However, this flexibility presents
problems of its own as the targeted investors may not be sensitive to the policy.
           Our emphasis on the importance of targeting is relevant for other entrepreneurship
programs, such as matching funds that also subsidize investors at the time of investment.
Israel's Yozma is an example of a highly successful venture capital matching fund that
targeted expert foreign investors. In contrast, China's Government Guidance Fund Initiative
that also matched outside capital did not enjoy the same success, which Lerner (2020)
attributes to the fact that much of its matching capital came from local governments and


51
     See https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/973.
                                                       31
state-owned companies. Consistent with the contrast between the Israeli and Chinese
programs, our results demonstrate that targeting investors who can identify and monitor
high-growth startups is an important element of government programs focused on
subsidizing capital for high-growth entrepreneurship.




                                            32
References

Abadie, A., 2020. Statistical non-significance in empirical economics. American Economic
Review: Insights, 2(2), 193-208.
Acs, Z., Åstebro, T., Audretsch, D., Robinson, D., 2016. Public policy to promote
entrepreneurship: A call to arms. Small Business Economics, 47(1), 35-51.
Adelino, M., Ma, S., Robinson, D., 2017. Firm Age, Investment Opportunities, and Job
Creation, Journal of Finance, 72 (3), 999-1038
Agrawal, A., Rosell, C., Simcoe, T. S., 2014. Do tax credits affect R&D expenditures by
small firms? Evidence from Canada, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Babina, T., Bernstein, A., Mezzanotti, F. 2020. Crisis Innovation. Working Paper.
Balsmeier, B., Kurakina, M., Fleming, L., 2018. R&D tax credits: Mechanisms of private
and public value. Working Paper.
Bernstein, S., Korteweg, A., Laws, K., 2017. Attracting early-stage investors: Evidence from
a randomized field experiment. Journal of Finance, 72(2), 509-538.
Bernstein, S., Lerner, J., Mezzanotti,. F, 2019. Private equity and financial fragility during
the crisis. Review of Financial Studies, 32(4), 1309-1373.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., Mullainathan, S., 2004. How much should we trust differences-in-
differences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249-275.
Bhargava, S., Manoli, D., 2015. Psychological frictions and the incomplete take-up of social
benefits: Evidence from an IRS field experiment. American Economic Review, 105(11),
3489-3529.
Bloom, N., Griffith, R., Van Reenen, J., 2002. Do R&D tax credits work? Evidence from a
panel of countries 1979­1997. Journal of Public Economics, 85(1), 1-31.
Brander, J.A., Du, Q., Hellmann, T., 2015. The effects of government-sponsored venture
capital: international evidence. Review of Finance, 19(2), 571-618.
Brander, J.A., Egan, E., Hellmann, T., 2010. Government sponsored versus private venture
capital: Canadian evidence. In: International Differences in Entrepreneurship. University of
Chicago Press, 275-320.
Bronzini, R., Iachini, E., 2014. Are incentives for R&D effective? Evidence from a
regression discontinuity approach, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4),
100-134.
Burlig, F., Preonas, L., Woerman, M., 2020. Panel data and experimental design. Journal of
Development Economics, 144, 102458.
Campbell,      J.,  Legislation    could     impact     economy,    April   7,  2014,
https://insurancenewsnet.com/oarticle/Legislation-could-impact-economy-a-485988
(accessed June 29, 2020).

                                             33
Chetty, R., Finkelstein, A., 2020. Public economics, NBER Reporter Program Report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Clausen, T. H., 2009. Do subsidies have positive impacts on R&D and innovation activities
at the firm level?, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics 20(4), 239­253.
Cohen, S., Fehder, D. C., Hochberg, Y. V., Murray, F., 2019, The design of startup
accelerators, Research Policy, 48(7), 1781-1797.
Crane, L.D., Decker, R., 2020. Research with private sector business microdata: The case of
NETS/D&B. Working paper.
Curtis, E. M., Decker, R., 2018. Entrepreneurship and state taxation. Working paper.
Da Rin, M., Phalippou L., 2014. There is something special about large investors: Evidence
from a survey of private equity limited partners. Tilburg University, Center for Economic
Research, Discussion Paper.
Davis, J., Morse, A., Wang, X., 2019. The leveraging of Silicon Valley. Working paper.
Dechezleprêtre, A., Einiö, E., Martin, R., Nguyen, K.-T., Van Reenen, J., 2016. Do tax
incentives for research increase firm innovation? An RD design for R&D. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
DellaVigna, S., Linos, E., 2020. RCTs to scale: Comprehensive evidence from two nudge
units. Working Paper.
Deshpande, M., Li, Y., 2019. Who is screened out? Application costs and the targeting of
disability programs. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(4), 213-48.
Denes, M., 2019. When do firms risk shift? Evidence from venture capital. Working paper.
Ersahin, N., Huang, R., Khanna, N., 2020. Venture capital competition, reputation, and
investment. Working paper.
Evans, D.S., Jovanovic B., 1989. An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under
liquidity constraints. Journal of Political Economy, 97(4), 808-827.

Ewens, M., Farre-Mensa, J., 2019. The deregulation of the private equity markets and the
decline in IPOs. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Ewens, M, Malenko, N., 2020. Board dynamics over the startup lifecycle. Working paper.

Ewens, M.,Townsend, R.R., 2019. Are early stage investors biased against women? Journal
of Financial Economics, 135(3), 653-677.
Fazio, C., Guzman, J., Stern, S., 2019. The impact of state-level R&D tax credits on the
quantity and quality of entrepreneurship. Working paper.
Fehder, D.C., Hochberg, Y.V., 2019. Spillover effects of startup accelerator programs:
Evidence from venture-backed startup activity, Working paper.
Gompers, P.A., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S.N., Strebulaev, I.A., 2020. How do venture
capitalists make decisions? Journal of Financial Economics, 135(1), 169-190.
                                            34
Gompers, P., Kaplan, S., Mukharlyamov, V., 2016. What do private equity firms say they
do? Journal of Financial Economics, 121(3), 449-76.
Gonzalez-Uribe, J., Leatherbee, M., 2017. The effects of business accelerators on venture
performance: Evidence from start-up Chile, Review of Financial Studies 31(4), 1566-1603.
González-Uribe, J., Paravisini, D., 2019. How sensitive is young firm investment to the cost
of outside equity? Evidence from a UK tax relief. Working paper.
Gornall, W., Strebulaev, I.A., 2019. Gender, race, and entrepreneurship: A randomized field
experiment on venture capitalists and angels. Working paper.
Graham, J., Harvey, C., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence from
the field. Journal of Financial Economics, 60(2-3), 187-243.
Hall, B. H., 1993. R&D tax policy during the 1980s: Success or failure?, Tax Policy and the
Economy, 7, 1­35.
Hall, B. and Van Reenen, J., 2000. How effective are fiscal incentives for R&D? A review
of the evidence, Research Policy, 29(4), 449­469.
Hellmann, T., Schure, P., Vo, D., 2017. Angels and venture capitalists: Substitutes or
complements? Working paper.
Hellmann, T., Thiele, V., 2015. Friends or foes? The interrelationship between angel and
venture capital markets. Journal of Financial Economics, 115(3), 639-653.
Hochberg, Y.V., Serrano, C.J., Ziedonis, R.H., 2018. Patent collateral, investor commitment,
and the market for venture lending. Journal of Financial Economics, 130(1), 74-94.
Hölmstrom, B., 1979, Moral hazard and observability. The Bell Journal of Economics, 74-
91.
Howell, S., 2017. Financing innovation: Evidence from R&D grants, American Economic
Review, 107(4), 1136-64.
Howell, S., 2020. Reducing information frictions in venture capital: The role of new venture
competitions, Journal of Financial Economics, 136(3): 676-694.
Howell, S., Brown, D. J., 2019. Do cash windfalls affect wages? Evidence from R&D grants.
Working paper.
Hsu, D.H., 2007. Experienced entrepreneurial founders, organizational capital, and venture
capital funding. Research Policy, 36(5), 722-741.
Huang, L., Wu, A., Lee, M. J., Bao, J., Hudson, M., Bolle, E., 2017. The American Angel.
Kerr, W.R., Nanda, R., Rhodes-Kropf, M., 2014. Entrepreneurship as experimentation.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 25-48.

Kerr, W.R., Lerner, J., Schoar, A., 2011. The consequences of entrepreneurial finance:
Evidence from angel financings. Review of Financial Studies, 27(1), 20-55.


                                            35
Klassen, K. J., Pittman, J. A., Reed, M. P., Fortin, S., 2004. A cross-national comparison of
R&D expenditure decisions: Tax incentives and financial constraints, Contemporary
Accounting Research, 21(3), 639-680.
Kousky, K., Tuomi., K., Angel Tax Credits: What do the reports say about job creation?,
April 3, 2015, https://www.angelcapitalassociation.org/blog/angel-tax-credits-what-do-the-
reports-say-about-job-creation (accessed August 25, 2019).
Lach, S., 2002. Do R&D subsidies stimulate or displace private R&D? Evidence from Israel,
Journal of Industrial Economics, 50(4), 369-390.
Lafontaine, F., Shaw, K., 2016. Serial entrepreneurship: Learning by doing? Journal of
Labor Economics, 34(S2), S217-S254.
Lerner, J., 2009. Boulevard of broken dreams: Why public efforts to boost entrepreneurship
and venture capital have failed and what to do about it. Princeton University Press.
Lerner, J., 2020. Government incentives for entrepreneurship. NBER working paper No.
26884.
Lerner, J., Schoar, A., Sokolinski, S., Wilson, K., 2018. The globalization of angel
investments: Evidence across countries. Journal of Financial Economics, 127(1), 1-20.
Lindsey, L.A., Stein, L.C., 2020. Angels, entrepreneurship, and employment dynamics:
Evidence from investor accreditation rules. Working paper.
Linhorst, M., "Bill offering breaks for `angel investors' signed," The Record (Bergen County,
NJ), February 1, 2013.
Ma, S., 2020. The life cycle of corporate venture capital, Review of Financial Studies, 33 (1),
358-394.
Mamuneas, T.P., Nadiri, M.I., 1996. Public R&D policies and cost behavior of the US
manufacturing industries. Journal of Public Economics, 63(1), 57-81.
Manso, Gustavo. 2011. Motivating innovation. Journal of Finance, 66(5), 1823-1860.
McKenzie, D., 2017. Identifying and spurring high-growth entrepreneurship: experimental
evidence from a business plan competition, American Economic Review, 107(8), 2278-2307.
Moxley, E., Why Missouri doesn't offer angel tax credits to startup investors, October 21,
2014,       https://www.kcur.org/post/why-missouri-doesnt-offer-angel-tax-credits-startup-
investors (accessed August 25, 2019).
Poterba, J.M., 1989. Capital gains tax policy toward entrepreneurship. National Tax
Journal, 42(3), 375-389.
OECD, 2011. Financing high-growth firms: The role of angel investors. OECD Publishing,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264118782-en.
Robb, A., Robinson, D., 2012. The capital structure decisions of startup firms. Review of
Financial Studies, 27(1), 153-179.


                                              36
Shane, S., 2009. Fool's gold? The truth behind angel investing in America. Oxford
University Press.
Tuomi, K., Boxer, B., 2015. The costs and benefits of early-stage business tax credits: a case
study of two US states. Venture Capital, 17(3), 263-270.

Wilson, D. J., 2009. Beggar thy neighbor? the in-state, out-of-state, and aggregate effects of
R&D tax credits, Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(2), 431-436.

Xu, T., 2019. Learning from the crowd: The feedback value of crowdfunding. Working
paper.

Zwick, E., Mahon, J., 2017, Tax policy and heterogeneous investment behavior, American
Economic Review, 107(1), 217-48.

Zwick, E. 2020. The costs of corporate tax complexity. American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, forthcoming.




                                             37
           Figure 1. Total Expenditure on Angel Investor Tax Credit Programs
This figure shows the total annual expenditure on state angel investor tax credits (i.e. take-up). All states in
Appendix Table A1 are included except Oklahoma and New York, for which no data are available. The total
across all years is $8.1 billion. On average, take-up is 88 percent of allocated funding.




                                                      38
                               Figure 2. State Angel Tax Credit Programs

Panel A provides a map of states that have adopted angel tax credit programs from 1988 to 2018. The blue shading
indicates the tax credit percentage, with darker shades representing larger tax credits. The slanted lines denote states
with no state income tax. Panel B shows the introduction and termination of each program in our sample, starting with
the earliest program and ending with the most recent one.

                                 Panel A. States with Angel Tax Credit Programs




                               Panel B. Timing of State Angel Tax Credit Programs




                                                          39
                        Figure 3. Aggregate Real Effects of Angel Tax Credits

Panel A reports the difference-in-differences point estimates and confidence intervals of the aggregate effects of angel
tax credits using the specification in equation (1) with no controls. Panel B reports the same estimates with controls.
All outcome variables except the probability of having successful exits (Any Succ. Exit) are log-transformed to
facilitate comparison of magnitudes across outcomes. All variables are defined in Appendix A.

                             Panel A. Effects of Angel Tax Credits, without Controls




                               Panel B. Effects of Angel Tax Credits, with Controls




                                                          40
        Figure 4. Dynamic Effects of Angel Tax Credit Introduction on Real Outcomes
This figure shows the dynamic effect of a state introducing angel tax credits using equation (2). The samples are the
same as in Figure 3. The year before policy introduction is normalized to zero. Panel A shows the number of angel
investments; Panel B examines the number of small establishments (with employment of 1 to 19) in the high-tech
sector; Panel C shows total employment in young firms of age 0 to 5; Panel D shows job creation rate (in percentage
points) among young firms of age 0 to 5; Panel E looks at the number of patent applications; and Panel F examines
the probability of having at least one successful exit (IPO or high-price M&A) by angel-backed firms receiving
investment in a state-year. All outcome variables are log transformed, except for Panel F. All variables are defined in
Appendix A. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. 95% confidence intervals are shown.

           Panel A. Number of Angel Investments                  Panel B. Number of Small Establishments
                                                                              in High-Tech




        Panel C. Aggregate Employment in Young Firms              Panel D. Job Creation Rate in Young Firms




            Panel E. Number of Patent Applications                 Panel F. Probability of Successful Exit




                                                          41
                                          Figure 5: Survey Results

                       Panel A. Distribution of Responses to Factor Importance Question




These graphs show the distribution of responses to question 1 in the survey for each of the nine factors. Respondents
could only choose one importance level for each factor. The order in which the factors were presented was randomized
across survey participants. N=1,364.




                                                         42
         Panel B. Distribution of Responses to Importance of Angel Tax Credits by Respondent Type




These graphs show the distribution of responses to the question of whether angel tax credits are important to the
decision to invest in a startup. Each graph presents a different sample. The top graph shows the subset of respondents
who were either angel tax credit recipients from our state-provided data, or who reported having used an angel tax
credit in the survey (N=268). The second graph shows the subset of respondents from AngelList data who reported
having never used an angel tax credit in the survey (N=1,028). The third graph shows the subset of respondents from
AngelList data who identify as professional investors (N=241). The bottom graph shows the subset of respondents
from AngelList data whose number of deals are in the top 10% among all AngelList responders (N=84). Respondents
could only choose one importance level. The order in which the factors were presented was randomized across survey
participants.



                                                         43
               Panel C. Distribution of Responses to Why Angel Tax Credits are (Un)important




These graphs show the distribution of responses to the question of why angel tax credits are unimportant (top, N=948)
or important (bottom, N=338) to the decision to invest in a startup. Respondents were prompted to answer the question
of why the credits are unimportant if they rated them as not at all or slightly important. Similarly, respondents were
prompted to answer the question of why the credits are unimportant if they rated them as at least moderately important.
Respondents could only choose one importance level. The order in which the factors were presented was randomized
across survey participants.


                                                          44
                 Panel D. Distribution of Responses to Why Have Not Used Angel Tax Credits




These graphs show the distribution of responses to the question of why an investor has not used angel tax credits,
conditional on not using them. The sample is restricted to the subset of respondents from AngelList data who reported
having never used an angel tax credit in the survey (N=1,028). Respondents could only choose one option.




                                                         45
                    Table 1. Summary Statistics on Angel Tax Credit Programs

Table 1 presents the program parameters for the 36 angel tax credit programs in our sample. Column 1 reports the
percentage of programs that have a particular restriction in place. Columns 2 and 3 report the mean and median values
of the restriction.

                                                                      % with
                                                                    restriction    Mean          Median
          Tax credit percentage                                                     34%            33%
                                                                            Company restrictions
          Age cap                                                      31%           7.1            6.0
          Employment cap                                               39%          64.6           50.0
          Revenue cap ($ million)                                      47%           5.4            5.0
          Asset cap ($ million)                                        22%          11.5            7.5
          Prior total external financing cap ($ million)               19%           5.7            4.0
                                                                     Investment and investor restrictions
          Minimum investment per investor ($)                          36%        19,231          25,000
          Minimum holding period                                       50%           3.2            3.0
          Ownership cap before investment                              64%          35%            30%
          Exclude owners and their families                            61%
          Exclude full-time employees                                  22%
          Exclude executives and officers                              33%
                                                                           Tax credit restrictions
          State tax credit allocation per year ($ million)             86%           9.0            5.0
          Maximum tax credit per company per year ($ million)          42%          0.81           0.60
          Maximum tax credit per investor per year ($ million)         78%          0.21           0.11
          Non-refundable                                               72%
          No carry forward                                             11%
          Non-transferrable                                            72%




                                                           46
                                       Table 2. Predictive Regressions

This table examines whether a state's economic, political, fiscal, or entrepreneurial conditions predict the adoption of
angel tax credit programs for the sample period 1985 to 2018. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to one
(ATC) if a state has adopted an angel tax credit program in that year (columns 1 to 4) or a continuous variable (Tax
credit percentage) equal to the maximum tax credit percentage available in state-years with an angel tax credit program
and zero otherwise (columns 5 to 8). State-years after a state adopts a program are excluded from the sample. All
independent variables are lagged by one year relative to the dependent variable and are defined in Appendix A. Each
column includes year fixed effects, while the even-numbered columns also include state fixed effects. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses and clustered by state. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.

                                               ATC                                    Tax credit percentage
                               (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)
 GSP growth                  -0.051     0.056      -0.042      0.047         0.002      0.024        0.013      0.033
                            (0.112)    (0.135)    (0.135)     (0.145)      (0.039)     (0.045)     (0.046)    (0.048)
 Ln(Income per capita)       -0.003     0.013      -0.002      0.011        -0.000     -0.004       -0.002     -0.004
                            (0.027)    (0.066)    (0.027)     (0.066)      (0.010)     (0.022)     (0.011)    (0.022)
 Ln(Population)               0.000     -0.118      0.002     -0.126*       -0.001     -0.041       -0.001     -0.045
                            (0.005)    (0.072)    (0.008)     (0.075)      (0.002)     (0.026)     (0.003)    (0.028)
 Unemployment rate           -0.002     0.005      -0.001      0.006        -0.001      0.001       -0.001      0.001
                            (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.002)
 Democratic control           0.002     -0.008      0.001      -0.008       -0.001     -0.006       -0.001     -0.006
                            (0.010)    (0.013)    (0.010)     (0.013)      (0.003)     (0.005)     (0.003)    (0.005)
 Republican control          -0.009     -0.016     -0.009      -0.015       -0.003     -0.005       -0.003     -0.005
                            (0.009)    (0.014)    (0.010)     (0.014)      (0.003)     (0.005)     (0.003)    (0.005)
 Revenue/GSP                 -0.133     -0.171     -0.129      -0.188       -0.049     -0.060       -0.040     -0.060
                            (0.222)    (0.275)    (0.227)     (0.273)      (0.086)     (0.104)     (0.088)    (0.105)
 Expenditure/GSP              0.131     -0.355      0.085      -0.273        0.064     -0.164        0.055     -0.140
                            (0.276)    (0.440)    (0.281)     (0.461)      (0.098)     (0.151)     (0.099)    (0.158)
 Debt/GSP                    -0.023     0.480      -0.010      0.460        -0.028      0.132       -0.035      0.126
                            (0.099)    (0.299)    (0.101)     (0.319)      (0.032)     (0.101)     (0.033)    (0.108)
 Has income tax             0.032**     0.032       0.027      0.036       0.011**      0.006       0.009*      0.008
                            (0.016)    (0.035)    (0.016)     (0.035)      (0.005)     (0.012)     (0.005)    (0.012)
 Max income tax rate         -0.001   -0.016**     -0.001    -0.015**       -0.000    -0.005**      -0.000    -0.005*
                            (0.003)    (0.007)    (0.003)     (0.007)      (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.003)
 Capital gains tax            0.000     0.003       0.001      0.003        -0.000      0.001       -0.000      0.001
                            (0.003)    (0.005)    (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)    (0.002)
 Neighbor ATC                 0.015     0.012       0.015      0.011         0.004      0.004        0.005      0.004
                            (0.013)    (0.015)    (0.013)     (0.015)      (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.004)    (0.005)
 Establishment entry rate                          -0.016      0.329                                 0.019      0.112
                                                  (0.227)     (0.345)                              (0.079)    (0.112)
 Establishment exit rate                           -0.247      -0.292                               -0.112     -0.083
                                                  (0.224)     (0.385)                              (0.083)    (0.144)
 Net job creation rate                             -0.034      -0.066                               -0.062     -0.080
                                                  (0.242)     (0.273)                              (0.086)    (0.098)
 Venture capital volume                            -0.001      0.004                                 0.000      0.002
                                                  (0.004)     (0.005)                              (0.001)    (0.002)
 Year FE                      Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
 State FE                     No         Yes          No        Yes          No          Yes          No         Yes
 Observations                1,343      1,343       1,343      1,343        1,343       1,343        1,343      1,343
 Adjusted R2                 0.022      0.038        0.02      0.036        0.017        0.04        0.015      0.039




                                                            47
                               Table 3. State-Year Level Summary Statistics

This table reports summary statistics for the state-year level variables used in our analyses. All variables are defined
in Appendix A.

               Variable                                     N        Mean  Std. dev.      p5      p50     p95
                                                                          Treatment variables
               ATC                                        1,200    0.25      0.43        0.00     0.00    1.00
               Tax credit percentage                      1,200    0.09      0.18        0.00     0.00    0.50
                                                                            Angel investment
               Ln(number of angel investments)            1,200    2.19      1.36        0.00     2.20    4.37
                                                          Average ex-ante characteristics of angel-backed firms
               Pre-investment ln(employment)              1,200    2.20      0.68        1.27     2.12    3.30
               Pre-investment employment growth           1,200    0.39      0.46        0.00     0.31    1.08
               Fraction of serial entrepreneurs on team   1,199    0.05      0.09        0.00     0.00    0.17
                                                                State-year level controls and outcomes
               GSP growth                                 1,343    1.05      0.04        1.00     1.05    1.11
               Ln(Income per capita)                      1,343 10.12        0.41        9.46    10.12 10.78
               Ln(Population)                             1,343 15.03        1.04       13.33 15.16 16.73
               Has income tax                             1,343    0.77      0.42        0.00     1.00    1.00
               Max income tax rate                        1,343    4.90      3.30        0.00     5.51    9.86
               Capital gain tax rate                      1,343    4.40      3.07        0.00     4.77    9.00
               Neighbor ATC                               1,343    0.21      0.41        0.00     0.00    1.00
               Unemployment rate                          1,343    5.75      1.90        3.14     5.41    9.38
               Democratic control                         1,343    0.24      0.43        0.00     0.00    1.00
               Republican control                         1,343    0.20      0.40        0.00     0.00    1.00
               Revenue/GSP                                1,343    0.13      0.04        0.09     0.12    0.19
               Expenditure/GSP                            1,343    0.12      0.03        0.08     0.11    0.18
               Debt/GSP                                   1,343    0.07      0.04        0.02     0.06    0.15
               Venture capital volume                     1,343    3.95      2.41        0.00     4.10    7.72
               Ln(emp. young all industries)               970    12.09      1.03       12.41 12.20 13.96
               Ln(emp. young manufact. high tech)          970     9.76      1.28        7.64     9.90   11.72
               Ln(job destr. rate)                        1,200    2.58      0.16        2.31     2.59    2.85
               Ln(job creat. rate)                        1,200    2.70      0.16        2.42     2.70    2.98
               Ln(job destr. rate young)                  1,100    3.08      0.12        2.89     3.08    3.28
               Ln(job creat. rate young)                  1,100    3.73      0.10        3.56     3.75    3.87
               Ln(entry rate young)                       1,100    3.76      0.04        3.74     3.76    3.79
               Ln(exit rate young)                        1,100    2.71      0.10        2.57     2.71    2.87
               Ln(small est. manufacturing)                900     7.92      0.10        6.14     7.90    9.50
               Ln(small est. high tech)                    900     8.42      1.09        6.77     8.42   10.25
               Any succ. exit                             1,300    0.61      0.49        0.00     1.00    1.00
               Ln(quality firms)                          1,166    1.95      1.15        0.25     1.93    4.13
               Ln(patent applications)                    1,250    7.00      1.49        4.89     7.12    9.22
                                                                         Investors on AngelList
               Ln(number of investors)                     735     2.09      1.97        0.00     1.61    5.74
               Ln(number of in-state investors)            735     1.44      1.72        0.00     0.69    4.80
               Ln(number of out-of-state investors)        735     1.78      1.80        0.00     1.39    5.21
               Ln(number of new investors)                 735     1.70      1.75        0.00     1.39    5.02
               Ln(number of experienced investors)         735     1.55      1.78        0.00     1.10    5.14
               Ln(number of investors with no exits)       735     1.73      1.76        0.00     1.39    5.04
               Ln(number of investors with exits)          735     1.50      1.79        0.00     0.69    5.07



                                                                48
                           Table 4. Angel Tax Credits and Angel Investments

Panel A reports the difference-in-differences estimates for the effect of angel tax credits on the number of angel
investments in the high-tech sector (IT, biotech, and renewable energy). The sample period is 1993 to 2016. The
dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the total number of angel investments in a state-year. ATC is an indicator
equaling one if a state has an angel tax credit program in that year. Tax credit percentage is a continuous variable
equal to the maximum tax credit percentage available in a state-year with an angel tax credit program. Panel B reports
the heterogeneous effect of angel tax credit programs. Program flexibility is an index ranging from 0 to 17 that
measures the presence and strictness of the 17 program restrictions in Table 1. Higher values of the index represent
more flexible programs. VC supply is state-year-level aggregate VC investment amount (excluding angel and seed
rounds identified in our main sample) scaled by the total number of young firms (of age 0 to 5) in that state-year from
BDS. Both Program flexibility and VC supply are standardized by subtracting the sample mean and dividing by the
standard deviation. Control variables are defined in equation (1). Each observation is a state-year. All specifications
include state and year fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered by state. ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                            Panel A. Angel Tax Credits and Angel Investment Volume

                                                        Ln(Number of angel investments)
                                                              (1)               (2)
                           ATC                             0.170**
                                                            (0.075)
                           Tax credit percentage                             0.539***
                                                                              (0.176)
                           Controls                           Yes               Yes
                           State FE                           Yes               Yes
                           Year FE                            Yes               Yes
                           Observations                      1,200             1,200
                           Adjusted R2                       0.911             0.912

                                               Panel B. Heterogeneity

                                                                   Ln(Number of angel investments)
                                                               (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
            ATC                                             0.157** 0.168**
                                                            (0.069)      (0.066)
            ATC × Program flexibility                        0.124*
                                                            (0.065)
            ATC × VC supply                                            -0.182***
                                                                         (0.050)
            Tax credit percentage                                                 0.394*** 0.370**
                                                                                   (0.142)      (0.154)
            Tax credit percentage × Program flexibility                           0.359***
                                                                                   (0.083)
            Tax credit percentage × VC supply                                                 -0.286***
                                                                                                (0.068)
            Controls                                          Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes
            State FE                                          Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes
            Year FE                                           Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes
            Observations                                     1,200        1,200     1,200        1,200
            Adjusted R2                                      0.912        0.913     0.914        0.913


                                                           49
                   Table 5. Angel Investments by Ex-Ante Growth Characteristics

 This table reports the difference-in-differences estimates for the effect of angel tax credits on the quantity of angel
 investments in the high-tech sector split by pre-investment startup characteristics at the median (employment,
 employment growth, and the fraction of serial entrepreneurs on founding team). Control variables are defined in
 equation (1). All specifications include state and year fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and
 clustered by state. ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                        High               Low           High fraction     Low fraction
                    High              Low
                                                     employment        employment           of serial         of serial
                 employment        employment
                                                       growth            growth          entrepreneurs     entrepreneurs
                       (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)
ATC                  -0.004          0.247***           0.078            0.185**             0.083            0.177*
                    (0.075)           (0.083)          (0.067)           (0.082)            (0.116)           (0.094)
Controls               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
State FE               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
Year FE                Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
Observations          1,200            1,200            1,200             1,200              1,200             1,200
Adjusted R2           0.879            0.872            0.891             0.860              0.735             0.879




                                                           50
                          Table 6. Angel Tax Credits and Firm-Level Outcomes

This table reports the effect of receiving a tax credit and firm-level outcomes. The dependent variable in column 1 is
an indicator that denotes whether a startup receives VC financing within two years after receiving a tax credit. The
dependent variable in column 2 is an indicator equal to one if a startup reaches a successful exit. The dependent
variable in columns 3 (4) (5) are indicators equal to one if a startup has more than 10 (25) (75th percentile) employees
within two years after first applying to have an investor receive a tax credit. Finance pre-TC is indicator variable for
whether a firm received any other external financing before its investors received a tax credit. All specifications
include state-year and sector-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state-year level. ***, **, and *
denotes significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                              Raised VC 2                   Emp. > 10 2yrs      Emp. > 25 2yrs       Emp. > p75 2yrs
                                                 Exit
                              yrs post-TC                     post-TC             post-TC              post-TC
                                    (1)            (2)           (3)                 (4)                  (5)
 Got tax credit                  -0.0088        -0.0051        0.0023             -0.00021               0.011
                                (0.0160)       (0.0093)        (0.004)            (0.0026)              (0.007)
 Emp. > 10 in credit yr                                       0.53***
                                                               (0.070)
 Emp. > 25 in credit yr                                                             0.65***
                                                                                     (0.11)
 Emp. > p75 in credit yr                                                                                 0.45***
                                                                                                         (0.065)
 Finance pre-TC                 0.17***       0.086***         0.041***            0.015***             0.053***
                                (0.028)        (0.015)          (0.009)            (0.0046)              (0.010)
 State-Year FE                    Yes            Yes              Yes                 Yes                  Yes
 Sector-Year FE                   Yes            Yes              Yes                 Yes                  Yes
 Observations                    3,227          3,227            3,227               3,227                3,227
 Adjusted R2                      0.31           0.11             0.46                0.50                 0.41




                                                          51
                    Table 7. Characteristics of Investors Receiving Tax Credits

This table describes characteristics of investors who receive angel tax credits. We gather information from LinkedIn
on angel investors from seven states that publicly release the names of individual investors who received angel tax
credits. Corporate Executive is an investor who lists their current occupation as President, Vice President, Partner,
Principal, Managing Director, or Chief Officer other than CEO. Gender and race are identified from pictures. An
individual's approximate age is derived from adding 22 years to the d ifference between the individual's college
graduation year and the median year of investment in the sample, which is 2013.

                                                  N      Fraction                          N     Fraction
          Number of investor-tax credit pairs   8,218                  Profession        3,286
                                                                         Corp. Exec.                0.82
          Number of unique investors            5,637                    Doctor                    0.073
            Illinois                                      0.14           Entrepreneur              0.062
            Kentucky                                      0.05           Lawyer                    0.041
            Maryland                                      0.16           Investor                  0.007
            Minnesota                                     0.39           Other                     0.003
            New Jersey                                    0.09
            New Mexico                                    0.03         Race             4,446
            Ohio                                          0.14           White                      0.95
                                                                         South Asian                0.03
          Location is in state                  4,694     0.79           East Asian                 0.02
                                                                         Black                     0.007
          Male                                  4,702     0.87           Hispanic                  0.002
                                                                         Middle Eastern            0.001
                                                  N       Mean
          Age                                   2,363     41.9




                                                         52
                                             Table 8. Which Investors Respond to Angel Tax Credits?

This table examines changes in investor composition during angel tax credit programs. Panel A reports the difference-in-differences estimates for the effects of
angel tax credits on the entry of investors based on AngelList data. ATC is an indicator equaling one if a state has an angel tax credit program in that year. The
dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the number of investors in each category (in-state, out-of-state, new, not new, had no prior exit, had exit, no prior
founder experience, had founder experience) who invested in a state-year. Each observation is a state-year. Control variables are defined in equation (1). Panel B
reports the difference-in-differences estimates for the effects of angel tax credits on investor composition on AngelList. Each observation is an investor-startup pair
(i.e., investment) and is weighted by one over the number of observations in each state. The dependent variables are dummies indicating that an investor was in-
state, new, had no prior exit, or had no prior founder experience. All specifications include CBSA and year fixed effects. The sample period is 2003 to 2017 in both
panels. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered by state. ***, **, and * denotes significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                           Panel A. Investor Entry at the State-Year Level

                                                                                                                       No founder    Has founder
                                 In-state   Out-of-state         New        Not new       Had no exit   Had exit
                                                                                                                       experience    experience
                                    (1)          (2)               (3)        (4)             (5)         (6)              (7)           (8)
                 ATC             0.277**        0.189           0.262**      0.154         0.273**       0.156          0.256**         0.119
                                 (0.131)       (0.146)          (0.128)     (0.161)        (0.133)      (0.146)          (0.128)       (0.177)
                 Controls          Yes           Yes              Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes           Yes
                 State FE          Yes           Yes              Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes           Yes
                 Year FE           Yes           Yes              Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes           Yes
                 Observations      735           735              735         735            735          735              735           735
                 Adjusted R2      0.862         0.841            0.845       0.843          0.849        0.836            0.863         0.791

                                                    Panel B. Investor Characteristics at the Investment Level

                                                                                                             No founder
                                                                 In-state         New        Had no exit     experience
                                                                   (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)
                                             ATC                0.087***        0.058**       0.085***        0.066**
                                                                 (0.031)        (0.025)        (0.027)         (0.031)
                                             Controls              Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes
                                             CBSA FE               Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes
                                             Year FE               Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes
                                             Observations        90,702          90,702        90,702          90,702
                                             Adjusted R2          0.220           0.109         0.187           0.112



                                                                                  53
                                              Table 9. Survey Analysis

This table examines investors' perception of the importance of angel tax credits based on survey data . In Panel A, the
dependent variable is ATC importance, a score that takes a value of 1 to 5 (1 being "not at all important" and 5 being
"extremely important"). Column 1 examines whether a respondent has done an above median number of angel deals
since January 2018. Column 2 focuses on investor experience measured by matching respondents to AngelList data.
Column 3 examines investor profession. Column 4 examines surveyed importance of other investment factors. Panel
B examines how deal experience correlates with the reasons a respondent perceives angel tax credit as unimportant.
All regressions include state fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state. ***, **, and * denotes significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                 Panel A. ATC Importance
                                                                             ATC importance
                                                                (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)
                   Above median # of deals since 2018       -0.229***
                                                             (0.041)
                   AL_has exit                                          -0.199***
                                                                         (0.039)
                   AL_has founder experience                             -0.118*
                                                                         (0.061)
                   AL_has invested as insider                            0.103**
                                                                         (0.049)
                   AL_top school                                        -0.138***
                                                                         (0.033)
                   Profession_corporate executive                                       -0.144
                                                                                       (0.110)
                   Profession_entrepreneur                                             -0.193*
                                                                                       (0.105)
                   Profession_investor                                                -0.375***
                                                                                       (0.136)
                   Importance_team                                                                 -0.103**
                                                                                                    (0.040)
                   Importance_business                                                             0.127***
                                                                                                    (0.034)
                   Importance_location                                                               0.055*
                                                                                                    (0.031)
                   Importance_financial return                                                     0.117***
                                                                                                    (0.020)
                   Importance_add value                                                             0.041**
                                                                                                    (0.017)
                   Importance_valuation                                                              0.001
                                                                                                    (0.031)
                   Importance_gut reaction                                                            -0.02
                                                                                                    (0.021)
                   Importance_deal terms                                                           0.141***
                                                                                                    (0.029)
                   State FE                                   Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
                   Observations                              1,202       1,199          1,242        1,331
                   Adjusted R2                               0.126       0.048          0.121        0.170

                                  Panel B. ATC Unimportance for Different Reasons
                                                 Home run     Coordination     Non-financial    Too small   Cannot use
                                                     (1)           (2)              (3)             (4)        (5)
         Above median # of deals since 2018       0.046**       0.051**            0.006          -0.021      0.003
                                                  (0.020)       (0.024)          (0.016)         (0.021)     (0.021)
         State FE                                   Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes         Yes
         Observations                              1,202         1,202             1,202          1,202       1,202
         Adjusted R2                               0.018         0.025            -0.007          0.018       0.090

                                                              54
                                  Table 10. The Role of Insider Investors

This table reports summary statistics for tax credit recipients who are insider investors, defined as angel investors who
also serve as executives or managers at the firm for which they receive angel tax credits. For company-level statistics,
the unit of observation is a unique tax credit beneficiary company for which we observe an investor-company link.
For investor-level statistics, the unit of observation is a unique investor for which we observe an investor-company
link.


                                                    Company Level
                                                                                  N     Fraction
                       1 investor is executive or has family member
                                                                                 628      0.35
                       who is executive
                        Among Kentucky companies                                  77      0.04
                        Among Maryland companies                                  81      0.38
                        Among New Jersey companies                                63      0.24
                        Among New Mexico companies                                61      0.26
                        Among Ohio companies                                     346      0.44
                       At least one investor is an executive                     628      0.33

                                                     Investor Level
                                                                                  N     Fraction
                       Investor is executive or has family who is executive     3,560     0.14
                       Investor is executive                                    3,560     0.11




                                                           55
                                     Appendix Figures and Tables

 Figure A1. Distributions of Ex-Ante Growth Characteristics: State-Years with vs. without
                                         ATC

Panel A (B) compares the distributions of ex-ante employment (employment growth) of angel-backed firms in state-
years with an angel tax credit program to state-years without a program, restricting to states that ever had an angel tax
credit program. Employment and employment growth are measured in the year before angel investment. In Panel A,
the solid line (dotted line) represent the estimated kernel density for firms that received angel investments in state-
years with (without) an angel tax credit program. Panel B shows the histogram where employment growth is
discretized into negative growth, zero growth, and positive growth. Panel C compares the histograms of exit outcomes
by angel-backed firms in state-years with an angel tax credit program to those in state-years without a program,
restricting to states that ever had an angel tax credit program. The blue bars (empty bars) represent the fraction of
angel-backed firms achieving each exit outcome by the end of 2018 and that received angel investments in state-years
with (without) an angel tax credit program from 1985 to 2016. Panel D compares the distribution of the logarithm of
exit multiple for angel-backed firms that have achieved M&A or IPO by the end of 2018 and received angel
investments in state-years with (without) an angel tax credit program from 1985 to 2016. Exit multiple is defined as
total enterprise value at exit divided by total invested capital. All variables are defined in Appendix A.

                               Panel A                                             Panel B




                              Panel C                                              Panel D




                                                           1
                 Figure A2. Aggregate Effects Robustness: Dropping CA and MA

This figure re-estimates the specification in Figure 3, dropping California and Massachusetts. Panel A reports the
difference-in-differences point estimates and confidence intervals of the aggregate effects of angel tax credits using
the specification in equation (1) with no controls. Panel B reports the same estimates with controls.

                             Panel A. Effects of Angel Tax Credits, without Controls




                              Panel B. Effects of Angel Tax Credits, with Controls




                                                          2
        Figure A3. Aggregate Effects Robustness: Rate Variables in Percentage Points
This figure provides a robustness to the results in Figure 3. We consider the outcomes that are rates (in percentage
points) and show the results without log-transforming these variables. Panel A reports the difference-in-differences
point estimates and confidence intervals of the aggregate effects of angel tax credits using the specification in equation
(1) with no controls. Panel B reports the same estimates with controls. The horizontal axis is in percentage points.

                              Panel A. Effects of Angel Tax Credits, without Controls




                               Panel B. Effects of Angel Tax Credits, with Controls




                                                            3
                        Figure A4. Aggregate Effects Robustness: Event Study

This figure reestimates the specifications in Figure 3 using an event study approach. Instead of using the full panel of
state-years, we focus on six years before and after program introductions and expirations, and use the states that never
adopted the tax credit as the control group. Panel A reports the main coefficients and 95% confidence intervals without
control variables. Panel B reports those with control variables.

                             Panel A. Effects of Angel Tax Credits, without Controls

                                                                                    0.009(0.012)
                                Emp. Young All Industries
                                                                                        0.029(0.036)
                         Emp. Young Manufact. High Tech
                                                                                    0.012(0.007)
                                         Job Creat. Rate
                                                                                   0.003(0.008)
                                         Job Destr. Rate
                                                                                    0.010(0.010)
                                  Job Creat. Rate Young
                                                                                  -0.001(0.015)
                                  Job Destr. Rate Young
                                                                                   0.003(0.005)
                                       Entry Rate Young
                                                                                 -0.002(0.009)
                                         Exit Rate Young
                                                                              -0.008(0.009)
                                 Small Est. Manufacturing
                                                                                  0.001(0.012)
                                    Small Est. High Tech
                                                                         -0.035(0.041)
                                          Any Succ. Exit
                                                                                    0.008(0.028)
                                            Quality Firms
                                                                                 -0.006(0.024)
                                      Patent Applications

                                                            -.15   -.1    -.05          0          .05   .1   .15




                                Panel B. Effects of Angel Tax Credits, with Controls


                                                                                  0.001(0.013)
                               Emp. Young All Industries
                                                                                      0.025(0.045)
                         Emp. Young Manufact. High Tech
                                                                                    0.014(0.009)
                                        Job Creat. Rate
                                                                                 -0.003(0.009)
                                        Job Destr. Rate
                                                                                    0.011(0.010)
                                  Job Creat. Rate Young
                                                                                 -0.004(0.014)
                                  Job Destr. Rate Young
                                                                                  0.004(0.005)
                                       Entry Rate Young
                                                                                 -0.005(0.010)
                                        Exit Rate Young
                                                                            -0.014(0.012)
                                Small Est. Manufacturing
                                                                             -0.009(0.015)
                                    Small Est. High Tech
                                                                           -0.021(0.037)
                                          Any Succ. Exit
                                                                                 -0.002(0.034)
                                           Quality Firms
                                                                           -0.021(0.026)
                                     Patent Applications

                                                            -.15   -.1    -.05         0          .05    .1   .15




                                                                    4
                                                                 Table A1. Tax Credit Program Details

This table lists the angel tax credit programs in the U.S. from 1988 to 2018. For each program, it provides the state, program name, effective period and tax credit
percentage. It also details program-level company, investment, investor and tax credit restrictions. We include the latest value for any restrictions that vary over a
program's life. Additionally, we do not list state programs for direct investment or co-investment, in addition to support for investments in funds or universities.

                                                                                                                                Individuals or groups    Max tax credit
                State            Program                                                     Effective year   Expiration year   qualify for tax credit    percentage
                Arizona          Angel Investment Program                                        2006              2021                  Both              0.3­0.35
                Arkansas         Equity Investment Incentive Program                             2007              2019                  Both                0.333
                                 Innovation Investment Tax Credit                                2010              2010                  Both                 0.15
                Colorado
                                 Advanced Industry Investment Tax Credit                         2014              2022                  Both              0.25­0.3
                Connecticut      Angel Investor Tax Credit Program                               2010              2019                  Both                 0.25
                Georgia          Angel Investment Tax Credit                                     2011              2018              Individuals              0.35
                Hawaii           High Technology Business Investment Tax Credit                  1999              2010                  Both               0.1­1.0
                Illinois         Angel Investment Credit Program                                 2011              2021                  Both                 0.25
                Indiana          Venture Capital Investment Tax Credit Program                   2004              2020                  Both              0.2­0.25
                Iowa             Innovation Fund Tax Credit                                      2002            ongoing                 Both                 0.2
                Kansas           Angel Investor Tax Credit                                       2005              2021                  Both                 0.5
                Kentucky         Angel Investment Act Tax Credit                                 2015            ongoing             Individuals            0.4­0.5
                Louisiana        Angel Investor Tax Credit                                       2005              2021              Individuals              0.25
                Maine            Seed Capital Tax Credit Program                                 1989            ongoing                 Both               0.3­0.6
                                 Biotechnology Investment Incentive Tax Credit                   2007            ongoing                 Both                 0.5
                Maryland
                                 Cybersecurity Investment Tax Credit                             2014              2023                  Both              0.33­0.5
                Michigan         Small Business Investment Tax Credit                            2011              2011                Groups                 0.25
                                 Angel Tax Credit                                                2010              2017                  Both                 0.25
                Minnesota
                                 Seed Capital investment Credit                                  2019                                    Both                 0.45
                Nebraska         Angel Investment Tax Credit                                     2011             2022                   Both              0.35­0.4
                New Jersey       Angel Investor Tax Credit Program                               2013            ongoing                 Both                 0.1
                New Mexico       Angel Investment Credit                                         2007             2025               Individuals              0.25
                New York         Qualified Emerging Technology Company Tax Credits               2000            ongoing                 Both               0.1­0.2
                North Carolina   Qualified Business Tax Credit Program                           2008             2013                   Both                 0.25
                                 Seed Capital Investment Tax Credit                              1993            ongoing                 Both                 0.45
                North Dakota
                                 Angel Investor Investment Credit                                2017            ongoing                 Both                 0.35
                                 Ohio Technology Investment Tax Credit                           1996             2013                   Both              0.25­0.3
                Ohio
                                 InvestOhio                                                      2011            ongoing                 Both                 0.1
                Oklahoma         Small Business Capital Companies Tax Credit                     1998             2011                   Both                 0.2
                Rhode Island     Innovation Tax Credit                                           2007             2016                   Both                 0.5
                South Carolina   High Growth Small Business Job Creation Act                     2013             2019               Individuals              0.35
                Tennessee        Angel Tax Credit                                                2017            ongoing             Individuals           0.33­0.5
                Utah             Life Science and Technology Tax Credits                         2011                                    Both                 0.35
                Virginia         Qualified Equity and Subordinated Debt Investments Credit       1999            ongoing             Individuals              0.5
                West Virginia    High-Growth Business Investment Tax Credit                      2005             2008                   Both                 0.5
                Wisconsin        Qualified New Business Venture Program                          2005            ongoing                 Both                 0.25




                                                                                             5
                                                                                Asset cap             Revenue cap      Employment           Age cap
State            Program                                                       ($ million)             ($ million)        cap               (years)
                                                                        Assets < 2 if before 2012;
Arizona          Angel Investment Program
                                                                         Assets < 10 otherwise
Arkansas         Equity Investment Incentive Program
                 Innovation Investment Tax Credit                               Assets < 5                  2                                  5
Colorado
                 Advanced Industry Investment Tax Credit                                                    5                                  5
Connecticut      Angel Investor Tax Credit Program                                                          1              25                  7
Georgia          Angel Investment Tax Credit                                                               0.5             20                  3
Hawaii           High Technology Business Investment Tax Credit
Illinois         Angel Investment Credit Program                                                                          100                  10
Indiana          Venture Capital Investment Tax Credit Program                                             10
                                                                       Net worth < 3 before 2005;                                        3 before 2009;
Iowa             Innovation Fund Tax Credit
                                                                       Net worth < 10 otherwise                                           6 otherwise
Kansas           Angel Investor Tax Credit                                                                  5                                  5
Kentucky         Angel Investment Act Tax Credit                             Net worth < 10                               100
Louisiana        Angel Investor Tax Credit                                   Net worth < 2                  10             50
                                                                                                      3 before 2014;
Maine            Seed Capital Tax Credit Program
                                                                                                       5 otherwise
                 Biotechnology Investment Incentive Tax Credit                                                             50                  10
Maryland
                 Cybersecurity Investment Tax Credit                                                                       50
                                                                                                                                    10 years if business uses
Michigan         Small Business Investment Tax Credit                 Pre-investment valuation < 10                       100        MI university research;
                                                                                                                                          5 otherwise
                                                                                                                                        20 if med tech or
                 Angel Tax Credit                                                                                          25
Minnesota                                                                                                                            pharma; 10 otherwise
                 Seed Capital investment Credit
Nebraska         Angel Investment Tax Credit                                                                               25
New Jersey       Angel Investor Tax Credit Program                                                                        225
New Mexico       Angel Investment Credit                                                                    5             100
New York         Qualified Emerging Technology Company Tax Credits                                         10
North Carolina   Qualified Business Tax Credit Program                                                      5
                 Seed Capital Investment Tax Credit                                                        10
North Dakota
                 Angel Investor Investment Credit                                                          10
                 Ohio Technology Investment Tax Credit                    Net book value < 2.5             2.5
Ohio
                 InvestOhio                                                   Assets < 50                  10
Oklahoma         Small Business Capital Companies Tax Credit                 Net worth < 1
Rhode Island     Innovation Tax Credit                                                                      1
South Carolina   High Growth Small Business Job Creation Act                                                                                   5
Tennessee        Angel Tax Credit                                                                           3              25                  5
Utah             Life Science and Technology Tax Credits
                 Qualified Equity and Subordinated Debt Investments
Virginia                                                                                                    3
                 Credit
West Virginia    High-Growth Business Investment Tax Credit                                                20
Wisconsin        Qualified New Business Venture Program                                                                   100                  10




                                                                            6
                                                                Min.                                                Exclude existing    Exclude       Exclude      Reporting req.   Previous external     Registration
                                                           investment per    Min. holding        Ownership cap        owners and        full-time    executives    for investor's     financing cap         req. for
State            Program                                     investor ($)    period (year)      before investment    their families    employees    and officers        firm            ($ million)        business
Arkansas         Equity Investment Incentive Program                                                                                                                      N                                    Y
Arizona          Angel Investment Program                     25,000               1                  30%                  Y                                              N           2 in total inv           Y
                 Innovation Investment Tax Credit             25,000                                  30%                  Y                                              N                                    Y
Colorado                                                                                                                                                                              10 in inv, debt,
                 Advanced Industry Investment Tax Credit      10,000                                  30%                  Y                                             N                                     N
                                                                                                                                                                                           equity
                                                                                                                                                                                         2 in angel
Connecticut      Angel Investor Tax Credit Program            25,000                                  50%                  Y                                             N                                     Y
                                                                                                                                                                                         financing
                                                                                                                                                                                    1 in equity or debt
Georgia          Angel Investment Tax Credit                                       2                                                                                     N                                     Y
                                                                                                                                                                                             inv
                 High Technology Business Investment
Hawaii                                                                             5
                 Tax Credit
Illinois         Angel Investment Credit Program              10,000               3                  50%                  Y                                             Y          10 in PE, 4 TC inv         Y
                 Venture Capital Investment Tax Credit
Indiana                                                                                               50%                  Y                                             N                                     Y
                 Program
                                                                            3 if before 2014;
Iowa             Innovation Fund Tax Credit                                                           70%                  Y                                             N                                     N
                                                                               none if after
Kansas           Angel Investor Tax Credit                                                                                                 Y             Y               Y                                     N
Kentucky         Angel Investment Act Tax Credit              10,000                                  20%                  Y               Y                             Y          1 in TC angel inv          Y
Louisiana        Angel Investor Tax Credit                                         3                  50%                  Y                             Y               N                                     Y
Maine            Seed Capital Tax Credit Program                                   4                  50%                  Y                             Y               Y                                     N
                 Biotechnology Investment Incentive Tax
                                                              25,000               2                  25%                  Y                                             N                                     Y
Maryland         Credit
                 Cybersecurity Investment Tax Credit          25,000               2                  25%                  Y                                             N                                     Y
Michigan         Small Business Investment Tax Credit         20,000               3                                       Y                             Y               Y                                     Y
                 Angel Tax Credit                             10,000               3                  20%                  Y                             Y               Y               4 in PE               Y
Minnesota
                 Seed Capital investment Credit                                                       50%                  Y                                             Y                                     Y
Nebraska         Angel Investment Tax Credit                  25,000               3                  50%                  Y                             Y               Y                                     Y
New Jersey       Angel Investor Tax Credit Program                                                    80%                  Y                                             N                                     N
New Mexico       Angel Investment Credit                                                                                                   Y             Y               N                                     N
                 Qualified Emerging Technology Company
New York                                                                           4                  10%                  Y                                             N                                     N
                 Tax Credits
North Carolina   Qualified Business Tax Credit Program                             1                  10%                  Y               Y             Y               N                                     Y
                 Seed Capital Investment Tax Credit                                3                  50%                  Y                                             N                                     Y
North Dakota
                 Angel Investor Investment Credit                                  3                                                                                     N                                     N
                 Ohio Technology Investment Tax Credit                             3                   5%                  Y               Y                             N                                     Y
Ohio
                 InvestOhio                                                       2-5                                                                                    N                                     Y
                 Small Business Capital Companies Tax
Oklahoma                                                                                                                                                                 Y                                     N
                 Credit
Rhode Island     Innovation Tax Credit                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                 High Growth Small Business Job Creation
South Carolina                                                                     2                                                                                     N                                     Y
                 Act
Tennessee        Angel Tax Credit                             15,000                                                                                                     Y                                     Y
Utah             Life Science and Technology Tax Credits      25,000               3                  30%                  Y                                             N                                     N
                 Qualified Equity and Subordinated Debt                                                                                                                             3 in equity or debt
Virginia                                                                           3                                       Y               Y             Y               N                                     Y
                 Investments Credit                                                                                                                                                         inv
                 High-Growth Business Investment Tax
West Virginia                                                                      5                   5%                  Y                             Y               N                                     N
                 Credit
Wisconsin        Qualified New Business Venture Program                            3                  20%                  Y                                             N               10 in PE              Y




                                                                                                       7
                                                                                           Max tax credit                                                                           Total angel         State
                                                                 Max tax      Max tax       amount per          "First                                                              inv. in state    funding as
                                              Aggregate tax     credit per   credit per     investor per      come first                                                Carry        during eff.      share of
                                               credit cap       company       investor    business per year    served"                                    Carry        forward          year         total angel
State         Program                          ($ million)         ($)           ($)             ($)            policy     Refundable   Transferrable      over         (year)       ($ million)    inv. in state
Arizona       Angel Investment Program             2.5           600,000      250,000                             Y            N             N              Y             3              4.2            0.60
              Equity Investment Incentive
Arkansas                                           6.25                                                                        N             Y              Y             9              0              1
              Program
              Innovation Investment Tax
                                                   0.75                       20,000                              Y            N             N              Y             5            44.62            0.02
              Credit
Colorado
              Advanced Industry
                                                   0.75                       50,000                              Y            N             N              Y             5           143.59            0.01
              Investment Tax Credit
              Angel Investor Tax Credit
Connecticut                                         3            500,000      250,000                             Y            N             N              Y             5            33.04            0.09
              Program
Georgia       Angel Investment Tax Credit          5-10                       50,000                              N            N             N              Y             5            28.97            0.35
              High Technology Business
Hawaii                                                                        700,000                                          Y             Y              Y         Unlimited        12.41
              Investment Tax Credit
              Angel Investment Credit
Illinois                                            10          1,000,000                     500,000             Y            N             N              Y             5            49.87            0.20
              Program
              Venture Capital Investment                                                                                                Y after 2012;
Indiana                                            12.5                      1,000,000                            N            N                            Y             5              0              1
              Tax Credit Program                                                                                                        N before 2012
Iowa          Innovation Fund Tax Credit           2-4          500,000       100,000          50,000             Y            Y              Y             Y            3-5            8.33            1
Kansas        Angel Investor Tax Credit             6                         250,000          50,000             Y            N              Y             Y         Unlimited           0             1
              Angel Investment Act Tax
Kentucky                                            3                         200,000                             Y            N             Y              Y             15            9.55            0.31
              Credit
Louisiana     Angel Investor Tax Credit             3.6                       362,880         181,440             Y                          Y                                          6.51            1
                                              Lifetime cap 30
              Seed Capital Tax Credit
Maine                                          before 2014;     5,000,000                     500,000             Y            Y             N              Y             15            3.07            1
              Program
                                                5 otherwise
              Biotechnology Investment
                                                   6-12                       250,000                             Y            Y             N                                         75.32            0.16
              Incentive Tax Credit
Maryland
              Cybersecurity Investment Tax                      250,000 to
                                                   2-4                                                            Y            Y             N              N
              Credit                                             500,000
              Small Business Investment
Michigan                                            9           1,000,000     250,000         250,000                          N                            Y             5            24.81            0.36
              Tax Credit
              Angel Tax Credit                      15                        125,000                                          Y             N              Y                           33.7            0.45
Minnesota     Seed Capital investment
                                                                              112,500                                          N             N              Y             4
              Credit
Nebraska      Angel Investment Tax Credit          3-4                        300,000                             Y            Y             N               N                         13.27            0.30
                                                                                                                                                           Y for
              Angel Investor Tax Credit                                                                                                                  corporate;
New Jersey                                          25                                        500,000             Y            Y             N                                         46.17            0.54
              Program                                                                                                                                      N for
                                                                                                                                                        individuals
                                                                                                                                                                       5 years if
                                                                                                                                                                      after 2015;
New Mexico    Angel Investment Credit               2                                          62,500             Y            N             N              Y          3 years if       7.2             0.28
                                                                                                                                                                        before
                                                                                                                                                                         2015
              Qualified Emerging
New York      Technology Company Tax                                          150,000                                          Y                            Y         Unlimited       279.57
              Credits
North         Qualified Business Tax Credit
                                                    7.5                                        50,000             N                          N              Y             5            15.82            0.47
Carolina      Program




                                                                                                    8
                                                                                         Max tax credit                                                                      Total angel         State
                                                               Max tax      Max tax       amount per          "First                                                         inv. in state    funding as
                                              Aggregate tax   credit per   credit per     investor per      come first                                           Carry        during eff.      share of
                                               credit cap     company       investor    business per year    served"                                   Carry    forward          year         total angel
State           Program                        ($ million)       ($)           ($)             ($)            policy     Refundable   Transferrable     over     (year)       ($ million)    inv. in state
                Seed Capital Investment Tax
                                                   3.5         225,000      112,500                             Y            N              N           Y          4              0              1
                Credit
North Dakota
                Angel Investor Investment
                                                                            45,000                                           N              N           Y          5
                Credit
                Ohio Technology Investment
                                                   45                       62,500                              Y            N              N           Y          15             0              1
Ohio            Tax Credit
                InvestOhio                         50                       500,000                             Y            N              N           Y           7           46.66            1
                                                                                                                                                                3 years if
                                                                                                                                                               after 2006;
                Small Business Capital
Oklahoma                                                                                                                     N              N           Y      10 years if        0
                Companies Tax Credit
                                                                                                                                                                 before
                                                                                                                                                                  2006
Rhode Island    Innovation Tax Credit              0.5                                      100,000                          N              N           Y           3            6.18            0.08
South           High Growth Small Business
                                                   5                        100,000                                          N              Y           Y          10            11.2            0.45
Carolina        Job Creation Act
Tennessee       Angel Tax Credit                   4                        50,000                              Y            N              N           Y          5            34.68            0.12
                Life Science and Technology
Utah                                                                                                                         N                          N
                Tax Credits
                Qualified Equity and
Virginia        Subordinated Debt                  5                        50,000                              N            N              N           Y          15             35             0.14
                Investments Credit
                High-Growth Business
West Virginia                                      1           500,000      50,000                              Y            N              N           Y          4              0              1
                Investment Tax Credit
                                                                                                                                        Y for early
                                                                                                                                        stage, seed
                Qualified New Business                                                                                                  investment
Wisconsin                                          30         2,000,000                                                      N                          Y          15            1.08            1
                Venture Program                                                                                                        credit, N for
                                                                                                                                      angel investor
                                                                                                                                         tax credit




                                                                                                  9
                         Table A2. Tax Credit Applicant Summary Statistics

This table presents summary statistics on companies that applied to be eligible for an investor tax credit, some of
which did have an investor receiving a credit ("beneficiary companies") and some of which did not ("failed
applicants"). Panel A tabulates these two groups by state. Panel B compares the characteristics between the two groups.
All variables are defined in Appendix A.

                                   Panel A. Unique Tax Credit Applicants by State

                                                    Received Tax
                                                                           No Tax Credit
                                                       Credit
                           AZ                           144                    145
                           CO                           109                     25
                           CT                           100                     70
                           KS                           199                     63
                           KY                            60                    101
                           MD                            87                     0
                           MN                           338                    205
                           NJ                            69                     6
                           NM                            72                     0
                           OH                           374                    537
                           SC                            65                    136
                           WI                           206                    116
                           Total                       1,823                  1,404

                                            Panel B. Summary Statistics

                                                   Received Tax Credit      No Tax Credit     P-Value
               Tax credit (TC) amount ($ thou)            32.00                0.00             0.00
               Finance pre-TC                              0.37                0.12             0.00
               Raised VC 2yrs post-TC                      0.26                0.16             0.00
               Exit                                        0.07                0.04             0.00
               Emp. in credit yr                           6.50                6.20             0.85
               Emp. 2yrs post -TC                          7.20                6.60             0.79
               Emp. > p75 in credit Yr                     0.21                0.20             0.68
               Emp. > p75 2yrs post -TC                    0.25                0.16             0.03
               Emp. > 10 in credit Yr                      0.14                0.09             0.04
               Emp. > 10 2yrs post -TC                     0.18                0.12             0.11
               Emp. > 25 in credit Yr                      0.04                0.01             0.04
               Emp. > 25 2yrs Post-TC                      0.06                0.03             0.25




                                                         10
                   Table A3. Angel Tax Credit and Angel Activities: Robustness

Panel A reports the difference-in-differences estimates for the effect of angel tax credits on the amount of angel
activities based on AngelList data. The sample period is 2003 to 2017. The dependent variables are the natural
logarithm of the number of angel investments, the number of unique invested companies, and the number of unique
investors in a state-year, respectively. Investments, companies, and investors are assigned to state-years based on the
invested companies' locations. ATC is an indicator equaling one if a state has an angel tax credit program in that year.
Tax credit percentage is a continuous variable equal to the maximum tax credit percentage available in a state-year
with an angel tax credit program. Panel B examines the effect of angel tax credits on the state-year average ex-ante
characteristics of angel-backed firms. Dependent variables in columns 1 to 4 are based on firms that have non-imputed
employment numbers from NETS. Panel C reports the triple-difference (DDD) estimation of the effect of angel tax
credits on angel volume as described in equations (2) and (3). Each observation is a state-sector-year. High-tech is an
indicator variable equaling one if the startup is in the high-tech sector (IT, biotech, and renewable energies). Panel D
reports the effect of ATC on angel volume measured from the following subsamples: post year 2000, CVV deals,
Form D deals, Form D and Crunchbase deals, and dropping deals in California and Massachusetts. Control variables
are defined in equation (1). Each observation is a state-year. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered
by state. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                             Panel A. ATC and Angel Volume: Using AngelList Data

                                      No. of Investments         No. of Companies      No. of Investors
                                         (1)       (2)             (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)
             ATC                      0.280**                   0.244**              0.272**
                                      (0.140)                   (0.113)              (0.130)
             Tax credit percentage              0.902***                  0.715***              0.852***
                                                 (0.268)                   (0.228)               (0.239)
             Controls                   Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
             State FE                   Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
             Year FE                    Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
             Observations               735         735           735       735        735         735
             Adjusted R2               0.867       0.869         0.893     0.894      0.866       0.867


                   Panel B. ATC and Ex-ante Growth Characteristics of Angel-Backed Firms

                                                                                        Fraction of serial
                                      Ln(employment)         Employment growth
                                                                                     entrepreneurs on team
                                        (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
           ATC                       -0.180**               -0.106**                  -0.013*
                                      (0.086)                (0.042)                  (0.008)
           Tax credit percentage                -0.446**                 -0.253***                -0.039**
                                                 (0.174)                   (0.087)                 (0.015)
           Controls                    Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
           State FE                    Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
           Year FE                     Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
           Observations               1,200       1,200         1,200       1,200      1,200        1,200
           Adjusted R2                0.182       0.182         0.076       0.075      0.143        0.144




                                                           11
          Panel C. ATC and Angel Volume: Triple-Difference

                               Ln(Number of angel investments)
                                     (1)              (2)
          ATC                      -0.037
                                  (0.052)
          ATC × High-tech        0.206***         0.206***
                                  (0.062)           (0.062)
          Controls                  Yes               No
          State × Sector FE         Yes               Yes
          Year × Sector FE          Yes               Yes
          State × Year FE            No               Yes
          Observations             2,400             2,400
          Adjusted R2              0.914             0.926


               Panel D. ATC and Angel Volume: Subsamples

                             Ln(Number of angel investments)
                Post-2000    CVV     Form D       Dropping   Dropping
Sample:
                 Sample     Sample   Sample VX and VS CA and MA
                    (1)        (2)     (3)           (4)        (5)
ATC              0.178**    0.141** 0.206***      0.166**    0.166**
                 (0.071)    (0.070)  (0.071)       (0.072)    (0.075)
Controls           Yes        Yes      Yes           Yes        Yes
State FE           Yes        Yes      Yes           Yes        Yes
Year FE            Yes        Yes      Yes           Yes        Yes
Observations       800       1,200    1,200         1,200      1,152
Adjusted R2       0.912      0.889    0.869         0.883      0.887




                                   12
                        Table A4. Aggregate Real Effects of Angel Tax Credits

This table reports the difference-in-differences estimates of the aggregate effects of angel tax credits corresponding to
Panel A of Figure 3. The specifications and variables are the same as those in Panel A of Figure 3. All outcome
variables are defined in Appendix A. Standard errors are clustered by state. ***, **, and * denote significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                     Emp. Young
                           Emp. Young All                                                           Job Destruction
                                                     Manufact. All         Job Creation Rate
                             Industries                                                                  Rate
                                                      Industries
                                   (1)                   (2)                       (3)                      (4)
 ATC                             -0.018                 0.007                     0.007                   -0.007
                                (0.016)                (0.043)                   (0.009)                 (0.008)
 State FE                         Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes
 Year FE                          Yes                    Yes                       Yes                     Yes
 Observations                     970                    970                      1,200                   1,200
 Adjusted R2                     0.996                  0.985                     0.892                   0.830

                           Job Creation Rate        Job Destruction
                                                                           Entry Rate Young         Exit Rate Young
                                Young                 Rate Young
                                  (5)                      (6)                      (7)                     (8)
 ATC                             0.010                   -0.006                   -0.000                  -0.000
                                (0.009)                 (0.014)                  (0.005)                 (0.011)
 State FE                         Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
 Year FE                          Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
 Observations                    1,100                   1,100                    1,100                   1,100
 Adjusted R2                     0.604                   0.464                    0.422                   0.668

                       Small Est.           Small Est.          Any Successful                             Patent
                                                                                   Quality Firms
                      Manufacturing         High Tech                Exit                               Applications
                           (9)                 (10)                  (11)                (12)                (13)
 ATC                     -0.019               -0.018                0.000              -0.032              -0.019
                        (0.016)              (0.020)               (0.040)            (0.056)             (0.043)
 State FE                 Yes                  Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 Year FE                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 Observations             900                  900                  1,300               1,166               1,250
 Adjusted R2             0.998                0.996                 0.391               0.962               0.986




                                                           13
               Table A5. Different-State-Matched Employment and Exit Outcomes

This table shows the nearest-neighbor matching estimates for Table 6. Instead of comparing beneficiary firms to failed
applicants, we compare them to control firms in nearby states without tax credit programs. We match each beneficiary
startup with up to five similar control startups through a nearest ne ighbor matching procedure. To match with a
treatment group startup, the control group startup(s) must be located in a different state but in the same census division,
belong to the same sector/market, have a similar age, and have a similar amount of previou s financing relative to the
year of the treatment startup's first tax credit. After this match, the age of each control group startup must be within
two years of the treatment group startup's age, and each startup belongs to one of eighteen narrowly defined s ectors.
The dependent variables are defined within two years following the tax credit year, except for Exit (IPOs and
acquisitions). As in Table 6, we consider as outcomes indicators that are equal to one if the employment is above ten
workers, twenty-five workers, the top quartile in the sample, or if the firm experienced a successful exit. We control
for sector-by-year and the firm-level controls discussed in the paper. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level, respectively.

                                           Emp. > 10        Emp. > 25        Emp. > p75
                                                                                                  Exit
                                          2yrs post-TC     2yrs post-TC     2yrs post-TC
                                                (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
               Got tax credit               -0.0012           -0.014            0.019            -0.017
                                             (0.016)         (0.0094)          (0.015)          (0.015)
               Sector-Year FE                  Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
               Controls                        Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
               Observations                   2,511            2,511            2,511             4,115
               Adjusted R2                     0.52             0.46             0.44             0.079




                                                            14
                                          Table A6. Investor Characteristics and Startup Exit Outcomes
This table reports the relationship between investor characteristics the exit outcomes of the invested startups based on AngelList data. In columns 1 to 4, the
dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the startup achieved exit through IPO or M&A. In columns 5 to 8, the dependent variable is a dummy equal to one
if the startup achieved exit through IPO. Independent variables are defined the same as in Panel B of Table 7. The sample period is 2003 to 2017. All specifications
include company state-year fixed effects and investor state-year fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered by state. ***, **, and * to
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.



                                                        Exit though IPO or M&A                                           Exit though IPO
                                                (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)
                 In-state                   -0.014***                                            -0.009***
                                              (0.004)                                              (0.002)
                 Had no exit                             -0.285***                                            -0.030***
                                                           (0.020)                                              (0.007)
                 New                                                  -0.031***                                            -0.003***
                                                                        (0.003)                                              (0.001)
                 No founder exp.                                                       -0.002                                           -0.002***
                                                                                      (0.002)                                             (0.000)
                 Company state-year FE          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                 Investor state-year FE         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                 Observations                 76,942       76,942       76,942        76,942       76,942       76,942       76,942       76,942
                 Adjusted R2                   0.113        0.232        0.115         0.113        0.096        0.106        0.095        0.095




                                                                                 15
                    Table A7. Survey Summary Statistics and Sample Selection

Panels A and B present the summary statistics for our survey analysis. Panel A shows sample sizes for investors who
we emailed and those who responded. Panel B presents the summary statistics for the variables used in our regressions.
Panel C examines sample selection. Column 1 examines the roles of ATC usage, availability, and locations in
California or Massachusetts. Column 2 additionally examines investor experience measured from AngelList. Standard
errors are clustered by state. ***, **, and * denotes significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively

                                                 Panel A. Samples

                                         Tax credit recipient   AngelList Investors    Total
                        Emailed                2,508                  9,566           12,074
                        Responded               158                   1,226           1,384

                                Panel B. Summary Stats for Regression Variables

                          Variable                                 N      Mean    Std. dev.
                          Tax credit recipient                   1,384    0.11      0.32
                          State has ATC                          1,384    0.41      0.49
                          CA or MA                               1,384    0.42      0.49
                          ATC unimportant_coordination           1,361    0.08      0.27
                          ATC unimportant_home run               1,361    0.40      0.49
                          ATC unimportant_non-financial          1,361    0.08      0.26
                          ATC unimportant_too small              1,361    0.22      0.41
                          ATC unimportant_cannot use             1,361    0.09      0.28
                          Importance_ATC                         1,361    1.82      1.02
                          Importance_team                        1,363    4.75      0.52
                          Importance_business                    1,364    4.36      0.73
                          Importance_location                    1,360    2.41      1.06
                          Importance_financial return            1,365    3.66      1.11
                          Importance_add value                   1,364    3.39      1.16
                          Importance_valuation                   1,362    3.48      0.97
                          Importance_gut reaction                1,363    3.94      0.96
                          Importance_deal terms                  1,362    3.33      1.06
                          Profession_corporate executive         1,250    0.24      0.43
                          Profession_entrepreneur                1,250    0.37      0.48
                          Profession_investor                    1,250    0.22      0.41
                          Above median # of deals since 2018     1,215    0.47      0.50
                          AL_above median # of deals             1,228    0.44      0.50
                          AL_has exit                            1,228    0.30      0.46
                          AL_has founder experience              1,228    0.60      0.49
                          AL_has invested as insider             1,228    0.32      0.47
                          AL_top school                          1,228    0.31      0.46




                                                         16
       Panel C. Sample Selection: Who Responds?

                                         Responded
                                       (1)          (2)
Tax credit recipient              -0.074***      0.114*
                                    (0.012)      (0.063)
State has ATC                         0.012        0.010
                                    (0.013)      (0.012)
CA or MA                             -0.001       -0.009
                                    (0.011)      (0.010)
AL_above median deal experience                0.066***
                                                 (0.006)
AL_has exit                                     -0.015*
                                                 (0.009)
AL_has founder exp                              0.015**
                                                 (0.007)
AL_has invested as insider                     -0.031***
                                                 (0.006)
AL_top school                                    0.020*
                                                 (0.010)
Observations                        12,073         9,572
Adjusted R2                           0.007        0.010




                         17
Appendix A. Variable Definitions
 Variable Name                        Definition
 ATC                                  Indicator variable equaling one if a state has an angel investor tax credit programs in that year.
 Tax credit percentage                Continuous variable equal to the maximum tax credit available (percent) in a particular state-year when there is an angel investor
                                      tax program and set to zero if there is no program in place in a state-year.
 Number of angel investments          Total number of financing rounds that include angel investors in a state-year. Source: CVV and Form D.
 Pre-investment employment            Number of employees in the year prior to receiving angel investment. Source: Non-imputed NETS.
 Pre-investment employment growth     The percentage change in firm employment from year t-2 to t-1. Source: Non-imputed NETS.
 Fraction of serial entrepreneurs     Fraction of founding team members who have prior entrepreneurship experience at the time of angel investment. Source: CVV.
 Exit                                 Indicator variable equaling one if a startup has an IPO or high-valued M&A, defined as the sale price being at least 1.25 times
                                      the total invested capital. Source: CVV.
 Exit multiple                        Enterprise value at exit divided by the total cumulative amount of invested capital. Source: CVV, SDC Platinum, and Kenney-
                                      Patton IPO Database.
 GSP growth                           Gross State Product (GSP) at the state-year level. Source: BEA.
 Income per capita                    Income per capita at the state-year level. Source: BEA.
 Population                           Population at the state-year level. Source: BEA.
 Unemployment rate                    State unemployment rate in a given year in percentage points. Source: BEA.
 Democratic control                   Indicator variable for whether a state (both the legislative and executive branches) is controlled by Democrats. Source: NCSL.
 Republication control                Indicator variable for whether a state (both the legislative and executive branches) is controlled by Republicans. Source: NCSL.
 Revenue/GSP                          Ratio of revenue to Gross State Product at the state-year level. Source: Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances.
 Expenditure/GSP                      Ratio of expenditure to Gross State Product at the state-year level. Source: Annual Survey of State and Local Government
                                      Finances.
 Debt/GSP                             Ratio of debt to Gross State Product at the state-year level. Source: Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances.
 Has income tax                       Indicator variable equal to one if a state has personal income tax in a given year. Source: NBER.
 Max income tax rate                  Maximum state personal income tax rate. Source: NBER.
 Capital gains tax rate               State long-term capital gains tax rate. Source: NBER.
 Neighbor ATC                         Indicator variable equaling one if a state has a least one neighboring state with an active angel tax credit program.
 Venture capital volume               Natural logarithm of aggregate VC investment amount (in millions) in a state-year. Source: VentureXpert
 Program flexibility                  An index ranging from 0 to 17 and is constructed based on the restrictions in Table 1. For each non-binary restriction, we rank
                                      programs from least to most strict and assign the highest rank to programs without this restriction. These rank values are then
                                      normalized to the unit interval by dividing all values by the maximum value. We also construct indicator variables for programs
                                      that do not exclude insider investors and for each of the non-refundable, non-transferable, and no carry forward restrictions. To
                                      form the Program flexibility index, we sum these 17 variables and then standardize the index by subtracting its mean and
                                      dividing by its standard deviation prior to interacting it with our treatment variables.
 VC supply                            State-year level aggregate venture capital investment amount (excluding angel and seed rounds identified in our main sample)
                                      scaled by the total number of young firms (of age 0-5) in that state-year. This variable is standardized by subtracting its mean
                                      and dividing by its standard deviation. Source: VentureXpert, BDS.
 Ln(emp. young all industries)        The logarithm of one plus state-year level aggregate of employment across all industries in young firms (of age 0-5). Period
                                      covered: 1993 -2017 (some states do not report earlier years). Source QWI.
 Ln(emp. young manufact. high tech)   The logarithm of one plus state-year level aggregate of employment for manufacturing and high-tech in young firms (of age 0-5).
                                      High-tech is defined as NAICS: 3254 3341 3342 3344 3345, 3346, 3353, 3391, 5112, 5141, 5171, 5172, 5179, 5182, 5191, 5413,
                                      5413, 5415, 5416 and, 5417. Period covered: 1993 -2017 (some states do not report earlier years). Source QWI.
 Ln(job creat. rate)                  The logarithm of one plus state-year job creation rate in percentage points. Period covered: 1993 -2016. Source: BDS.
 Ln(job destr. rate)                  The logarithm of one plus state-year job destruction rate in percentage points. Period covered: 1993 -2016. Source: BDS.


                                                                             18
Ln(job creat. rate young)               The logarithm of one plus state-year job creation rate (in percentage points) for young firms of age 0-5. Period covered: 1993-
                                        2014. Source: BDS.
Ln(job destr. rate young)               The logarithm of one plus state-year job destruction rate (in percentage points) for young firms of age 0-5. Period covered: 1993-
                                        2016. Source: BDS.
Ln(small est. manufacturing)            The logarithm of one plus state-year establishment count in small (less than 20 workers) manufacturing firms. Period covered:
                                        1995-2015. Source: CBP.
Ln(small est. high tech)                The logarithm of one plus state-year establishment count in small (less than 20 workers) high-tech firms. High-tech is defined as
                                        NAICS: 3254 3341 3342 3344 3345, 3346, 3353, 3391, 5112, 5141, 5171, 5172, 5179, 5182, 5191, 5413, 5413, 5415, 5416 and,
Any succ. exit                          5417. Period covered: 1995-2015. Source: CBP.
                                        Dummy equal to one if the state-year has any angel-backed firm that later had a successful exit, defined as an IPO or high-valued
Ln(quality firms)                       M&A (at least 1.25 times the total invested capital). Source: CVV.
                                        The logarithm of one plus the number of high-potential firms founded in each state-year, where high potential is predicted
                                        (nowcast) by firm characteristics at founding. This corresponds to the Regional Entrepreneurship Cohort Potential Index
Ln(patent applications)                 (RECPI) in Fazio, Guzman, and Stern (2019). Period covered: 1993-2016. Source: Startup Cartography Project.
Ln(entry rate young)                    The logarithm of one plus state-year count of patent applications of granted patents. Period: 1993-2017. Source: USPTO.
                                        The logarithm of one plus state-year entry rate (in percentage points) for young firms of age 0-5. Period: 1993-2014. Source:
Ln(exit rate young)                     BDS.
Got tax credit                          The logarithm of one plus state-year exit rate (in percentage points) for young firms of age 0-5. Period: 1993-2014. Source: BDS.
                                        Indicator variable for whether a firm certified by the tax credit program has an investor receiving tax credit. Source: state
                                        programs.
Raised VC 2 yrs post-TC                 Indicator variable for whether a firm received any VC financing within two years after its investors received angel tax credit.
                                        Source: state programs and CVV.
Emp. >10 2 yrs post-TC                  Indicator variable for whether a firm had more than 10 employees within two years after its investors received angel tax credit.
                                        Source: state programs and Non-imputed NETS.
Emp .>25 2 yrs post-TC                  Indicator variable for whether a firm had more than 25 employees within two years after its investors receive angel tax credit.
                                        Source: state programs and Non-imputed NETS.
Emp. >p75 2 yrs post-TC                 Indicator variable for whether a firm's employment count was above the 75th percentile within two years after its investors
                                        received angel tax credit. Source: state programs and Non-imputed NETS.
Emp. >10 in credit yr                   Indicator variable for whether a firm had more than 10 employees in the year its investors received angel tax credit. Source: state
                                        programs and Non-imputed NETS.
Emp. >25 in credit yr                   Indicator variable for whether a firm had more than 25 employees in the year after its investors received angel tax credit. Source:
                                        state programs and Non-imputed NETS.
Emp. >p75 in credit yr                  Indicator variable for whether a firm's employment count was above the 75th percentile within our sample in the year its
                                        investors received angel tax credit. Source: state programs and Non-imputed NETS.
Finance pre-TC                          Indicator variable for whether a firm received any other external financing before its investors received tax credit.
Ln(number of investors)                 The logarithm of one plus the number of investors making investments in each startup state-year. Source: AngelList.
Ln(number of in-state investors)        The logarithm of one plus the number of investors investing in same-state startups in each startup state-year. Source: AngelList.
Ln(number of out-of-state investors)    The logarithm of one plus the number of out-of-state investors in each startup state-year. Source: AngelList.
Ln(number of new investors)             The logarithm of one plus the number of investors with less than a year of investment experience in each startup state-year.
                                        Source: AngelList.
Ln(number of experienced investors)     The logarithm of one plus the number of investors with more than a year of investment experience in each startup state-year.
                                        Source: AngelList.
Ln(number of investors with no exits)   The logarithm of one plus the number of investors with no prior successful exit in each startup state-year. Source: AngelList.
Ln(number of investors with exits)      The logarithm of one plus the number of investors with prior successful exits in each startup state-year. Source: AngelList.


                                                                               19
Ln(number of investors with no founder      The logarithm of one plus the number of investors with no prior founder experience in each startup state-year. Source: AngelList.
exp.)
Ln(number of investors with founder exp.)   The logarithm of one plus the number of investors with prior founder experience in each startup state-year. Source: AngelList.
Ln(number of insider investors)             The logarithm of one plus the number of investors who are insiders of invested startups in each startup state-year. Source:
                                            AngelList.
ATC importance                              An index variable that takes values of 1 to 5 (1 being "not at all important" and 5 being "extremely important") on the perceived
                                            importance of angel tax credits. Source: survey.
Above median no. of deals since 2018        Indicator variable equaling one if the number of deals made by the investor is above the median in our sample. Source: survey.
AL_has exit                                 Indicator variable equaling one if the investor has had at least one exit (IPO or M&A) in the past. Source: survey matched to
                                            AngelList.
AL_has founder experience                   Indicator variable equaling one if the investor has prior founder experience. Source: survey matched to AngelList.
AL_has invested as insider                  Indicator variable equaling one if the investor has invested in a startup as an insider. Source: survey matched to AngelList.
AL_top school                               Indicator variable equaling one if the investor holds a degree from one of the Wall Street Journal Top 50 Universities or Wall
                                            Street Journal Top 50 MBA Programs. Source: survey matched to AngelList.
ATC_unimportant_home run                    The respondent believed angel tax credit is unimportant because the investor invests based on whether the startup has the
                                            potential to be a "home run" or not. Source: survey.
ATC_unimportant_coordination                The respondent believed angel tax credit is unimportant because it is too difficult to coordinate certification with the startup.
                                            Source: survey.
ATC_unimportant_non-financial               The respondent believed angel tax credit is unimportant because the investor invests for non-financial reasons (personal,
                                            philanthropic, social, etc.) Source: survey.
ATC_unimportant_too small                   The respondent believed angel tax credit is unimportant because the investor thinks tax credits are too small to make a
                                            difference. Source: survey.
ATC_unimportant_cannot use                  The respondent believed angel tax credit is unimportant because the investor cannot take advantage of the tax credit (e.g. no state
                                            income tax liabilities). Source: survey.




                                                                                    20
Appendix B. Identifying Insiders

In Section 5, we describe how a substantial share of angels using the tax credit are actually
insiders of the beneficiary firms. In this Appendix, we present some of the methods we have
used to identify insiders. As mentioned in the paper, we conduct this analysis in the five
states where we observe the identities of tax credit beneficiary companies, the names of
investors who were awarded tax credits, and the link between these two pieces of information
(Ohio, New Jersey, Maryland, New Mexico and Kentucky). These five states are reasonably
representative of states that employ angel tax credits, including some high-tech clusters (e.g.
in New Jersey and Maryland), as well as rural areas (Kentucky, New Mexico), and the Rust
Belt (Ohio). There are 628 unique companies in this group, and 3,560 investors.
        We identify insiders in three ways. First, we check whether any of the investors are
executives in the company using data from Linkedin. Among investors for whom we observe
LinkedIn employment histories, 20% identify as employed at the company they invested in
during the time period in which they received the tax credit, of which almost half are the
CEO.
        Second, we repeat the same procedure using the listed executives in Form D. We can
find Form D filings in the year of the tax credit for 186 of the companies, and we matched
executive officers from the Form D to investors in the tax credit data. A company must list
its executive officers and board members in its Form D. We matched our companies to SEC
Form Ds available on https://disclosurequest.com, which are those post-2010 when the Form
Ds are available in HTML (rather than PDF). Of the 628 unique companies, we were able to
match 186 firms. We use the Form D filed in the year of the tax credit. There are 407 unique
executive officers on these Form Ds, and of them, there are 38 with the same full name as
an investor who received a tax credit, and an additional 24 with the same last name as an
investor. Of the 186 matched companies, 39 have at least one investor who is an executive
or family member of an executive. The share of investors implicated is small, as the
companies that match tend to have a large number of investors.
        Lastly, we also check for investors who are potential family members of any of the
executives. We first identify the 61 companies that had at least three investors with the same
last name. For these investors, we searched websites to identify if they or a family member
were an executive. Based on this process, 61 percent of these 61 companies were identified
as having an insider investor.
        The methods used are inherently imperfect. However, we think that the errors are
likely to be false negative (i.e. fail to identify an investor as insider when she is actually an
insider) rather than false positive (i.e. incorrectly identify an insider). As a result, we
consider our estimates to be a lower bound for the presence of insiders in the beneficiary
group. We refer to the paper for more details on the results.




                                               21
Appendix C. Power Analysis of Aggregate Real Effects Results

In this appendix, we discuss the interpretation of our real effects in the context of Abadie
(2020). We also present a power analysis of our tests.
       Statistically null effects in economics are generally interpreted with caution. In fact, a
null effect does not prove that the effect is zero, but simply means that the researchers failed
to show that the effect was different than zero. Therefore, in the presence of null effects,
researchers usually rely on the magnitude of the point estimate to claim that the estimate is
consistent with an economically small effect. This is what we have done in the body of the
paper.
       In a recent paper, Abadie (2020) studies the informativeness of a statistically null
effect in a Bayesian framework. The key takeaway is that dismissing null effect as
uninformative based on the fact that confidence intervals are not "tight enough" is generally
misleading. In particular, he proves that, when we hold the prior that an experiment is
successful in generating a result (i.e. the policy was effective), a statistical null effect is
informative, and in some cases more informative than a statistically significant result.
Intuitively, when evaluating such experiments, a null result moves the prior more than a
significant result, bringing more evidence in favor of the possibility that the policy was
ineffective. In particular, Abadie (2020) shows that non-significance is more informative
than significance if the power of the test is at least 0.5.
       Abadie (2020) has two implications for our work. First, statistical insignificance could
be useful above and beyond the fact that the estimates are close to zero. Although our null
point estimates are small enough to rule out significant impact of angel tax credits, this result
helps us provide a better conceptual framework to think about these effects. Second, when
the power of a test is sufficiently high (more than 0.5), a null effect changes our prior more
than a significant effect does. This could be the case in our setting, given the widely held
view (in particular by policymakers) that these programs can be effective in increasing
entrepreneurship.
       This discussion requires a careful discussion of the power of our analysis, since our
sample sizes make the likelihood of having tests with small power on a single analysis is
potentially high. Formally speaking, power is the probability that a null hypothesis will be
rejected, conditional on it being false. For our context, there are two particular challenges to
overcome. First, we need to compute the power of our test for each of the outcomes. In
particular, our panel difference-in-differences does not fit well with the traditional, simple
(RCT) framework for power calculation. Second, we need to aggregate the power of our
tests across the many outcomes examined in our analyses. Intuitively, testing our hypothesis
across a large number of outcomes increases the probability of rejecting the null in at least
one test, given that the null is false. The actual aggregation, however, will depend on the
correlation structure of different outcomes.
       We address the first challenge by relying on the recent work by Burlig, Preonas, and
Woerman (2020). This paper develops a method to calculate power in a difference-in-
difference framework.1 Their model, in addition to being directly applicable to our setting,
also deals with some of the unique features of difference-in-differences, such as serial
correlation in the error structure, which could be relevant in a power calculation.

1
 The authors also provide a Stata program to run their analysis: pc_dd_analytic. We thank them for the
program as well as the careful documentation provided.
                                                    22
       In general, the framework by Burlig, Preonas, and Woerman (2020) fits well with ours.
However, there are some differences. First, their model assumes that the treatment happens
only once, and that it does not reverse. In our setting, some states had terminated their tax
credit programs, and in a few cases re-introduced them. This difference is likely going to
bias our estimate of the power downward, because the method will assume a smaller number
of treatment events than actually in our data. Second, Burlig, Preonas, and Woerman (2020)
assume that treatment happens at the same time for all treated units. Therefore, their model
simply requires the specification of the proportion of units treated and the number of pre-
and post-periods. We define the proportion of units treated as the share of states that have
ever introduced tax credit programs (62%). We proxy the number of post-periods (pre-
periods) by multiplying the sample period length by the share of state-years that are treated
(untreated). 2 We think this approximation is reasonable, and we find that altering these
parameters around the baseline does not significantly impact the inference discussed later.
Lastly, the model does not allow us to add controls, but ­ as shown in the paper ­ this does
not affect our estimate of the real effect. Since controls seem to improve inference, not
having a control is also likely to bias downward the actual power. Using these assumptions,
we then calculate the power for each outcome variable assuming an effect of 3% (small) or
5% (medium), and a significance level of 10%. Importantly, we have log-transformed all
outcomes, and therefore our effect can be interpreted as a percentage change in increase
relative to the baseline.
       The second challenge is to combine the power across different outcomes. This is
important because in the limited sample that is provided in our state-level analysis, the power
is not always high in one single specification, and therefore examining several dimensions
is crucial to establish credibility in the analyses. Recall that power can be thought as the
inverse of the likelihood of a false negative. Intuitively, a way to reduce the likelihood of a
false negative is to repeat the experiment across different outcomes, which captures different
aspects of entrepreneurship activities in a state. The idea is that, while one may be unlucky
to fail to detect an effect for one outcome, the probability of failing to detect any effect across
all outcomes decreases as the number of outcomes increases.
       While this is intuitive, a precise aggregation of power requires the knowledge of the
correlation structure of different outcomes. While such a correlation structure is ultimately
unobservable, we consider two limiting cases that ­ in our view ­ can help frame the
discussion in intuitive but compelling ways.
       First, we consider a scenario where all outcome variables are independent (up to some
random noise) from each other. This would imply that each measure captures a distinct
aspect of the local economy and provides new and independent information. To be clear, we
do not believe this limiting assumption to be true in the data, but it provides a useful thought
experiment for our model. However, we do think that each of our measures provides new
and useful information on the underlying economics of entrepreneurship in the local market.
       Under this assumption, it is easy to see that the probability of rejecting the null
hypothesis in at least one of the tests, given that the null is false, is 1 -  =1(1 -  ), where
p is the power of the test for outcome i. This would yield a power that is well above 90% for
both the 3% and 5% assumption. More generally, under this assumption, the overall power

2
 As we show in the variable definition (Appendix A), the different outcomes differ in the sample period
covered. For those variables with a shorter period, we need to modify the assumption about the number of
pre/post to match the total number of period (time dimension) in the sample.
                                                    23
does not depend crucially on having particularly strong tests. Rather, the power is mostly
coming from the high number of tests that are performed. The idea is that, even if an
individual test does not have high power, once we repeat the test thirteen times, the
likelihood of not detecting at least one positive effect given that there is an effect is quite
low. The same result would in fact also hold with smaller expected sizes, like 1%.
       We then consider the opposite scenario where all outcomes are perfectly correlated. In
this case, each outcome is simply a "replica" of the other with random noise. This implies
that ­ net of the noise - additional outcomes do not bring new information. Also, we do not
believe this case is likely in our data. For instance, measures of patenting at the state level is
likely to capture a very distinct economic aspect than measures of employment. Nevertheless,
this provides a useful "worst case scenario" for the aggregation of power across tests. In fact,
under this assumption having more tests does not necessarily help.
       In this case, we can still calculate the lower bound of power. In particular, under this
scenario, the probability of rejecting the null across all tests, given that the null is false, is as
at least high as the power of the most powerful test. In other words, if all tests are essentially
the same and only differ in the level of noise, one can at least have the same level of
confidence as the "best" test.3 In our context, this implies we should look at the test with the
highest power to determine the lower bound of the power of the overall analysis. If we
consider the case of a 3% (5%) effect, our best test yields a power of 0.94 (0.99), which is
for the entry rate on young firm. This result does not crucially depend on this one variable,
since we have five (nine) outcomes for which the power is above 0.5.
       In general, we expect our tests lie between the above two limiting cases: our outcomes
likely provide partially overlapping information, but we still learn new things as we add
more and more outcomes. Together, the above analysis suggests that the likelihood of a false
negative across all our outcome variables is relatively low, even when assuming a relatively
small effect of 3%. Furthermore, this discussion highlights that our setting is likely to be
above the threshold of 0.5 for an insignificant result to be informative (Abadie (2020)).
       The above conclusion is only made stronger by the fact that we find the same null
effect across different alternative models. First, we find similar results when we measure the
outcomes differently (Figure A.2). In particular, we show that the null effects remain when
we do not log-transform the rates variables. Second, we find the same results when excluding
Massachusetts and California (Figure A.3). Third, our results are robust to using an event-
study approach, where we examine the effect of these programs in a narrower window
around their introductions and expirations (Figure A.4).
       Lastly, we note that while our power analysis is specific to our setting, it is also useful
for those interested in understanding the power of studying staggered introductions of
policies in a difference-in-differences setting.




3
  To explain this idea with an example, this situation is akin to a case where one conduct ten tests for a
disease. Assume that nine tests are bad, in that they are unlikely to detect the disease even when the person is
sick, and one is excellent. If you administer all ten tests, the likelihood of detecting the disease on a sick
person is at least as high as the detection rate of the good test. In principle, you might also learn something
from the nine bad tests, but having these extra tests will not lower your power across all tests.
                                                      24
Appendix D: Angel Investor Survey Email




                                      25
Appendix E: Angel Investor Survey

Which of the following factors do you consider to be the most important in affecting your decision about
whether or not to invest in a startup?

                                          Not at all         Slightly   Moderately      Very         Extremely
                                         important          Important   important     important      important
                                            (1)                 (2)        (3)           (4)             (5)

 Quality of the startup's
 management team (1)                          o                 o            o             o               o
 Quality of the startup's technology
 or business model (2)                        o                 o            o             o               o
 Location of the startup (3)
                                              o                 o            o             o               o
 Expected financial returns (based
 on NPV/IRR/Multiple) (4)                     o                 o            o             o               o
 My ability to add value to the
 startup and its alignment with my
 expertise (5)
                                              o                 o            o             o               o
 My ability to benefit from a state-
 level angel investor income tax
 credit after investing (6)
                                              o                 o            o             o               o
 Valuation (overall worth of the
 startup) (7)                                 o                 o            o             o               o
 My gut reaction after seeing the
 business plan or meeting the
 management (8)
                                              o                 o            o             o               o
 Terms of the investment (e.g.
 board control, future participation
 rights) (9)
                                              o                 o            o             o               o




                                                       26
 (Display this question if answer to previous question "My ability to benefit from a state-level angel investor
income tax credit after investing" <= 2)
In the previous question, you rated your ability to benefit from a state-level angel investor income tax credit
after investing as relatively unimportant. Why? (Select all that apply)
     It is too difficult to coordinate certification with the startup. (1)
     I invest based on whether the startup has the potential to be a "home run" or not. (6)
     I invest for non-financial reasons (personal, philanthropic, social, etc.). (2)
     Tax credits are too small to make a difference. (3)
     I cannot take advantage of the tax credit (e.g. no state income tax liabilities). (4)
     Other (please describe). (5) ________________________________________________

Page Break




(Display this question if answer to previous question "My ability to benefit from a state -level angel investor
income tax credit after investing" >= 3)

In the previous question, you rated your ability to benefit from a state-level angel investor income tax credit
after investing as relatively important. Why? (Select all that apply)
     It helps to certify the startup's high quality. (1)
     It might make the investment financially viable (i.e., change NPV from negative to positive). (2)
     I wouldn't calculate the effect on the NPV, but it would make the investment more appealing
    financially. (3)
     It would enable me to invest in additional startups. (4)
     Other (please describe). (5) ________________________________________________

Page Break




                                                       27
Have you ever received a state-level angel investor income tax credit? Choose one.

    o     No, because the states where I invest do not have angel investor tax credits. (1)

    o     No, because I am not aware whether the states where I invest offer angel investor tax credits. (2)

    o  No, because making use of angel investor tax credits requires too much coordination or
    administrative work. (3)

    o     Yes. (4)

What is your opinion of state-level angel investor income tax credits? Do you think they attract new
investments into startups?
     ________________________________________________________________
     ________________________________________________________________


Page Break




Which of the following best describes your main approach to investing in a startup? Choose one.

    o
    (1)
          After conducting financial analysis, I invest when the expected return is above a certain threshold.


    o   I focus on whether the startup is likely to experience dramatic growth over the next couple of
    years. (2)

    o  I focus on whether the startup has a strong team, high quality technology, and/or good business
    model. (3)

    o     I invest for non-financial reasons (personal, philanthropic, social). (4)

    o   None of the above (please describe). (5)
    ________________________________________________


Page Break




                                                        28
To close our survey, we would like to ask you for some background information.


How many investments in startups have you made since January 2018?
    ________________________________________________________________


What is your average investment amount in a startup financing round (a rough estimate is fine)?
   ________________________________________________________________


What is your main profession?

    o   Corporate Executive (4)

    o   Doctor (5)

    o   Entrepreneur (6)

    o   Lawyer (7)

    o   Investor (8)

    o   Other (please describe) (9) ________________________________________________


Are you a member of an angel investment group?

    o   Yes (1)

    o   No (2)

End of Block: Default Question Block




                                                    29
