                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CENTRINO AND THE RESTRUCTURING OF WI-FI SUPPLY

                                       Roberto Fontana
                                       Shane Greenstein

                                      Working Paper 27754
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27754


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




Roberto Fontana thanks the University of Pavia (`Pavia-Boston Program') for financial support,
and the HBS Deans Office for their hospitality during his visit. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Roberto Fontana and Shane Greenstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Centrino and the Restructuring of WI-FI Supply
Roberto Fontana and Shane Greenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 27754
August 2020
JEL No. L63,M21,O32

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper we examine Intel's launch of Centrino and interpret it as platform leader's attempt to
restructure a supply chain. We provide a narrative of key actions and how they coordinated
changes and offer a framework of the predictable consequences for complementary markets. We
then collect data and test these predictions on outcomes in several related complementary
markets. The overall findings are consistent with our framework. We show that the launch of
Centrino increased the likelihood of exit from internal and external Wi-Fi cards markets, and we
find that the magnitude of the effect was largest for internal cards. We also show that the launch
of Centrino's stimulated product introduction in the markets for complements overall and find
that the effect varied across type of routers. Finally, we show that experience with producing Wi-
Fi cards shaped product introduction by router providers.


Roberto Fontana
University of Pavia
Via San Felice 5
27100, Pavia
Italy
and ICRIOS-Bocconi University
roberto.fontana@unipv.it

Shane Greenstein
Technology Operation and Management
Morgan Hall 439
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
sgreenstein@hbs.edu
   1. Introduction

       Under the rubric of studying "platform leadership," an array of studies has deepened

understanding of strategies that look beyond a narrow focus on only a product and its

distribution. Studies of leading platforms identified and inferred principles for guiding future

managerial actions. For example, studies have shown that managers at leading platforms can and

do make strategic investments related to every important complementary market with which their

product interfaces, and that platform leaders can and do develop principles for negotiating with

complementors, investing in administrative support for them, and coordinating a range of

activities with them. These studies conclude that these actions from platform leaders can and do

improve their platform-based businesses (Gawer and Cusumano, 2002; Cusumano, Gawer, and

Yoffie, 2019).

       Should a platform leader take action to alter their supply chain so that it reorients the

supply chain to serve a long-term interest for the platform leader? While prior studies of actions

with complementors suggests that a well-managed platform leader could restructure a supply

chain, no study had investigated such a wide-ranging strategy. Nor has any analyzed the

managerial challenges platform leaders faced. This gap arises because the vast majority of

empirical studies of platform leadership are situated within computing and digital gaming

markets in which the platform leaders interact with applications. In these contexts, negotiations

take place between an upstream platform leader and a downstream application provider, in which

applications face uncertain demand. Rearranging a supply chain requires platform leaders to

consider more than negotiating with application providers. A platform leader must consider the

internal costs of migrating from an established platform to a potential new one, as well as the

external costs of designing for complementors in a new platform, while managing the complex

tradeoffs among numerous internal constituents, and across multiple parts suppliers, developers,

assemblers, and distributors.
       In this study we measure the consequences of the actions by a platform leader to rearrange

its supply chain. These actions, taken during Intel's large, risky, and costly campaign to re-

architect the supply chain for laptops and introduce a non-proprietary standard, IEEE 802.11,

became identified with Intel's branding "Centrino." This is an important program to study,

because Intel restructured the supply chain for laptops, and its actions contributed to growing

laptops into a mass market. It is also interesting because of its complexity and drama. Intel took

many actions ­ i.e., gave away new designs, enabled new complementary designs, reduced the

cost of complements, induced entry of complements, and raised the quality of complements. This

is a rich setting for empirical scholarship to infer costs and consequences.

       Using a variety of sources, we describe management's actions, and the costs it chose to

incur to alter internal priorities. While it is well known that laptop sales growth accelerated after

Centrino's introduction (Burgelmann, 2007, Exhibit 8), the breadth of the scope of changes in

complementor markets, and complexity of managing those changes, is generally overlooked, and

has not been measured. While reviewing events, we identify a set of crucial actions, and we link

these to measurement of the consequence. We focus particularly on changes in the mother board,

external and internal WI-FI cards, and WI-FI router markets, and how Intel's actions altered

behavior in these markets.

       Our data show that the launch of Centrino increases the hazard of exit from both Wi-Fi

cards markets, and, further, that the magnitude of the effect is higher in the case of internal cards.

We also show that the launch of Centrino's stimulated product introduction in the markets for

complements overall, particularly routers. The magnitude of the effect and its statistical

significance vary across type of routers. Surprisingly, this difference in complementor performance

correlates with a firms' prior experience in Wi-Fi cards, but not evenly in both low and high-end

routers. Prior experience in Wi-Fi card is beneficial for product introduction in Small office Home

office (SoHo) routers (low-end). It is not beneficial, or it is (perhaps) harmful for the introduction

of Enterprise and Broadband routers (high-end).
       All these findings lead to the conclusion that Intel's management coordinated a set of

changes to the supply chain that made Intel's laptops more appealing, and most, but not all of it

unfolded as planned. While it is not possible for any observer to view what might have happened

had Intel's management not taken any action, our findings are consistent with the view that Intel

acted before growth occurred and accelerated a potential change in the market. More to the point,

its actions accelerated it in ways that aided Intel's own interests. As such, we offer novel evidence

of a platform strategy that coordinated across a wide range of complementors in a supply chain,

enabled large scale growth, and under conditions of considerable demand uncertainty. In addition,

our study offers observations about the challenges to participating firms, either as a platform

leader or as business partners. The study highlights the costs, risks, and complexity of changing

the conditions for many complementors to a platform leader, and managerial dilemma of

balancing between commitments to "stay the course" and adjusting to new information.

Complementors must react to the "do-or-die" changes in their production costs and in the demand

for new features.



1.1. Contribution to related literature

       While many studies have studied aspects of platform leadership, no existing study

examines a leader's restructuring of supply chains, as this study does. This section identifies the

gap and foreshadows how this study fills it.

       The closest analysis to this study is Gawer and Henderson (2007). They focus on Intel in an

era just before our study, when desktops were the dominant user of Intel's microchips. They

analyze which complementary markets Intel chose to enter and which to avoid, trading off

strategic interests in complementary market with binding backward compatibility constraints. We

overlap in our focus on a range of complementary relationships, but we examine a later and a

wider array of complementors in the supply chain for laptops. We examine Intel's entry into

motherboard design and some of these microchips, and, additionally, the consequences of Intel's
actions on complementary markets where it does not have a presence, such as antennae, cards, and

routers. We also provide extensive statistical support for the analysis, which the prior study could

not do.

          We also related to studies of platform leadership during the "Wintel era," which have

focused on the rollout of Windows 95, the use and support of APIs (Cusumano and Selby, 1998),

the management of complementors at Intel (Gawer and Cusumano, 2002; Gawer and Henderson,

2007), the management of platform competition (Cusumano and Yoffie, 1998), the management of

conflicts over the scope of the old and new platforms (Bresnahan, Greenstein and Henderson,

2011), and the contrast between platform leadership and the use of open principles (Greenstein,

2015: chapter 7). We build on this rich literature of negotiation with complementors and use many

of its core insights to analyze restructuring the supply chain after the millennium.

          We draw our review of events around Centrino from three sources ­ i.e., one case study

(Burgelmann, 2007), one book chapter (Greenstein, 2015: Chapter 14), and a retrospective

celebration of Wi-Fi by its inventors (Lemstra, Hayes and Groewegen, 2011). In contrast, none have

attached their analysis to measurable change in complementor markets.

          The literature on "dominant design" does discuss structuring and restructuring supply

chains, but this study does not build on that tradition. On the surface the Centrino program may

seem to resemble platform leadership before the emergence of a "dominant design" that enables a

"taking off" to a mass market. We regard this resemblance as superficial and not substantive, and

to avoid confusion we draw out the differences now. We would not label laptops as a nascent or

new market in 2001, nor would have contemporaries. The laptop market already did exist, and it

had used a stable set of component designs for many years, just at a small scale. That stability and

predictability makes this setting an awkward fit into standard theories of the emergence of a

dominant design. Instead, we view the Centrino program as a re-architecting of the existing

supply chain ­ that is, the introduction of a new set of arrangements with many complementor
markets, as well as with OEMs. We label these as "coordinated actions" carried out within the

boundary of the actual or potential complementary markets influenced by Intel's standards.

        Another thread in the literature focuses on incentives at platform leaders to support and

compete with complementors (Zhu and Liu, 2018). Technical standards are not central to their

analysis, however, and they do not consider a coordinated set of actions across multiple

complementors, as we do. Zhu (2019) provides a broad review and analysis of platform leader's

entry into complementary spaces. Among the studies reviewed there, we most resemble Foerderer,

Kude, Mithas and Heinzl (2018) and Li and Agrawal (2016), who analyze the consequences for

photo applications from, respectively, Google and Facebook's actions. Google's actions shape

traffic and clicks for photos, affecting demand for services by larger and more diversified

providers, while Facebook alters its governance after its merger with Instagram, creating

heterogeneous effects on photo applications, favoring large over small. In contrast, we do not find

large firms necessarily benefit more than small from Intel's actions. And, more important, the

Centrino episode necessarily leads us to examine and measure a broader range of actions and

markets across the supply chain.

         Like recent research in this vein we focus on a "trigger event(s)" (Agarwal, Moeen and

Shah, 2017), which, in this case, are (a) Intel's actions to reshape laptops after both (b) Apple's

introduction of the Apple Airport, and (c) Dell's development of wireless local access for PCs.

Arguably, all three actions ­ (a), (b) and (c) ­ add up to one big trigger event, though we focus

most of our attention on (a), which the platform leader undertook. Though Intel's management

could make educated guesses about the consequences of their action, there was no way to know

how mass market buyers would act until firms attempted to grow a mass market supply chain. 1 To

this literature we add insights from measurement.


1We share the focus of studies on "economic experiments" by leading firms to learn about market features that
otherwise cannot easily be discovered in a laboratory (Rosenberg, 1992; 1996). In this study we do not stress controlled
experiments internal to the firm (Thomke, 2003a; 2003b). Rather, we stress experiments in nascent platforms prior to the
emergence of large scale production (Moeen, Agarwal and Shah, 2019; Moeen and Agarwal, 2017), such as economic
experiments external to the firm to learn demand, costs at mass market scales, or operational processes (Moeen, Agarwal
and Shah, 2019; Greenstein, 2012; 2007; Rosenberg, 1996; Stern, 2006).
         Our approach resembles many studies that examine the tradeoff between backward

compatibility and new potential markets, as it plays out in application markets, such as gaming

(Kretschmer and Claussen, 2016). In gaming, variance across genres and/or in the timing of

customer adoption identifies consequences from the action of platform leaders, such as demand

expansion from a leader's entry into one application area (Cennamo, Gu and Zhu, 2018; Rietveld

and Eggers, 2018). In contrast, we examine a management team at a leading firm using

coordinated economic experiments in several complementary markets to resolve uncertainty about

a supply chain for a system, which had otherwise not previously experienced mass market

demand. 2

         We also relate to extant research, which has focused on the role or prior experience as

source of heterogeneity among entrants in an industry (Helfat and Lieberman, 2002; Klepper and

Simons, 2000). It has also focused on the role of complementary assets (i.e. manufacturing, sales

and distribution) both at the firm level (Teece, 1986; 2006) and at the industry level (Kapoor and

Furr, 2015). Like this research, we consider how the redeployment of complementary resources

and capabilities was driven by the possession of prior experience.



2. Background the early Wi-Fi market

         We provide a brief review of the events that led to the efforts by Intel, which we give the

label "the Centrino program." The discussion identifies the key elements of this program. 3 A

visual timeline of the events before the launch of Centrino is presented in Figure 1a and a




2 This study also considers how the development of Centrino introduced possible bottlenecks within the system
(Rosenberg, 1963) as well as opened-up new opportunities (Adner, 2012). Bottlenecks could create frictions among the
components and constrain the diffusion of the new technology. New opportunities could advance other elements of the
systems (components and/or complements) which could sustain the competitiveness of the existing technology or even
improve it (Henderson, 1985; Adner and Kapoor, 2016). In both cases transition from the old to the new technology can
be delayed. In contrast to these studies, we highlight how Intel coordinated actions that aided the transition from the
`old' platform to the `new' one, and how it occurred rather quickly.
3 This account draws from, and synthesizes Burgelmann (2007), Lemstra et al. (2011), chapter 4, and Greenstein (2015),

chapter 14.
simplified visual representation of the supply chain before Centrino is provided in Figure 1b. The

detail behind Figure 1b requires lengthy explanation, which the Appendix provides.



                                   [Insert Figures 1a and 1b about here]



       The first trigger event: Apple pioneers market (these are depicted in the timeline under

events 1-5).

       Apple first pioneered the Wi-Fi router using 802.11b, the second design to come out of the

IEEE 802.11 committee, which was an improvement on the first (and flawed) design released in

1997. The Apple Airport--the first mass-market Wi-Fi product--debuted in July 1999 at a

MacWorld convention in New York. Famously, Jobs took out a hoop during the presentation to

convince the audience that there were no wires.

       The Airport did something no prior wireless product had done: it was aimed at the mass

market. The expansion card for the laptop had been priced at $99, and it came in a branded

product from Apple. The base station was sold separately. Apple distributed the entire system.

       Apple got the components for the card and base station from Lucent. Lucent's employees

knew about the 802.11 standard because some of their employees had participated in committee

802.11. Lucent's cards for Apple laptops and the Apple Airport system did not serve PCs from

suppliers other than Apple. At the time that left a large part of the PC market uncovered because

most PCs used a Windows operating system from Microsoft.

       The second trigger event: Dell pioneers Microsoft-compatible systems (these are depicted

in the timeline as events 6-10).

       The IBM-compatible market became first addressed at Dell computer. Michael Dell was

CEO of Dell Computer, one of the largest PC providers in the world by 1999. Dell learned about

the announcement of the Apple Airport and contacted Lucent. According to the account from an
employee, Cees Links, Dell was "furious" with Lucent because Dell was not first to experiment

with a wireless product release. 4

         The two parties subsequently came to a deal. Making Wi-Fi compatible with Windows XP

was the main challenge for the team at Lucent. Eventually Lucent would succeed. To do that

Lucent and Microsoft cooperated in changing the design of Windows XP, and a new version was

released in 2001. It supported IEEE 802.11b in a Windows based system. Just as with Apple, Lucent

made a hardware card for an external slot in a PC.

         Those first two projects established the potential for a larger market for laptop use,

pioneering the technical issues affiliated with the challenges of the Apple and Windows operating

systems. Both were investments in product designs embedding 802.11b, aimed at fostering sales as

part of either Apple's or Dell's portfolio of products. By 2001 some insiders forecast that other

laptop providers would include expansion slots in their systems and try to grow use of wireless

laptops.

         Around the same time as the publication of 802.11b, firms that had helped pioneering the

standard--including 3Com, Aironet (now a division of Cisco), Harris Semiconductor (now

Intersil), Lucent (now Agere), Nokia, and Symbol Technologies--formed the Wireless Ethernet

Compatibility Alliance (WECA). WECA branded the new technology "Wi-Fi," which was a

marketing ploy for the mass market. WECA's members believed that "802.11b" was a much less

appealing label. 5

         WECA arranged to perform testing for conformance to the standard, such as certifying

interoperability of antennae and receivers made by different firms. In brief, while the IEEE




4 Lemstra et al. (2011), Chapter 4, page 131. Links says Michael Dell "was furious about the fact that he had been beaten

by Apple..." Lucent executives had to remind Michael Dell that he had an opportunity to be in on discussions as early as
1992. However, Dell had decided in 1993 to stop the discussions because he concluded (incorrectly, as it turned out) that
there was no market for the technology.
5 The choice of the label "Wi-Fi" resembled "Hi-Fi" or high-fidelity, a term commonly used to describe high quality and

expensive musical components. The label was meant to signal high quality transmission. Yet, 802.11b actually has little
to do with music or fidelity, and "Wi-Fi" is a made-up phrase.
committee designed the standard, a different body (drawn from similar participating firms)

performed conformance testing.

         Technical successes became publicized. Numerous businesses became early users of Wi-Fi

and began directed experiments supporting what became known as hot-spots, which was an

innovative business idea. A hot spot is a data transmission mediated, potentially by a third party,

for local use in a public space or on a retail premises. A hot-spot in a public space could be free, it

could be installed by a home-owner, or it could be maintained by a building association for all

building residences. It could be supported by the café or by a restaurant or by a library trying to

serve its local user base. Or, it could be subscription-based, with short term or long-term contracts

between users and providers.

         The third trigger event: Intel initiates Centrino (these are depicted in the timeline as

events 8 and 11).

         While demand for desktop and notebook computers had grown along with the Internet in

the 1990s, Intel's own marketing department forecast an imminent slowdown in the share of

desktop sales, as well as increasing engineering challenges supplying faster chips. 6 More

worrisome, Intel had branded itself as a firm that always marketed better and faster microchips,

though there were doubts raised about whether demand for bigger and faster would continue to

grow across all segments of computing. Notebook users valued mobility, for example, which

placed value on longer battery life, less energy-intensive chips, smaller storage, more compact

designs, less weight, and less heat. The open question: would mass market mobile users give up

improvements in bigger and faster microprocessors to get improvements on these other attributes?

         In 2001 Intel's management thoroughly examined the supply chain for laptops, as depicted

in Figure 1b, and decided to consider changing priorities from desktops to laptops. Labeling this a

"left turn", the company considered how to support a Wi-Fi connection in all notebooks that used



6 While the forecast about the slowdown in Moore's law continues to receive debate, the forecast about desktop and

laptops did, in fact, come true, albeit this result is endogenous to Intel's contributions. In 2006 the sales of laptops
exceeded sales of desktops, and that continued thereafter.
Intel microprocessors. Those in favor of the change hoped that its program would increase

demand for wireless capabilities within notebooks by, among other things, reducing weight and

size while offering users simplicity and technical assurances in a standardized function. The

proponents of the change also anticipated that its branding would help sell notebooks using Intel

chips and motherboard designs instead of using microchips from Advanced Micro Devices

(AMD). Furthermore, they expected antenna and router equipment makers to welcome a

standardized format for wireless notebooks, which might help raise demand for their goods.

        The proponents at Intel also hoped the standardization of design on non-proprietary

designs would invite many entrants, introduce scale economies into production of ancillary chips

and circuits, and reduce differentiation between them. They also hoped it would reduce

differentiation between OEMs, again, reducing margins. The hope was that the sum total of those

changes would eventually reduce costs and margins, and lower laptop prices. The precise

consequences further down the supply chain for related components, such as routers, was more

difficult to forecast, but there was a hope that demand for such complementary components would

rise.

        Intel made desktop motherboard designs available to others at little or no cost. The firm

had crept into motherboard design slowly over the prior decade as it initiated a variety of

improvements to the designs of computers using its microprocessors. The wireless capabilities of a

notebook had not been the focus on these earlier programs, so the announcement of the Centrino

program represented a shift in strategic aims and direction for this activity.

        These initiatives met with considerable internal resistance inside Intel. The choice not only

involved redesigning the Intel microprocessor, Intel's core product, stressing lower power and

lower processing speeds, but it also involved redesigning the motherboard, adding antennae and

supporting chips. None of these actions could be taken quickly, and each redesign touched the

business of scores of business partners. The initiative also redistributed resources from the division

that supported desktop OEMs, which had a successful track record, and redirected resources to the
laptop division, which was still small in 2001. Contemporaries regarded the program as risky

because it undermined the ability of the desktop division to be at full strength.

       Additional controversy arose from the scope of the Centrino program. Intel's management

considered exploring activities far outside of its core business of manufacturing and distributing

microprocessors. These actions were a reinterpretation of its philosophical approach to managing

the demand for microprocessors, activities initiated under Andy Grove's leadership in the 1990s.

Intel had previously made a distinction between managing its first job, making microprocessors,

and managing anything that helped it sell more microprocessors, which was often given the label

"Job 2"(Gawer and Henderson, 2007). To skeptics of Job2, the expansion to aid wireless laptops

represented new actions outside of Intel's core strengths.

       It is easy to have a retrospective bias and presume the success of this Centrino program,

but to contemporaries success was not a foregone conclusion. We will not dwell on the internal

fights for Centrino, but simply remind the reader about what is already known (Burgelmann,

2007). The internal fights became heated, bitter, and prolonged, and became so encompassing for

the organization that the CEO had to risk his career to fully execute the Centrino program.

       Conflicts with complementors in the supply chain (if the reader requires a guide, the

Appendix provides details behind the main participants, as reported in this section).

       Centrino was officially launched in March 2003. The redesign eliminated the need for an

external card for the notebook, which was usually supplied by a firm other than Intel and installed

by users or OEMs. Intel hoped for additional benefits for users, such as more reliability in wireless

functionality, fewer set-up difficulties, longer-lived batteries due to less need for heat reduction,

and thinner notebook designs due to smaller cooling units. Seeking to inform users about all those

less visible changes, Intel adopted "Centrino" as a label, affiliated it with a trademarked symbol (a

butterfly in commercials, and that OEMs placed on laptops). It initiated a program to market the

design and certify compliance.
       Intel's motherboard designs could increase the efficiencies of computers, but that benefit

was not welcomed by every OEM who assembled PCs, or other market participants. For example,

firms such as Texas Instruments and Intersil had lobbied earlier for different designs for upgrades,

investing heavily in the efforts at committee 802.11. Neither of them had intended to help Intel's

business, and neither of them wanted to see Intel increase its influence over the designs that were

deployed to most users. As another example, Intel's designs eliminated some differences between

OEMs and other component providers. Many of these firms resented both losing control over their

designs and losing the ability to strategically differentiate their own designs. At the same time,

other OEMs, especially smaller ones, liked aspects of the Intel design, since it allowed the firms to

concentrate on other facets of their business. That competitive rivalry eventually generated

cooperation from every small OEM, especially after Intel initiated marketing programs for

Centrino.

       Intel ran into several unanticipated crises, such as insufficient parts for the preferred design

and resulting delays, as well as a trademark dispute over the use of its preferred symbol for the

program. However, the biggest and most important resistance came from the largest distributor of

PCs, Dell Computer, who was the earliest IBM-PC compatible firm to offer wireless features. Dell

insisted on selling its own branded Wi-Fi products, buying internal cards from others that handled

Wi-Fi, bypassing Intel altogether. Dell branded its solution and had grown a good side business

from its pioneering efforts. Dell's reluctant cooperation emerged only a year later, and observers at

the time believed Dell experienced a decline in sales of Dell-branded cards and routers.

       Conflicts also arose with other complements. Even before the launch of Centrino hot-spots

began to grow at business buildings, in homes, in public parks, and in a wide variety of settings.

Intel's certification program grew to considerable size. Intel initially certified (fifteen thousand)

hot-spots in hotels, airports, and other public places by the time Centrino launched.

       The growing use of hot-spots raised numerous unexpected issues about interference,

privacy, and appropriation of the signals of neighbors. Nevertheless, these issues did not slow Wi-
Fi's growing popularity. 7 Web sites sprouted up to give users, especially travelers, directions to the

nearest hot-spot. As demand grew, suppliers met it. As in a classic network bandwagon, the

growing number of hotspots would attract more users and suppliers.



2.1. Counterfactuals and predictions

         Before undertaking the statistical measurement, we note one principal challenge for

inference: we do not observe the alternative history. It is not possible to observe what might have

happened had Intel not undertaken its Centrino program. Would demand for laptops have grown

at the same rate if Intel had not acted? Would the same firms have succeeded that Intel had not

restructured the supply chain? There is no way to know. We can only work with the historical

events we observe and speculate about plausible alternatives.

         One possible alternative is a world in which laptop sales grew, but, had Intel not acted, not

in directions that necessarily benefited Intel. This alternative scenario would have been one in

which OEMs had more negotiating discretion to choose non-Intel chips if they desired it, where

this group includes both Apple, Dell, and other IBM-compatible OEMs. That could have happened

had the growth in Wi-Fi occurred without any redesign of the lap-top, where users continued to

get wireless functionality with an expansion card, and without an Intel endorsement.

         We stress, therefore, what we can observe. If the Centrino program caused growth in the

mass market, we could expect to see both the right timing (i.e., after 2003), and changes in a wide

breadth of markets (i.e. many types of complementors). We also note that measuring these effects

is quite challenging as researchers, but we have the benefit of hindsight. Intel's management had

to monitor and measure events in real time and must have faced considerable difficulty managing

events in the many markets touched by its actions.




7 In high-density settings it was possible for there to be interference among the channels, or interference with other users

of the unlicensed spectrum reserved by the FCC, such as cordless telephones.
       Our review of the Centrino program highlights several ways in which Intel reshaped

markets for laptops. As noted above, some features are already well documented, such as the

change in demand from desktop to laptops, linked especially to the rise in wireless capabilities

embedded within laptops. We also expect Intel to retain market share in comparison to AMD,

another documented part of the historical record.

   Other aspects of the historical record are not well-documented or measured, and this is where

we put our efforts. If this narrative is correct, there should be more: we should observe the

following:

   1. The Centrino program reduced the value of independent cards for expansion slots. Hence,

       we expect a decline in the sales of independent card makers to fit in expansion slots, and an

       exit of such firms, and only after 2003.

   2. The Centrino program improved the appeal of wireless laptops, which increased the value

       of wireless routers. We expect to see a rise in demand for wireless routers, and, again, only

       after 2003.

   3. Failure in the card business occurred due to the decline in demand, not due to managerial

       failures at card organizations. Hence, unlike typical entrepreneurial studies of firm failure,

       experience and exit in one complementor market is not a "negative signal," and could

       continue to confer competitive advantage in alternative complementor markets.

   4. We predict the difference in the experiences of firms in the SoHo (low-end) and enterprise

       and broadband (high-end) router markets. Both reached mass market scales after Centrino,

       and many firms entered. We expect firms with a prior experience in Wi-Fi cards to

       introduce more complements after the launch of Centrino than those firms who were not

       active in cards. If the experience provided more advantages in reducing costs of

       manufacturing than providing appropriate distribution, we expect firms with a prior

       experience in cards to introduce relatively more products in low-end routers after the

       launch of Centrino than firms with no prior experience. Related, we expect prior experience
       in cards to have no, or even a negative effect, on product introduction in high-end market

       such as enterprise or broadband routers, where branding and distribution play a more

       important role.



3. Estimation of the model

       We perform two types of analysis, focusing on: the effect of Centrino on the hazard of exit

from the Wi-Fi cards (both internal and external) market; the effect of Centrino on product

introduction in the markets for Wi-Fi complements (SoHo, Enterprise, and Broadband routers). We

combine in our estimations a set of time varying and time invariant covariates to measure

respectively: competition in the focal and adjacent market, availability of complementary products

in adjacent and distant markets, firms entry time cohorts, downstream and upstream integration,

and dummies capturing the effect of Centrino introduction.



3.1. Firm exit from the Wi-Fi card markets

       To analyze the effect of Centrino on the hazard of exit from the card market we choose as

unit of analysis the firm and we assume that exit occurs when a firm stops certifying new products

in the internal or external card market. We estimate the hazard of exit of firm i from card market j

at period t by employing the following Cox proportional hazard function:




   = ( )  + 1   + 2   2   + 3   3 

 + 4                                                                                          (1)




       The  coefficients account for the effect of Centrino introduction on the hazard rate of the

firms in a specific card market. More specifically, j1 captures the effect of Centrino on the hazard

rate of the firms active in market j. j2 and j3 capture the effect on the hazard rate of those that

entered market j in the same year or after Centrino respectively. If the launch of Centrino reshaped
the market leading to a decline in the sales of independent card manufacturers, and an exit of such

firms as in our prediction 1, we should expect a positive relationship between the Centrino

variable and the hazard rate of each cohort of entrants. The hazard rate of all firms should increase

after entry. In other words: j1, j1 + j2 and j1 +j3 should all be positive and significant. The

coefficient j4 captures instead the persistence of the effect of Centrino entry on the hazard rate of

the other firms for each market. If the effect is persistent in time j4 is expected to be positive and

statistically significant. If instead the effect fades away, we would expect j4 to be negative and

statistically significant. Xijt is a set of firm and market based variables summarizing observed

differences across firms and market couples in terms of firms experience in complementary

markets, competition in the card markets, and availability of complements.



3.2. Product introduction in the market for complements

        To estimate the rate of product introduction in the market of complements we employ a

conditional quasi-maximum likelihood (QML) estimator based on the fixed-effect Poisson model

introduced by Hausman, Hall and Griliches (1984). 8 More specifically for each firm i we first

estimate the following baseline equation:




 [ | ] = 0 + 1    +  +                                                                                      (2)




where y is the number of products produced by firm i in complementary market c at time t, AFTER

CENTRINOCT is an indicator variable that captures the effect of Centrino entry on complementary

market c, t is a full set of entry year by complementary market c variables and i corresponds to a

firm fixed effect. If, according to prediction 2, the introduction of Centrino improved the appeal of




8 The QML estimator produces standard errors that are robust and consistent. They are also robust to arbitrary patterns

of serial correlation (Wooldridge, 1997). Standard errors are clustered on company id.
wireless laptops, which increased the value of wireless routers, we would expect 1 to be positive

and significant for all type of routers.



          In our additional analyses we then modify equation (2) as follows:




 [ | ] = 0 + 1      + 2    +  +  (3),




where EXPERIENCEDIC is an indicator variable equal to one if firm i associated with complementary

market c was active in the card market before entry. In our analysis we will further distinguish

among prior experience in any card, prior experience in internal cards only and prior experience in

external cards only. If, according to prediction 3, experience in one complementor market continue

to confer competitive advantage in alternative complementor markets, we would expect 1 to be

positive and significant for all type of routers. If, according to prediction 4, prior experience in

cards had a different effect on alternative complementor markets we would expect 1 to be positive

and significant for the SoHo (low-end) routers only and negative or not significant for the

enterprise and broadband (high-end) routers.



4. Data

4.1. The sample of products and firms

          The information on Wi-Fi products and firms used in our analysis comes from the Wi-Fi

Alliance certified product database which collects information on the number of Wi-Fi products

certified, divided in several categories. Our analysis considers products such as: Wi-Fi internal and

external cards, Wi-Fi Small Office and Home Office (SoHo) routers (low-end), Enterprise routers

and Broadband routers (high-end). 9 The time span of our data begins in March 2000 and ends in




9 Information on some technical characteristics of the equipment (i.e. firmware version, operating system, frequency

bands etc.) is also available though not systematically across time and models. Information on prices is not provided.
May 2017. Over this period a total of 8,949 products have been certified (1,369 internal cards; 1,041

external cards; 2,982 SoHo routers; 2,192 enterprise routers and 1,365 Broadband routers).

Information are also available on the manufacturers of the equipment which have been

consolidated into a total of 298 firms.



4.2. Definition of firm exit and explanatory variables

       In this paper we employ the information on the certification date available in the dataset to

identify the timing of a firm exit from the internal and external card markets. Specifically, we

assume that exit occurs when a firm stops certifying new products in the internal or external card

market.

       In our analysis of the effect of Centrino entry on firms' exit we employ the following

explanatory variables:



       CENTRINOJT: this is our first key variable. A dummy that switches to one from the month in

which Centrino was launched (March 2003) until the end of the analysis period.

       TIME SINCE CENTRINOJT: this is our second key variable. It is defined as the time elapsed

since Centrino was launched.



       Our list of controls includes a set of time varying variables aimed at capturing the effect of

product competition, availability of complements, on the hazard of exit together with entry time

and firm fixed effects.



       DENSITY OF SAME MARKETT: measured in terms of number of cards available for sale in the

same market in each time period. DENSITY OF ADJACENT MARKETT: measured in terms of number of

cards available for sale in the adjacent market in each time period. Both variables intend to capture

the substitutions available to buyers in that specific market.
       DENSITY OF ADJACENT HIGHER END MARKETT: measured in terms of number of enterprise

routers available for sale in each time period. DENSITY OF ADJACENT LOWER END MARKETT:

measured in terms of number of SoHo routers available for sale in each time period. DENSITY OF

NON-ADJACENT MARKETT:     measured in terms of number of broadband routers available for sale in

each time period. These three variables aim at capturing the availability of different types of

complement products in the markets for equipment.



       COHORTIJ 1, COHORTIJ 2 and COHORTIJ 3: these are dummies equal to one if entry in card

market j occurred before Centrino (i.e. before March 2003), with Centrino (March 2003), or after

Centrino (later than March 2003) respectively and zero otherwise.



       ACTIVE IN ADJACENT HIGHER END MARKET, ACTIVE IN ADJACENT LOWER END MARKET and

ACTIVE IN NON-ADJACENT MARKET: these are three dummies equal to one if at the time of entry into

the focal card market a firm was active in SoHo routers, enterprise routers or broadband routers

respectively. They capture pre-entry presence in downstream complement markets.



4.3. Definition of product introduction and explanatory variables

       In our analysis a new product is introduced in the market when it is recorded in the Wi-Fi

Alliance certified product database. For each firm and for each year we count the number of product

introductions and, similarly to prior analyses (Greenstein and Wade, 1998), include the firm in the

analysis as long as they introduce new products. We run a specification for all the sample and then

three separate specifications, one for each type of router. For this analysis we employ the following

explanatory variables:
       FIRST PRODUCT (ANY MARKET): is a dummy equal to one when a firm introduces its first

product in a specific market in a specific year and zero otherwise.



       AFTER CENTRINO: is a dummy that switches to one from the year in which Centrino was

launched (2003) until the end of the analysis period and zero otherwise. In our further analyses we

interact AFTER CENTRINO with:



       EXPERIENCED IN CARDS, EXPERIENCED IN INTERNAL CARDS ONLY, EXPERIENCED IN EXTERNAL

CARDS ONLY:   these are three dummies equal to one if at the time of entry into the focal equipment

market a firm was respectively active in the card, the internal card equipment or the external card

market respectively and zero if they were not. All our specifications include a suite of entry year

time effect (the omitted year being 2003 the year of Centrino launch).



5. Results

       In this section we present the results of our investigation of the effect of Centrino on firms

exit from the Wi-Fi card market and on new product entry in the market for complements.



5.1. Centrino and firms exit from the card markets

       Table 1 reports the descriptive statistics for the variables in our analyses distinguishing

between type of cards.



                                     [Insert Table 1 about here]



More firms in our dataset enter the market for external card than the market for internal cards (102

vs. 83). We note that in both markets most firms belong to cohorts 2 and 3 indicating that they

entered the market `with or after' the launch of Centrino. Also, the shares of entrants in cohort 2
and 3 is similar with a slightly higher share of firms entering in internal cards (60%) rather than in

external cards (58%). The statistics on downstream integration provide information on the

heterogeneity of entrants in the market for Wi-Fi cards. The majority (about 66%) of the entrants in

the market for external cards were not producing complements when they entered and 23.5% were

producing low-end equipment (i.e. SoHo routers). On the contrary almost all entrants in the

market of internal cards were producing complements with rather similar presence across markets

for complements (32% in SoHo routers, 29% in enterprise routers, and 35% in broadband).

          At the end of our observation period (2016) few firms are still active in each market with a

higher proportion surviving in the market for internal cards (7.3%) than in the market for external

cards (2%). Figure 2 plots the number of incumbent firms in internal and external cards before and

after Centrino (March 2003).



                                        [Insert Figure 2 about here]



          It can be noted that following the launch of Centrino the number of incumbents peaks in

both markets and then declines generating a shake-out. Both the magnitude and the timing of the

event are not the same in the two markets though. The drop in the number of incumbents is

sharper in the case of internal than in the case of external cards. It also occurs over a shorter time

period.

          All in all, these preliminary statistics suggest that similarities exist across card markets in

terms of timing of entry especially with respect to the launch of Centrino but differences exist in

the composition of entrants and in the rate of exit. This is consistent with the idea that different

markets display different product life cycles and raise speculations about whether manufacturers

decisions to exit the market could have been tied to the type of their pre-existing investments. It is

also consistent with the view that managing the markets was a complex undertaking for the
platform leader, Intel, because each complementary component market operated according to its

own logic.

        Tables 2 and 3 summarize the results of our hazard rate estimations for the external and

internal card market respectively.



                                       [Insert Tables 2 and 3 about here]



        Model (1) is the baseline specification in which we introduce the control variables and the

entry cohort dummies. In Model (2) we add the Centrino dummy which is our key explanatory

variable. In Model (3) we interact the Centrino dummy with the entry cohorts. Finally, in Model (4)

we add the interaction with the time elapsed since Centrino launch.

        Considering the results for external cards first, we see that firms belonging to Cohort 2 and

Cohort 3 experience a relatively higher hazard rate than earlier entrants suggesting that entry with

or after Centrino was not beneficial for firms. The coefficient estimate of the number of models in

the adjacent market for internal cards has a negative effect on the hazard rate suggesting the

presence of complementarity rather than substitution between the two types of cards. 10 Finally

downstream integration in complements (high end enterprise routers) increases the hazard of exit

though this effect is statistically weak and not robust across specifications. We do not find any

significant effect of density of markets for complements indicating that availability of complements

did not affect the hazard of exit of external card producers.

        When we consider the effect of Centrino on the hazard rate of external cards makers, we

can see that the launch of Centrino increases the hazard rate of all manufacturers (coeff. 11 > 0 and

statistically significant). This result is robust to the inclusion of further interactions. The negative

effect of the launch of Centrino is higher for firms that entered the market after Centrino than for




10 This result is robust across specifications. As the two markets were growing together, some manufacturers were

producing both types of cards.
those that entered before (coeff. 11 + 12 > 0 and 11 +13 > 0 and statistically significant in Models 3

and 4) suggesting the presence of an earlier mover or an installed base advantage. Among those

who did not enter before Centrino Cohort 2 firms do better than Cohort 3 firms in terms of hazard

rate (coeff. 11 + 12 < 11 +13). Finally, the overall effect seems to increase as time elapses from

Centrino's launch (14 > 0 and statistically significant in Model 4) suggesting that the negative

effect does not weaken over time. These results are consistent with prediction 1.

           Estimates for the internal cards market are summarized in Table 4 instead. Similarities but

also differences can be observed with respect to the case of external cards. Again, the launch of

Centrino increases the hazard rate of firms in the market. In contrast to what observed in the case

of external cards, the size of the effect is rather small and weakly statistically significant only for

firms that entered after the launch of Centrino (i.e. Cohort 3). Density of products in the adjacent

market for external cards increases the hazard rate indicating a substitution relationship with

internal cards for external cards manufacturers. Density of products in the same market tends to

decrease the hazard rate. Both effects are robust across specifications. All in all, these results

indicate that internal cards makers faced competition from products in the adjacent market. In

terms of density of markets for complements, we find that the coefficient estimate of the number of

models in the non-adjacent market (broadband router) is positive and significant while the

coefficient estimate of the number of models in the higher end adjacent market (enterprise routers)

decreases the hazard of exit from the internal card market. 11 This result is robust across

specification and marks another important difference with respect to the market for external cards.

It seems to suggest that the patterns of exit from the card market depend on the relationship

between this market and the evolution of the market for complements and that this relationship

varies depending on the type of cards. Finally, no significant effect between downstream

integration in complements and the hazard of exit of internal card producers is found.




11   These differences are probably the consequence of the time lags in the growth of the two markets.
       The launch of Centrino has an effect on the hazard rate of internal cards makers similar to

the one we have observed in the case of external cards, in the sense that it increases the hazard rate

of all firms (coeff. 21 > 0 and statistically significant and robust across models). Similarly, we find

that the increase in the hazard rate is higher for firms that entered the market after Centrino than

for earlier entrants (coeff. 21 + 22 > 0 and 21 +23 > 0 and statistically significant in Models 3 and 4).

Again, the overall effect increases as time elapses from Centrino's launch (24 > 0 and statistically

significant in Model 4). This evidence is consistent with prediction 1. Again, this mix is consistent

with a challenge in monitoring a complex set of events.

       Alongside these similarities, some important differences can be highlighted. First, the

magnitude of the effect of Centrino on the hazard rate is much higher in the case of internal cards

than in the case of external cards (coeff. 21 > 11 in each specification). This is consistent with the

relatively sharper drop in the number of internal rather than external card incumbents pattern seen

in Figure 2. Second, the effect on the hazard rate is higher for those firms that entered with

Centrino than for those that entered after the launch (coeff. 21 + 22 > 11 +13). Additional insights

on the difference can be grasped by looking at Figure 3 which plots the survival rates before and

after Centrino by type of card market.



                                      [Insert Figure 3 about here]



       While there is a clear-cut evidence that the survival estimates of firms in both market are

much higher before than after the launch of Centrino, it can be noted that the survival rates display

different patterns over time. The proportions of surviving firms drop much faster for internal than

for external card makers. It also drops much more regularly suggesting again the presence of

differences in the product life cycle between the two types of cards.

       In our estimations, we have relied upon the implicit assumption that in the absence of the

launch of Centrino the hazard of exit from the card markets would have not been affected. As this
assumption is not directly testable because of the absence of a proper counterfactual, we have

decided to carry out three placebo tests, whose estimates are reported in Table 4 for both external

and internal cards separately.



                                     [Insert Table 4 about here]



       In column (1) of the table we report our baseline model (also shown in column (4) in Table

2). Column (2) estimates the same specification as in the baseline model but with only firms that

entered the market between March 2000 and December 2002 and with the fictitious Centrino

launch date of March 13, 2002 (one year before the actual launch date). In this case, the estimated

coefficient of the Centrino dummy is lower and not statistically significant. Further placebo tests

are presented in columns (3) and (4). More precisely in column (3) we consider only firms that

entered the market between January 2001 and December 2002 with the fictitious Centrino launch

date of March 13, 2002 (one year before the actual launch date). In column (4): we use only firms

that entered the market before January 2001 with the fictitious Centrino launch date of March 13,

2002 (one year before the actual launch date). In both these cases the estimated coefficients for the

Centrino dummy are not significant. We then repeat the same tests in the case of internal cards and

get similar (non-significant) coefficients (columns 6 and 7).

       All in all, this placebo analysis highlights that differences in the hazard rate before and

after the launch of Centrino do not seem to be attributable to other events or trends occurring

around the period of Centrino launch. If they were, we would have found similar results of the

launch when using a fictitious date or different subsets of entrants in each market.



5.2. Centrino and product introductions in the markets for complements

       The evidence presented in the previous section supports the idea that the launch of

Centrino reduced the value of independent cards for expansion slots leading to a decline in the
sales of independent card makers and an exit of such firms. However, the Centrino program also

induced a change in how users were accessing the network from desktop to laptops. Improvement

in sales in laptops linked to the availability of Centrino generated externality to wireless

complements such as routers. Did the launch of Centrino influence new product introduction in

the markets for routers? We test this idea by looking at product introduction overall and then

separately by router category (i.e. SoHo, Enterprise and Broadband).

        Table 5 summarizes the means and standard deviation for the variables used in the analysis

of product entry, the unit of observation is the product year.



                                      [Insert Table 5 about here]



        The average firm in our sample introduces nearly 5 routers per year with most products

(77%) introduced after the launch of Centrino. The pattern of entry differs across router type, with

more products per year introduced on average in the enterprise category (4.71 routers) followed by

the broadband category (4.20) and the SoHo category (2.72). The statistics on prior experience

provide information on the heterogeneity of entrants in the market for complements. Nearly 30%

of router manufacturers were active in the card market (any type) when they started producing

complements. One fifth were active in the internal cards only and one fourth in external cards

only.

        Figure 4 plots the number of products for the whole sample and by category of router.



                                     [Insert Figure 4 about here]



        We observe that the overall number of products introduced in the market grows

continuously but at different pace over time. After a slow initial growth there is a take-off

immediately after the launch of Centrino. This take-off is triggered mainly by the rapid
development of the market for (low-end) SoHo routers which experiences a spike after 2003. After

a couple of years of stability another phase of rapid growth in the number of complements is

observed between 2006 and 2011 driven in this case by the rapid and parallel growth in the

number of enterprise routers, SoHo routers and, to a lesser extent, the take-off of the Broadband

market. Finally, a further phase of growth starts in 2012 manly as a consequence of a spike in the

number of broadband routers.

       All in all, this preliminary evidence seems consistent with the idea that the launch of

Centrino, while inducing a shake-out in the market for cards, positively contributed to the growth

of the Wi-Fi industry through the creation and development of the markets for complementary

products. However, the evidence also suggests that there were important differences in the timing,

pace, and extent of development of these markets as captured by the pattern of new product

introduction. Given these differences, we expect the effects of Centrino on growth to have been

uneven across markets, and difficult to manage in real time. To probe further into this possibility,

we now turn to our empirical estimation of product introduction.

       Figure 5 plots the frequency of product introductions for the whole sample of routers and

for each category separately.



                                     [Insert Figure 5 about here]



       Though the average number of routers per year varies between 2.7 (SoHo equipment) and

4.8 (whole sample), the distribution of observations tends always to be very skewed. For this

reason, we employ a Poisson quasi-maximum likelihood estimator (see equation 2 above) in which

the dependent variable is the number of products introduced by each firm in each year of

observation. Table 6 reports our baseline results.



                                     [Insert Table 6 about here]
       Model (1) considers the whole sample focusing on the firms that have introduced at least

one Wi-Fi router in the period under consideration here. We find a significant increase in the

yearly number of equipment following the launch of Centrino as suggested by the positive

coefficient of the AFTER CENTRINO dummy. Models (2) to (4) repeat the analysis for the same set of

specification except that each one of them consider a specific market separately. In each market we

find a significant increase in the yearly number of Wi-Fi equipment following the launch of

Centrino. This evidence supports prediction 2. The magnitude of the effect, as well as its statistical

significance, varies across equipment type. The effect seems relatively smaller in the case of SoHo

routers and particularly larger for broadband ones.

         We do not have the luxury of rerunning history without Centrino, so there is no way to

interpret these findings without some speculation. We speculate that high-end markets start later

than So-Ho, so they grow faster both because they are catching-up and because they can benefit

from positive externalities from the existing installed base of low-end products as well as from

user learning. It is likely that the higher magnitude of the estimated coefficients of the Centrino

dummy in the case of Enterprise and Broadband routers (with respect to SoHo) partly reflects

these benefits as well as the effect of the launch of Centrino.

       To focus on the dynamics of the effect uncovered in Table 6 we re-estimate Model (1)

interacting the AFTER CENTRINO dummy with a set of covariates that includes: entry year effects,

the dummy capturing the years after the launch of Centrino and the interaction between the AFTER

CENTRINO dummy and the dummies corresponding to specific years relative to the launch of

Centrino (before and after). We then plot (solid line in Figure 6) the coefficient estimates of the

interactions and the 95% confidence interval (dashed lines) around them.



                                     [Insert Figure 6 about here]
        The pattern suggests that following the launch of Centrino there is an increase of the

coefficients, followed by a decline and then another increase particularly noticeable after 2006. This

dynamic is consistent with the idea that the Centrino program stimulated the availability of

complements and that the effect was quick and permanent. The finding that the increase is not

monotone may have different explanations. It may reflect differences in the product life cycle of

the Wi-Fi complements. SoHo routers are relatively cheaper than enterprise or broadband ones

which lowers the (switching) costs on the demand side. Lower switching costs lead to shorter

product life cycle and a higher frequency of replacement. It might as well reflect differentials in the

contribution that each market had to the growth of the overall Wi-Fi industry. Historically, the

market for SoHo routers took off first, followed by the market for enterprise routers and finally by

the market for broadband. Indeed, another look at Figure 4 confirms that SoHo equipment has an

early lead and always accounts for the largest shares of product introduction. Only from 2006

onwards, enterprise routers and broadband routers catch up in terms of new product

introductions. As the product life cycle of SoHo routers is relatively shorter and as its share of the

total equipment is relatively larger than the others', what happens in this market in terms of

frequency of product introduction and replacement ends up influencing the overall dynamic of the

industry especially in the early years after the launch of Centrino. 12

        As plausible as it might be, this explanation leaves unsolved the question of why the launch

of Centrino led firms to enter earlier and more into SoHo, the low-end, and only later and

relatively less into enterprise and broadband, the high-end. Our hypotheses, as reflected by

predictions 3 and 4, is that prior experience in a complementor market such as cards could confer

competitive advantage in alternative complementor markets. Such experience provided more



12 Another possibility is related to changes in the design of Centrino. To deal with some shortcomings of the early

implementations substantial improvements occurred in 2006/2007 with the release of a new Centrino platform (the
'Santa Rosa') based on the Intel Core Due processor which solved some problems (i.e. short battery life) that had plagued
prior generations. We speculate that this improvement might explain the further increase that we observe after 2006.
This is a fascinating possibility because it would associate the observed growth of the market for complements with the
interplay between the `original experiment' (i.e. the launch of Centrino) and `later experiments' (i.e. technological
improvements in the original design). The latter changes enabled more technologically sophisticated products such as
enterprise and broadband routers.
advantages in reducing costs of manufacturing than providing appropriate distribution, thus firms

with a prior experience would introduce relatively more products in low-end routers after the

launch of Centrino than firms with no prior experience. In contrast, prior experience in cards

would have no, or even a negative effect, on product introduction in high-end market such as

enterprise or broadband routers, where branding and distribution instead play a more important

role. We analyze this possibility in the next section.



5.3. Further analysis of high and low-end

       We carry out additional regressions in which we interact the AFTER CENTRINO dummy with

the variable EXPERIENCEDIC which is a variable equal to one if firm i associated with

complementary market c has been active in one or more Wi-Fi card market before entry and zero

otherwise (see equation 3 above). We further distinguish among experience in any Wi-Fi cards

market, experience in internal cards only and experience in external cards only.

       Table 7 reports the results of Poisson quasi-maximum likelihood regressions for the whole

sample of routers.



                                       [Insert Table 7 about here]



We find that firms with prior experience in Wi-Fi cards introduce more routers after the launch of

Centrino than firms without that experience (Model 1). However, the effect is not statistically

significant. The same result holds for firms with prior experience in external cards (Model 3). In

the case of firms with prior experience in internal cards (Model 2) the effect is negative although it

is offset by the positive, and significant, effect of Centrino launch. All in all, the estimates go in the

direction of suggesting that prior experience in Wi-Fi cards matters for the extent of product

introduction in complements after the launch of Centrino. However, the coefficients are not

statistically significant and this result seems to reject our hypothesis.
       We next re-estimate the previous model separately for each complementary market.



                                      [Insert Table 8 about here]



       Table 8 reports the results for SoHo routers. Model (1) finds that firms with prior

experience in Wi-Fi cards introduce more routers after the launch of Centrino than those without

prior experience. Model (3) finds that the positive effect is particularly relevant for firms with prior

experience in external cards even though the estimated coefficient is weakly significant. The effect

is positive but not significant for firms with prior experience in internal cards (Model 2).

       Table 9 reports the estimations for enterprise routers.



                                      [Insert Table 9 about here]



       In this case we find a positive and significant effect of the Centrino program on enterprise

routers introduction. However, this effect is driven by firms without prior experience in Wi-Fi

cards. Indeed, after the launch of Centrino, firms with prior experience in cards introduce less

equipment than those without prior experience (Model 1). The extent of this negative effect is

similar across type of cards though it is particularly negative for firms with prior experience in

internal cards (Model 2) than for those with prior experience in in external cards (Model 3).

       Finally, Table 10 reports the results for broadband routers.



                                     [Insert Table 10 about here]



       Here we find that prior experience in Wi-Fi cards matters though the coefficient estimate is

weakly significant (Model 1 and 3). Similarly to the case of enterprise equipment, again we find

that prior experience in internal cards has a negative effect (Model 2) on product introduction.
However, further explorations suggest this result is not robust. 13 Our speculation is that

broadband routers are quite different products from cards because they are `distant' along the

value chain. Accordingly, we would expect no effect of prior experience on broadband.

         Though the sum total of the effects are quite complex and difficult to tease out, this

additional analysis supports the idea that the launch of Centrino exerted a positive effect on the

development and growth of the Wi-Fi industry because it stimulated the introduction of new

products in markets for complements. This effect is particularly evident in the case of low-end

SoHo routers and it is mainly due to the presence of firms with prior experience in Wi-Fi cards.

         To gain further insights in the different effects that the launch of Centrino had on

complementors with prior experience in cards vs. those without experience, we repeat the same

exercise done for the whole product sample (see Figure 6 above) only for the subsample of firms

active in SoHo routers. Specifically, we re-estimate Model (2) in Table 6 interacting the AFTER

CENTRINO dummy with a set of covariates that includes: entry year effects, the dummy capturing

the years after the launch of Centrino and the interaction between the AFTER CENTRINO dummy

and the dummies corresponding to specific years relative to the launch of Centrino (before and

after). We do this for the sample of firms with prior experience in Wi-Fi cards and for the sample of

those without prior experience separately. Figures 7a and 7b plot (solid line) the coefficient

estimates of the interactions and the 95% confidence interval (dashed lines) around them.



                                       [Insert Figures 7a and 7b about here]



         The increase in the estimated coefficients in Figure 7a following the launch of Centrino

reflects the overall positive effect of the launch of Centrino on SoHo routers introduction. The

pattern is similar to the one observed in Figure 6 for the whole sample of complements although




13
  We further re-estimate the equation using random effects instead of QML Poisson, the positive coefficients for
broadband routers are no longer significant and we are left with the negative effect of prior experience in internal cards.
the magnitude of the effect is smaller for SoHo. Different is the pattern observable in Figure 7b. In

this case the estimated coefficients are negative right after the launch of Centrino, they decrease

further for one year and then increase but stay negative until 2007. The effect becomes positive

only after 2007, five years after the launch of Centrino. 14

        This further analysis of the SoHo market reveals that the overall positive effect of the

launch of Centrino on product introduction observable immediately after the launch of Centrino is

the result of a composition between two effects that go in opposite directions. Firms without prior

experience in Wi-Fi cards, on average, introduce relatively less products. Firms with prior

experience in cards, on average, undergo an immediate increase in their product introduction

which more than offset the decline.

        All in all, this evidence further supports our prediction 4 that prior experience in Wi-Fi

cards mattered for the introduction of complements after the launch of Centrino. As prior

experience provided more advantages in reducing costs of manufacturing than providing

appropriate distribution, firms with a prior experience in cards benefited more and introduced

relatively more products in low end routers. In contrast, prior experience in cards provides no

benefit, or even has a negative effect, on product introduction in high end market such as

enterprise or broadband routers, where branding and distribution played a more important role.



6. Conclusions

        In this paper we examine Intel's launch of Centrino, and analyze how this program

restructured the supply chain for laptop. We provide a narrative of key actions, offer a framework

of its consequences for complementary markets, and link the framework to testable predictions for

specific markets. We then collect data and test these predictions on outcomes in several related

complementary markets.


14Given the improvements that Centrino underwent in 2007 (see footnote 12) we speculate that the positive effect that
we are observing in Figure 7b here in the case of SoHo routers might be an externality of the growing demand for
enterprise and broadband routers. In addition, changes to Wi-Fi openness over the next few years also could have
played a role (Kim, 2019).
          The overall findings are consistent with our framework. We show that the launch of

Centrino increased the likelihood of exit from both Wi-Fi cards markets, and we find that the

magnitude of the effect was largest for internal cards. We also show that the launch of Centrino's

stimulated product introduction in the markets for complements overall, and find the effect varied

across type of routers. Finally, we show that experience with producing Wi-Fi cards shape the

likelihood of survival as a router provider. Prior experience in Wi-Fi card contributed to product

introduction in SoHo routers, but was not beneficial for the introduction of Enterprise and

Broadband routers.

          The findings in each market cannot be understood in isolation of each other. They are

consistent with the broad theme of this paper, that it is possible for a platform leader to restructure

an entire supply chain. And, indeed, our findings show that Intel could and did so with its

Centrino program. More concretely, these outcomes were the outgrowth of coordinated action by

Intel to restructure the supply chain for laptops in a direction that benefited Intel's interests.

          The analysis has implications for studies of platform leadership. For example, they suggest

the negotiations between platform leader and provider of complementary services can take a wide

lens to plans, negotiations, and consequences. That especially holds for firms who must recognize

when market opportunities shift as part of broader set of changes orchestrated by the platform

leader.

          The most difficult question is whether a platform leader should undertake such a

restructuring. While this study analyzed one (successful) example, it also highlights some of the

downsides. Intel's actions illustrate the challenges of managing so many complex changes at once.

Simultaneously restructuring so many complementors produces winners and losers inside the

platform leader's organization and among complementors, which creates numerous conflicts for

the leadership to manage. All these factors will place pressures on a platform leader to both

commit to a program around which complementors can make investments and adjust it when new

information reveals new circumstances, adding to the conflict and complexity.
       Accordingly, this experience does not teach the general lesson that all platform leaders

should restructure their supply chain whenever possible. It teaches, instead, that platform leaders

restructuring a supply chain can succeed, but only if the managerial challenges are overcome, as

happened here. Management must invest in considerable time and effort into developing the

capabilities to monitor and manage the complexity and unanticipated outcomes, as well as adapt

to the needs of situation.

       As with any study of a strategic action, our inferences are limited by the singularity of

historical events in a single system. We cannot compare outcomes with an alternative history in

which Intel does not take action. That necessarily implies that research progresses one strategic

action at a time, and one system at a time. In this sense, research about restructuring platform

supply chains is limited by the paucity of other systems in which a large platform leader has taken

actions across many existing complementary markets. This paucity increases the value of

additional investigations of other examples that help identify when (and when not) a platform

leader succeeds in realizing its aims, and why (not). Strong candidates for investigation arise in

mobile platform markets (e.g., i-Tunes and Android), social media (e.g., Facebook's migration to

smart phones), the cloud (e.g., Microsoft's migration of many applications), and other areas in

which technologies remain fluid (e.g., autonomous vehicles). Such cases can help research further

understand the mechanisms for shaping complementary markets and will help illuminate the

limitations of actions by a platform leader.
                                               References


Adner, R. (2012). The wide lens: A new strategy for innovation. Penguin UK.



Adner, R., & Kapoor, R. (2016). Innovation ecosystems and the pace of substitution: Reexamining

technology Scurves. Strategic Management Journal, 37(4), 625-648.



Agarwal, R., Moeen, M., & Shah, S. K. (2017). Athena's birth: Triggers, actors, and actions

preceding industry inception. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 11(3), 287-305.



Bresnahan, T. F., Greenstein, S., & Henderson, R. M. (2011). Schumpeterian competition and

diseconomies of scope: illustrations from the histories of Microsoft and IBM. In The rate and

direction of inventive activity revisited (pp. 203-271). University of Chicago Press.



Burgelman, R. A. (2007). Intel Centrino in 2007: A new platform strategy for growth. Stanford Case SM-

156. Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.



Cennamo, C., Gu, Y., & Zhu, F. (2018). Value cocreation and capture in platform markets: Evidence from

a creative industry. Working Paper. Harvard Business School.



Cusumano, M. A., & Selby, R. W. (1998). Microsoft secrets: how the world's most powerful software

company creates technology, shapes markets, and manages people. Simon and Schuster.



Cusumano, M. A., & Yoffie, D. B. (1998). Competing on Internet time: lessons from Netscape and its

battle with Microsoft. The Free Press.
Cusumano, M. A., Gawer, A., and Yoffie, D. B. (2019). The Business of Platforms: Strategy in the Age of

Digital Competition, Innovation, and Power. Harper Collins Publishers.



Foerderer, J., Kude, T., Mithas, S., & Heinzl, A. (2018). Does platform owner's entry crowd out

innovation? Evidence from Google Photos. Information Systems Research, 29(2), 444-460.



Gawer, A., & Cusumano, M. A. (2002). Platform leadership: How Intel, Microsoft, and Cisco drive

industry innovation. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.



Gawer, A., & Henderson, R. (2007). Platform owner entry and innovation in complementary

markets: Evidence from Intel. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 16(1), 1-34.



Henderson, R. (1995). Of life cycles real and imaginary: The unexpectedly long old age of optical

lithography. Research Policy, 24(4), 631-643.



Kapoor, R., & Furr, N. R. (2015). Complementarities and competition: Unpacking the drivers of

entrants' technology choices in the solar photovoltaic industry. Strategic Management Journal, 36(3),

416-436.



Greenstein, S. (2015). How the internet became commercial: Innovation, privatization, and the birth of a

new network. Princeton University Press.



Greenstein, S. (2012). Economic experiments and the development of Wi-Fi. In History and Strategy

(pp. 3-33). Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Greenstein, S. (2007). Economic experiments and neutrality in Internet access. Innovation policy and

the economy, 8, 59-109.



Greenstein, S. M., & Wade, J. B. (1998). The product life cycle in the commercial mainframe

computer market, 1968-1982. The RAND Journal of Economics, 772-789.



Helfat, C. E., & Lieberman, M. B. (2002). The birth of capabilities: market entry and the importance

of prehistory. Industrial and Corporate Change, 11(4), 725-760.



Hausman, J., Hall, B. H., & Griliches, Z. (1984). Econometric models for count data with an

application to the patents-R&D relationship. Econometrica, 52, 909-938.



Kim, Do Yoon (2019). Product Market Performance and Openness: The Moderating Role of

Customer Heterogeneity. Dissertation Chapter, Harvard Business School. May.



Klepper, S., & Simons, K. L. (2000). Dominance by birthright: entry of prior radio producers and

competitive ramifications in the US television receiver industry. Strategic Management Journal,

21(1011), 997-1016.



Kretschmer, T., & Claussen, J. (2016). Generational transitions in platform markets--The role of

backward compatibility. Strategy Science, 1(2), 90-104.



Lemstra, W., Hayes, V., & Groewegen, J. (2011). The innovation journey of Wi-Fi: the road to global

success. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Li, Z., & Agarwal, A. (2016). Platform integration and demand spillovers in complementary

markets: Evidence from Facebook's integration of Instagram. Management Science, 63(10), 3438-

3458.



Moeen, M., & Agarwal, R. (2017). Incubation of an industry: Heterogeneous knowledge bases and

modes of value capture. Strategic Management Journal, 38(3), 566-587.



Moeen, M., Agarwal, R., & Shah, S. K. (2019). Building industries by building knowledge: uncertainty

reduction through experimentation, knowledge release and knowledge acquisition. Working Paper. SSRN.



Rosenberg, N. (1963). Technological change in the machine tool industry, 1840­1910. The Journal of

Economic History, 23(4), 414-443.



Rosenberg, N. (1992). Economic experiments. Industrial and Corporate Change, 1(1), 181-203.



Rosenberg, N. (1996). Uncertainty and technological change. In R. Landau, T. Taylor & G. Wright

(Eds.), The mosaic of economic growth (pp. 334-356), Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.



Stern, S. (2006). Economic experiments: The role of entrepreneurship in economic prosperity. The

Melbourne Review: A Journal of Business and Public Policy, 2(2), 53-56.



Teece, D. J. (2006). Reflections on "profiting from innovation". Research Policy, 35(8), 1131-1146.



Teece, D. J. (1986). Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration,

collaboration, licensing and public policy. Research Policy, 15(6), 285-305.
Thomke, S. (2003b). R&D comes to services. Harvard Business Review, 81(4), 70-79.



Thomke, S. H. (2003a). Experimentation matters: unlocking the potential of new technologies for

innovation. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.



Wooldridge, J. M. (1997). Quasi-likelihood methods for count data. In: M. H. Pesaran & P. Schmidt

(eds.): Handbook of Applied Econometrics, Blackwell, Oxford, UK.



Zhu, F. (2019). Friends or foes? Examining platform owners' entry into complementors' spaces.

Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 28(1), 23-28.



Zhu, F., & Liu, Q. (2018). Competing with complementors: An empirical look at Amazon.com.

Strategic Management Journal, 39(10), 2618-2642.
Table 1: Means and Standard Deviations for firm exit from Internal and External Wi-Fi cards
                                             External Cards          Internal Cards
             Firm exit variables           Mean          SD        Mean          SD
 Firm exit                                  0.980       0.139       0.927       0.260
 Density of same market                   376.451      371.928    375.168      438.368
 Density of adjacent market               384.392      431.633    365.433      361.747

 Density of markets for complements
 Adj. higher end market (Enterprise routers)   252.794         416.747   273.927        511.939
 Adj. lower end market (SoHo routers.)         568.941         704.328   581.614        777.849
 Non-adjacent market (Broadband routers)       157.470         275.791   172.325        336.803

 Downstream integration
 Active in adjacent higher end market           0.058           0.236     0.289          0.456
 Active in adjacent lower end market            0.235           0.426     0.325          0.471
 Active in non-adjacent market                  0.049           0.216     0.349          0.479

 Entry cohorts
 Cohort 1 (entry before Centrino)               0.420           0.496     0.400          0.492
 Cohort 2 (entry with Centrino)                 0.080           0.270     0.070          0.260
 Cohort 3 (entry after Centrino)                0.500           0.502     0.530          0.502
 #of observations                                        102                       83
Table 2: Effect of Centrino entry on firms' exit from the external Wi-Fi cards market.
                                                                    External Wi-Fi cards

                                                         (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)

 Density of same market (external cards)               0.008       0.011*        0.008      0.009

                                                       [0.007]     [0.006]       [0.006]    [0.007]

 Density of adjacent market (int. cards)              -0.009**    -0.013**      -0.011**   -0.013***

                                                       [0.004]     [0.005]       [0.004]    [0.005]




 Density of markets for complements

 Adj. higher end market (Enterprise routers)           0.005       0.008         0.007      0.007

                                                       [0.008]     [0.007]       [0.007]    [0.007]

 Adj. lower end market (SoHo routers)                 0.0004      -0.0001        0.001      0.002

                                                       [0.008]     [0.008]       [0.008]    [0.008]

 Non-adjacent market (Broadband routers)               -0.002      -0.005        -0.005     -0.006

                                                       [0.011]     [0.011]       [0.011]    [0.011]




 Downstream integration (dummies)

 Active in adjacent higher end market                  0.576       0.487         0.369      0.369

                                                       [0.333]*    [0.326]       [0.334]    [0.347]

 Active in adjacent lower end market                   -0.069      -0.163        -0.129     -0.146

                                                       [0.258]     [0.236]       [0.216]    [0.232]

 Active in non-adjacent market                         -0.767     -0.838*       -0.809*    -0.864*

                                                       [0.474]     [0.482]       [0.482]    [0.502]

 Cohort 2 (entry with Centrino)                       0.869**

                                                       [0.341]

 Cohort 3 (entry after Centrino)                      1.449***

                                                       [0.552]




 Effect of Centrino entry

 Centrino dummy (11)                                              2.745***      3.080***   2.011***

                                                                   [0.406]       [0.373]    [0.579]
 Centrino dummy x Cohort 2 (12)                                                        -1.073***       0.027

                                                                                        [0.290]        [0.532]

 Centrino dummy x Cohort 3 (13)                                                         -0.503         0.567

                                                                                        [0.487]        [0.649]

 Centrino dummy x Time since Centrino (14)                                                           0.002***

                                                                                                      [0.0005]

 11 + 12                                                                               2.006***      2.039***

                                                                                        [0.461]        [0.468]

 11 + 13                                                                               2.576***      2.578***

                                                                                        [0.580]        [0.585]




 Log Pseudo likelihood                                     -343.81       -314.41       -311.50        -305.88

 Chisq                                                     68.91***      62.67***     120.82***      193.88***

 No of observations                                         4,233         4,233         4,233          4,233

 Time at risk                                              169,450       169,450       169,450        169,450

 No of firms (failures)                                    102(100)     102(100)       102(100)      102(100)

Notes: estimates result from Cox semi-parametric regressions. The dependent variable is the hazard of exit
from the external Wi-Fi card market. Density variables are monthly time varying. Robust standard errors
clustered on company id are reported. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 3: Effect of Centrino entry on firms' exit from the internal Wi-Fi cards market.
                                                            Internal Wi-Fi cards

                                                 (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)

 Density of same market (internal cards)       -0.113*    -0.022***     -0.170***   -0.020***

                                                [0.007]    [0.005]       [0.006]     [0.007]

 Density of adjacent market (ext. cards)        0.010     0.017**        0.012*      0.013*

                                                [0.007]    [0.007]       [0.007]     [0.008]




 Density of markets for complements

 Adj. higher end market (Enterprise routers)   -0.014**   -0.021***     -0.018***   -0.021***

                                                [0.007]    [0.006]       [0.006]     [0.007]

 Adj. lower end market (SoHo routers)           0.001      0.003         0.005       0.007

                                                [0.006]    [0.006]       [0.006]     [0.006]

 Non adjacent market (Broadband routers)       0.024**    0.036***      0.027***    0.029**

                                                [0.012]    [0.009]       [0.010]     [0.011]




 Downstream integration (dummies)

 Active in adjacent higher end market          -0.289      -0.358        -0.376      -0.433

                                                [0.308]    [0.297]       [0.260]     [0.287]

 Active in adjacent lower end market           -0.396      -0.259        -0.190      -0.172

                                                [0.258]    [0.221]       [0.207]     [0.240]

 Active in non-adjacent market                  0.091      0.186         0.256       0.378

                                                [0.281]    [0.258]       [0.246]     [0.265]

 Cohort 2 (entry with Centrino)                 0.195

                                                [0.375]

 Cohort 3 (entry after Centrino)               1.008*

                                                [0.581]




 Effect of Centrino entry

 Centrino dummy (21)                                      3.469***      3.753***    2.602***

                                                           [0.515]       [0.472]     [0.654]
 Centrino dummy x Cohort 2 (22)                                               -0.492         0.614

                                                                               [0.618]       [0.785]

 Centrino dummy x Cohort 3 (23)                                               -1.045**       0.056

                                                                               [0.455]       [0.793]

 Centrino dummy x Time since Centrino (24)                                                  0.004***

                                                                                             [0.001]

 21 + 22                                                                     3.261***       3.216***

                                                                               [0.794]       [0.806]

 21 + 23                                                                     2.708***       2.659***

                                                                               [0.642]       [0.700]




 Log Pseudo likelihood                           -257.7545    -218.5638      -216.7866     -209.5701

 Chisq                                            53.96***     80.74***      114.24***     133.49***

 No of observations                                2,952        2,952          2,952         2,952

 Time at risk                                     125,283      125,283        125,283       125,283

 No of firms (failures)                           83(77)        83(77)        83(77)         83(77)

Notes: estimates result from Cox semi-parametric regressions. The dependent variable is the hazard of exit
from the internal Wi-Fi card market. Density variables are monthly time varying. Robust standard errors
clustered on company id are reported. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 4: Effect of anticipating Centrino launch date on exit from the Wi-Fi cards markets
                                                                 External cards                                          Internal cards

 Effect of Centrino entry                    Baseline results   Placebo 1   Placebo 2   Placebo 3     Baseline results        Placebo 1   Placebo 2

 Centrino dummy (11)                             2.011***         0.142       2.404       15.259          2.602***              1.498       2.085

                                                  [0.579]        [1.079]      [2.378]     [13.514]         [0.654]              [1.172]    [1.190]

 Centrino dummy x Cohort 2 (12)                   0.027            --             --         --            0.614                  --         --

                                                  [0.532]                                                  [0.785]

 Centrino dummy x Cohort 3 (13)                   0.567            --             --         --            0.056                  --         --

                                                  [0.649]                                                  [0.793]

 Centrino dummy x Time since Centrino (14)       0.002***       0.011***      0.011       0.066**         0.004***            0.0154***   0.029***

                                                 [0.0005]        [0.003]      [0.009]     [0.028]          [0.001]              [0.005]    [0.006]

 11 + 12                                         2.039***          --             --         --           3.216***                --         --

                                                  [0.468]                                                  [0.806]

 11 + 13                                         2.578***          --             --         --           2.659***                --         --

                                                  [0.585]                                                  [0.700]




 Log Pseudo likelihood                           -305.88         -79.27       -46.44      -4.525         -209.5701            -42.4423    -27.3136

 Chisq                                          193.88***       115.22***    19.65**    12088.18***      133.49***            39.14***    73.79***

 No of observations                               4,233           2,483       1,500        911             2,952                1,511       1,260

 Time at risk                                    169,450        118,359      72,195       42,673          125,283              77,621      64,020
 No of firms (failures)                             102(100)         43(42)        26(25)       16(16)            83(77)            33(30)         27(24)

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered on company id are reported. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All models are estimated
using Cox semi-parametric regressions. The dependent variable is the hazard of exit from the external (internal) Wi-Fi card market. All models use the same
specification as our preferred one shown in Table 2 (Table 3) column (4). Column (1): preferred model. Column (2): Placebo 1 uses only firms that entered the
market between March 2000 and December 2002 with the fictitious Centrino launch date of March 13, 2002 (one year before the actual launch date). Column (3):
Placebo 2 uses only firms that entered the market between January 2001 and December 2002 with the fictitious Centrino launch date of March 13, 2002 (one year
before the actual launch date). Column (4): Placebo 3 uses only firms that entered the market before January 2001 with the fictitious Centrino launch date of
March 13, 2002 (one year before the actual launch date). For internal cards we do not estimate the model for Placebo 3, as only 3 companies entered the market
for internal cards between January 2001 and December 2002. They all exited.
Table 5: Means and Standard Deviations for product entry analysis
               Product entry variables                 Mean          SD
 All sample
 Any equipment                                          4.868       9.954
 First product (any market)                             0.039       0.194
 After Centrino dummy                                   0.777       0.415

 Specific market
 SoHo routers                                           2.725       5.114
 First product in SoHo                                  0.344       0.182
 Enterprise routers                                     4.713       10.843
 First product in Enterprise                            0.158       0.124
 Broadband routers                                      4.200       6.663
 First product in Broadband                             0.154       0.123

 Prior experience
 Experienced in cards                                   0.270       0.444
 Experience in Internal cards only                      0.200       0.400
 Experienced in External cards only                     0.249       0.432
Table 6: Effect of Centrino entry on the number of routers
                          All sample               SoHo               Enterprise            Broadband
                              (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)
 After Centrino            0.911***               0.493**               0.959*               1.700***
                            [0.222]               [0.255]              [0.493]                [0.349]

 Log pseudo-                -3309.53              -1822.37              -1002.4               -579.47
 likelihood
 No of obs.                  1,274                   991                  439                   286
 No of firms                  143                    118                   59                    44
 Chisq                      25.40***                4.55*                5.11*                28.49***
Notes: estimates result from conditional quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson regressions. The dependent
variable is the total number of equipment in the year of observation. All models incorporate a dummy for
first product entry. Robust standard errors clustered on company id are reported. * Significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 7: Number of routers and prior experience in Wi-Fi cards. All sample
                                                                                                                        All sample
                                                                                                      (1)                   (2)                   (3)
 After Centrino                                                                                      0.659               1.234***                0.745
                                                                                                    [0.584]               [0.348]               [0.504]
 After Centrino x Experienced in cards                                                               0.239
                                                                                                    [0.629]
 After Centrino x Experienced in internal cards only                                                                      -0.404
                                                                                                                          [0.419]
 After Centrino x Experienced in external cards only                                                                                             0.167
                                                                                                                                                [0.554]

 Log pseudo-likelihood                                                                              -3135.03             -3306.57              -3184.47
 No of obs.                                                                                           1,342                1,342                 1,342
 No of firms                                                                                           211                  211                   211
 Chisq                                                                                              40.56***             30.96***              28.91***
Notes: estimates result from conditional quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson regressions. The dependent variable is the total number of equipment in the year of
observation. All models incorporate a dummy for first product entry and a dummy for prior experience in card production. Robust standard errors clustered on
company id are reported. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 8: Number of routers and prior experience in Wi-Fi cards. Sub-sample of SoHo (low-end) routers
                                                                                                                      SoHo routers
                                                                                                      (1)                 (2)                     (3)
 After Centrino                                                                                     -0.508               0.029                  -0.215
                                                                                                    [0.362]             [0.316]                 [0.325]
 After Centrino x Experienced in cards                                                              1.072**
                                                                                                    [0.451]
 After Centrino x Experienced in internal cards only                                                                       0.522
                                                                                                                          [0.409]
 After Centrino x Experienced in external cards only                                                                                            0.785*
                                                                                                                                                [0.426]

 Log pseudo-likelihood                                                                              -1786.31             -1820.21              -1801.86
 No of obs.                                                                                           991                  991                    991
 No of firms                                                                                          118                  118                    118
 Chisq                                                                                              33.93***               6.04                  8.31*
Notes: estimates result from conditional quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson regressions. The dependent variable is the total number of equipment in the year of
observation. All models incorporate a dummy for first product entry and a dummy for prior experience in card production. Robust standard errors clustered on
company id are reported. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 9: Number of routers and prior experience in Wi-Fi cards. Sub-sample of Enterprise (high-end) routers
                                                                                                       Enterprise routers
                                                                                            (1)                (2)                                (3)
 After Centrino                                                                          2.104***           2.027***                            1.914**
                                                                                          [0.691]            [0.622]                            [0.901]
 After Centrino x Experienced in cards                                                   -1.591**
                                                                                          [0.657]
 After Centrino x Experienced in internal cards only                                                        -1.642**
                                                                                                             [0.710]
 After Centrino x Experienced in external cards only                                                                                            -1.398*
                                                                                                                                                [0.822]

 Log pseudo-likelihood                                                                              -991.12               -991.63              -994.09
 No of obs.                                                                                           439                   439                  439
 No of firms                                                                                           59                    59                   59
 Chisq                                                                                              23.48***              17.51**              20.18***
Notes: estimates result from conditional quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson regressions. The dependent variable is the total number of equipment in the year of
observation. All models incorporate a dummy for first product entry and a dummy for prior experience in card production. Robust standard errors clustered on
company id are reported. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Table 10: Number of routers and prior experience in Wi-Fi cards. Sub-sample of Broadband (high-end) routers
                                                                                                     Broadband routers
                                                                                          (1)                 (2)                                 (3)
 After Centrino                                                                          0.429             2.123***                              0.514
                                                                                        [0.349]             [0.060]                             [0.335]
 After Centrino x Experienced in cards                                                  1.191*
                                                                                        [0.616]
 After Centrino x Experienced in internal cards only                                                      -1.270***
                                                                                                            [0.089]
 After Centrino x Experienced in external cards only                                                                                            1.106*
                                                                                                                                               [0.607]*

 Log pseudo-likelihood                                                                              -546.34              -577.44               -548.49
 No of obs.                                                                                           286                  286                   286
 No of firms                                                                                           44                   44                    44
 Chisq                                                                                              21.78***             20.53***              20.33***
Notes: estimates result from conditional quasi-maximum likelihood Poisson regressions. The dependent variable is the total number of equipment in the year of
observation. All models incorporate a dummy for first product entry and a dummy for prior experience in card production. Robust standard errors clustered on
company id are reported. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Figure 1a: Timeline of events in the development and commercialization of Wi-Fi products (until the launch of Centrino)

                                                                                             9) Hot-spot experimentation
                                                                                               7) Dell and
                                                      5) August: Intersil,
                                                                                                  Lucent
                                                         3Com, Nokia,
                                                                                              Technologies
                                                     Aironet, Symbol and
                                                                                            release card that
                                                     Lucent jointly create
                                                                                             works with XP-
                                                       WECA (Wireless
                                                                                            OS and one Dell
                                                           Ethernet
                                                                                             branded router
                                                         Compatibility
                                                                                            that works with
                                                           Alliance)
                                                                                              IEEE 802.11b

                      1) IEEE
                    Committee                                                                 6) Microsoft
                                                        2) July: Second
                  802.11 release                                                             release XP-OS
                                                     standard is approved                                       10) October: WECA is renamed
                  first standard                                                              with built in
                                                      by IEEE Committee                                                 Wi-Fi alliance
                  for "Wireless                                                             support for IEEE
                                                        (IEEE 802.11b)
                    Local Area                                                                   802.11
                    Network"


           1996            1997               1998                  1999            2000               2001                             2002               2003      2004


                                                      4) July: Apple and                                                                        11) March: Intel
                                                     Lucent Technologies                                                                       launches Centrino
                                                                                                 8) Intel debates redesigning processor &
                                                     introduce expansion                                                                       chipset with built-
                                                                                                           motherboard for laptop
                                                     card at 99$ (aimed at                                                                      in Wi-Fi (Carmel
                                                         mass market)                                                                               platform)


                                                         3) July: Apple
                                                        Airport (card +
                                                      access point router)
                                                       is launched. First
                                                       router to support
                                                          IEEE 802.11b
                                                            standard



Notes on events significance: 1) Gains attention of Steve Jobs who contacts Lucent Technologies with a proposal; 2) Fixes a number of flaws discovered in the first release; 5)
Formed for conformance testing to certify interoperability; 7) First 802.11b system for Windows based laptops; 8) Requires re-orienteering firm and supply chain to laptops instead
of desktops; 9) Many firms involved; 10) 802.11 is rebranded as "Wi-Fi.
Source: Authors' elaboration based on: Lemstra, W., Hayes, V., Groenewegen, J. (2011): Annex 2, and other sources.
Figure 1b: A representation of the supply chain before the launch of Centrino
                                                                                Router providers
                                         Wi-Fi card builders                    3Com
                                            Lucent                              Aironet (Cisco)
               IC makers                                                        Others....
                                            Symbol technologies
         Intel
         AMD
                                                                                                   Customers
         TI
         Intersil
         Motorola                                               OEMs

                                                          Dell
           OS providers                                   HP                                       Households
                                                          Lenovo                                   Enterprises
       Microsoft                                          Gateway
       Windows                                            Other Wintel
       Apple OS                                           brands
                                                          Apple laptops
Figure 2: Centrino entry and incumbent firms in the Wi-Fi cards market

                                  Number of incumbents
 50



 40



 30



 20



 10



  0
  mar-00           mar-03           mar-06             mar-09          mar-12           mar-15

                                      Internal cards        External cards


Notes: the graph plots the number of incumbent firms in the internal and external Wi-Fi card market before
and after the introduction of Centrino (March 2003).
Figure 3: Effect of Centrino on the hazard rate of firms by Wi-Fi card type


                                     Effect of Centrino on the hazard rate of firms. External cards market                                                Effect of Centrino on the hazard rate of firms. Internal cards market
                                     1.00




                                                                                                                                                          1.00
                                     0.75




                                                                                                                                                          0.75
   Cumulative percentage surviving




                                                                                                                        Cumulative percentage surviving
                                     0.50




                                                                                                                                                          0.50
                                     0.25




                                                                                                                                                          0.25
                                     0.00




                                                                                                                                                          0.00




                                            0               2000                         4000                    6000                                            0               2000                         4000                    6000
                                                                   Age (analysis time)                                                                                                  Age (analysis time)


                                                         Before Centrino                        After Centrino                                                                Before Centrino                        After Centrino
Figure 4: Number of products by equipment type
 300                                                                                                 800


                                                                                                     700
 250

                                                                                                     600

 200
                                                                                                     500


 150                                                                                                 400


                                                                                                     300
 100

                                                                                                     200

  50
                                                                                                     100


   0                                                                                                 0
       2000            2003            2006            2009            2012           2015

               SoHo equip.           Enterprise eq.           Broadband eq.          All sample

 Notes: the graph plots the number of products in the Wi-Fi equipment markets before and after the
introduction of Centrino (March 2003).
Figure 5: Frequencies of products introductions by equipment type




                                                                                     800
    200 400 600 800
     N° of observations




                                                                            N° of observations
                                                                           200     400   600
              0




                                                                                     0
                          0          20         40          60       80                          0      10       20      30      40     50
                              N° of model introductions (All sample)                             N° of model introductions (SoHo equiment)
              400




                                                                                     200
     N° of observations




                                                                           N° of observations
                  300




                                                                                        150
            200




                                                                                  100
    100




                                                                           50
              0




                                                                                     0




                          0        20          40         60          80                         0      10      20      30      40     50
                           N° of model introductions (Enterprise eq.)                            N° of model introductions (Broadband eq.)
Figure 6: Dynamics of the Centrino effect. Results for all sample
  2.5

    2

  1.5

    1

  0.5

    0
        -3   -2   -1   0    1    2    3    4    5    6    7   8    9    10   11
 -0.5

   -1

 -1.5
Notes: the solid line corresponds to the coefficient estimates of Poisson quasi-maximum likelihood
regressions in which the total number of routers in the year of observation is regressed against entry year
effects, the dummy capturing the years after Centrino entry and the interactions of the Centrino dummy
with variables corresponding to three years before Centrino entry, two years before Centrino entry, ... , ten
years after the year of Centrino entry, eleven years after the year of Centrino entry and above (the omitted
variable is the year of Centrino entry). The 95% confidence interval (computed on the basis of robust
standard errors clustered on firm id) is plotted in dashed lines.
Figure 7a: Dynamics of the Centrino effect. Results for the sample of SoHo routers
(experienced only)
   2

 1.5

   1

 0.5

   0
        -3   -2   -1   0   1   2    3   4    5   6    7    8   9   10   11
 -0.5

  -1

 -1.5


  Notes: the solid line corresponds to the coefficient estimates of Poisson quasi-maximum likelihood regressions in which
  year of observation is regressed against entry year effects, the dummy capturing the years after Centrino entry and the in
  with variables corresponding to three years before Centrino entry, two years before Centrino entry, ... , ten years after th
  years after the year of Centrino entry and above (the omitted variable is the year of Centrino entry). The 95% confidence
  robust standard errors clustered on firm id) is plotted in dashed lines. Figure 7a includes SoHo firms in the sample with
  Figure 7b includes only SoHo firms without such prior experience.




                                                     62
63
                                                                   APPENDIX

 Table A1: A detailed mapping of Wi-Fi supply chain participants
Role in Wi-Fi supply chain   Notes          Company name             Notes
                                            Intel                    Launch Centrino in March 2003; Leader in the integration of Wi-Fi
                                                                     functionality in laptops;
                                                                     Involved in early production for Wi-Fi chipset. Supported an alternative (to
                                            Texas Instruments
                                                                     Centrino) design to implement IEEE 802.11 standard;
                                                                     Enter the Wi-Fi chipset market in November 2002 with the Am1772 WLAN
                                            AMD                      chip set and a mini-PCI card reference design kit supporting the IEEE
                                                                     802.11b WLAN standard;
                                            Broadcom                 Leader in Wi-Fi chips for gateway and routers;
                                                                     Enter the Wi-Fi chipset market in July 2003 with the WaveLAN chipset; Chip
Integrated circuits makers                  Agere Systems
                                                                     technology unit dissolved in 2004;
                                                                     Enter the Wi-Fi chipset market in May 2003 with a IEEE 802.11b-compliant
                                            Conexant
                                                                     WLAN baseband processor;
                                                                     Former semiconductor unit of Harris Corporation; Become independent in
                                            Intersil                 early 2000; Sell its WLAN unit to Globespan Virata in 2003; Globespan Virata
                                                                     merge with Conexant in 2005;
                                                                     Early developer of Wireless LAN card (915 MHz) in September 1990;
                                            NCR
                                                                     Acquired by AT&T in 1991; Change name into AT&T Global Information
                                                                     Solutions (GIS) in 1994;
                                                                     Acquires NCR in 1991; Divested in 3 independent firms in 1996: AT&T-GIS;
                                            AT&T
                                                                     Lucent Technologies (retains WLAN/Wi-Fi activities);
                                                                     Created in 1996; In 1999 release the earliest IEEE-802.22 compliant (Wave-
Wi-Fi equipment builders                    Lucent Technologies
                             Large firms                             LAN);
(cards, routers, switches)
                                            Motorola                 Early developer of Altair Wireless LAN cards (18GHz band);
                                                                     Established as a subsidiary of Lucent Technologies in 2000; Spun-off in 2001
                                            Agere Systems
                                                                     retaining the WLAN/Wi-Fi activities; End of 2001, holds 50% of market
                                                                share for Wi-Fi products (including OEMs channel); In 2002 sell its WLAN
                                                                infrastructure to Proxim; Discontinue WLAN developments in 2004;
                                                                Among the early sponsors of the Wireless LAN Association (precursor of the
                                          Proxim
                                                                Wi-Fi alliance); Acquire the WLAN infrastructure of Agere Systems in 2002;
                                                                Work with 3Com to integrate its products within the 3Com line; In 2002 sell
                                          Harris/Intersil
                                                                its WLAN technology to Conexant;
                                          Symbol Technologies   Work with 3Com to integrate its products within the 3Com line;
                                                                Established in 1994 by Telxon RF division; Release a early proprietary
                                          Aironet
                                                                900MHz wireless cards; Acquired by Cisco Systems in 2003;
                                                                Established in 1988; Release the first Wi-Fi router in 1999; Acquired by Cisco
                                          Linksys
                                                                Systems in 2003; In 2013 sold to Belkin;
                                          Xircom                Leader in manufacturing of Wi-Fi cards; Acquired by Intel in 1999;
                                          BreezeCom             Established in 1992; Merged with Floware Wireless in 2001;
                            Small firms
                                                                Pioneer of fast Wi-Fi cards; Acquired by Lucent technologies in 1998; Closed
                                          WaveAccess
                                                                in 2001;
Networking companies                      3Com                  Leader of Wired LAN equipment, founding member of Wi-Fi Alliance;
(Wired LAN                                Xircom                Leader supplier of Ethernet port adapters;
card/equipment suppliers)                 NEC (Japan)           OEM;
                                          Solectek              OEM;
                                          OmniNet               Proponent of LAN over phone cables;
                                          ARCNet                Proponent of LAN over phone cables;
Computer manufacturers                    Apple                 Launch Apple Airport card + access point in July 1999;
and vendors (OEMs)                        Dell                  Miss agreement with NCR in 1992 for WaveLAN for PCs;
                                          Toshiba
                                          Compaq
                                                                Laptop vendors;
                                          Hewlett Packard
                                          IBM
Network Management OS-                    Microsoft (MS-LAN     In 2001 release XP-OS with built in support for IEEE 802.11;
Software providers                        Manager)
                                           Novell (Netware)
                                           Banyan Vine
                          Outsourcing                             World's largest wireless LAN card manufacturers; Subcontractor partner of
                                           Universal Scientific
                          partner of                              Agere Systems; Become an ODM specialized in wireless in 2002 after Agere
                                           Inc. (USI) (Taiwan)
                          equipment                               Systems sells its business unit to Proxim;
Offshore developers and
                          manufacturers
manufacturers of
                                           Ambit
equipment                 Outsourcing
                                           Compal (Taiwan)        Supply for Dell, Acer, Toshiba among others;
                          partners of PC
                                           Alphatop (Taiwan)      Started as manufacturer of iBook for Apple;
                          vendors
                                           Gemtek (Taiwan)        Established in 1996; Started as OEM then became an ODM;
System integrators,                        Computerland           Early involvement in WLAN development;
distributors and value-                    Softel
added resellers                            Ingram Micro/D
                                                                  Established in 1996; Provide early access points in Starbucks locations;
                                           MobileStar
                                                                  Acquired by VoiceStream in 2001;
                                           VoiceStream            Cellular communication company acquired by T-Mobile in 2002;
                                           T-Mobile
                                                                  Established in 1995, pioneer of wireless access in public places; Change name
                                           Plancom
                                                                  into Wayport in 1996; Acquired by AT&T in 2008;
                          Wireless ISPs
Access providers                           Deep Blue Wireless     Established in 2001, merged with WiFiFee in 2009;
                          (WISPs)
                                           FatPort (Canada)       Established in 2002, still active;
                                           NetNearU               Established in 1997, acquired by ViaSat in 2014;
                                           SurfandSip             Established in 2000, still active;
                                           Airwave Adventures     Established in 2003, acquired by TengoInternet in 2016;
                                           Harbor Link Network    Established in 1998;
                                           Hotpoint Wireless      Established in 2002, still active;
                                           J.C Penney,            Early target: narrow scale (1990);
                          Enterprise       Littlewoods,
Customers
                          Market           Younkers, House of
                                           Fraser, Victoria's
                                            Secret, Stop & Shop,
                                            Wal-Mart
                          Education         Carnegie Mellon        First large-scale implementation (1993);
                          Market            University
                          Household                                Office, Home, Internet `hotspots' (after 1999);
                          Market
Note: Authors' elaboration based on several sources
