                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  JACKS OF ALL TRADES AND MASTERS OF ONE:
              DECLINING SEARCH FRICTIONS AND UNEQUAL GROWTH

                                        Paolo Martellini
                                         Guido Menzio

                                      Working Paper 27758
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27758


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




We are grateful to Pieter Gautier, Victoria Gregory, Chris Moser and Robert Ulbricht for their
insightful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Paolo Martellini and Guido Menzio. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Jacks of All Trades and Masters of One: Declining Search Frictions and Unequal Growth
Paolo Martellini and Guido Menzio
NBER Working Paper No. 27758
August 2020
JEL No. E24,J24,J31,J64,O47

                                          ABSTRACT

Declining search frictions generate productivity growth by allowing workers to find jobs for
which they are better suited. The return of declining search frictions on productivity varies across
different types of workers. For workers who are "jacks of all trades"--in the sense that their
productivity is nearly independent from the distance between their skills and the requirements of
their job' declining search frictions lead to minimal productivity growth. For workers who are
"masters of one trade"--in the sense that their productivity is very sensitive to the gap between
their individual skills and the requirements of their job--declining search frictions lead to fast
productivity growth. As predicted by this view, we find that workers in routine occupations have
low wage dispersion and growth, while workers in non-routine occupations have high wage
dispersion and growth.


Paolo Martellini
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
pa.martellini@gmail.com

Guido Menzio
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street,
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
gm1310@nyu.edu
1       Introduction
Search frictions cause labor misallocation, in the sense that workers are not necessarily
employed in the jobs where they are most productive. As search frictions decline-- due
to, say, advances in information and communication technologies-- the allocation of labor
improves and average labor productivity increases.1 The return of declining search frictions
to productivity, though, is unequal for di¤erent groups of workers. For workers who are
specialists-- in the sense that their productivity varies a great deal across di¤erent jobs
in their labor market-- the decline in search frictions leads to high productivity and wage
growth. For workers who are generalists-- in the sense that their productivity is similar
across di¤erent jobs -- the decline in search frictions leads to minimal productivity and wage
growth. Thus, declining search frictions leads to lower growth for "jacks of all trades" (the
generalist workers) and higher growth for "masters of one trade"(the specialized workers).
    We formalize the above argument using a version of the search-theoretic model by
Martellini and Menzio (2020) with multiple types of workers. Di¤erent types of workers
populate di¤erent labor markets. In each labor market, workers and ...rms are located along
a circle of unit circumference and meet randomly. The distance between a particular worker
and a particular ...rm determines the productivity of their match and, in turn, the decision
of whether the ...rm and the worker consummate their match. The environment is non-
stationary, as both the production and the search technologies improve over time. As in
Martellini and Menzio (2020), we restrict attention to a Balanced Growth Path (BGP),
which is an equilibrium path consistent with the empirical observation that the unemploy-
ment rate, the vacancy rate, the rate at which unemployed workers become employed (UE
rate) and the rate at which employed workers become unemployed (EU rate) display no
secular trend. The existence of a BGP implies some restrictions on the fundamentals of
the model. In particular, it implies that productivity must be isoelastic with respect to the
distance between the worker and the ...rm, which we interpret as the distance between the
skills of the worker and the skill requirements of the ...rm'
                                                            s job.
     The main theoretical ...nding of the paper is that the growth rate of productivity and wages
for workers of a particular type has two components. The ...rst component is the growth rate
of the production technology used by that type of workers. The second component is the
growth rate of the e¢ ciency of the search technology multiplied by the type-speci...c elasticity
of productivity with respect to the ...rm-worker skill distance. Therefore, the growth rate for
two groups of workers may di¤er not only because of biased technical change. The growth
rate for two groups of workers may di¤er also because the return to declining search frictions
is higher for one group-- the group with a higher elasticity of productivity with respect to the
...rm-worker skill distance-- and lower for the other group-- the group with a lower elasticity
    1
     Bhuller, Kostol and Vigtel (2019) provide direct evidence that the introduction of Broadband Internet
reduced the extent of search frictions in Norway. They ...nd that, when Broadband Internet becomes available,
...rms report fewer problems in ...nding workers, workers ...nd employment more quickly, and the wage of newly
hired workers increases. These ...ndings are consistent with the predictions of our model in response to a
lumpy fall in search frictions.


                                                      1
of productivity with respect to the skill distance.
    The main empirical ...nding of the paper is documenting a relationship between wage
dispersion and wage growth across di¤erent occupations (which we take to be a proxy for
workers' types). Speci...cally, we ...nd that occupations featuring more wage dispersion in
1980 tend to have higher wage growth between 1980 and 2015. The ...nding is consistent
with the hypothesis that unequal growth is partly caused by di¤erential returns to declining
search frictions. Indeed, if a group of workers is more specialized-- in the sense that their
productivity is more sensitive to the ...rm-worker skill distance-- the cross-sectional wage
distribution is more dispersed, the return to declining search frictions is higher, and the
growth rate of wages is higher.
    We then group occupations into equally-sized bins according to their degree of routine-
ness. We ...nd that routine occupations have lower wage dispersion and lower wage growth
than non-routine occupations. These ...ndings have a natural interpretation in light of our
theory of unequal growth. Routine workers have a low e¤ective elasticity of productivity
with respect to the ...rm-worker skill distance because, almost by de...nition, routine jobs are
all similar. Non-routine workers have a high e¤ective elasticity of productivity with respect
to the ...rm-worker skill distance because, again by de...nition, non-routine jobs are dissimi-
lar. It then follows that declining search frictions lead to lower growth for routine than for
non-routine workers. A back of the envelope calibration of the model suggests that unequal
returns to declining search frictions account for about 30% of the growth di¤erential between
routine and non-routine occupations.
    Our paper contributes to the literature on rising wage inequality between di¤erent groups
of workers. The literature started by documenting the rise in the college premium (Katz and
Murphy 1992). The canonical explanation for this phenomenon is that technological progress
is biased in favor of skilled workers either by ...at (see, e.g., Katz and Murphy 1992 and Card
and DiNardo 2002) or because capital equipment is complementary to skilled labor (Krusell
et al. 2000). More recently, the literature has switched its focus from the college premium
to the rise in wage inequality between routine and non-routine workers (Autor and Dorn
2013). The standard explanation for this phenomenon is again a version of the skilled-biased
technical change hypothesis, in which automation erodes the wages of routine workers (see,
e.g., Autor and Dorn 2013, Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018 and Ray and Mookherjee 2020).
Our paper provides a complementary explanation based on the view that improvements in
the search technology have di¤erent e¤ects on routine and non-routine workers.
    Our paper also contributes to the literature on search frictions and wage inequality.
Generally, this literature is focused on measuring the contribution of search frictions to the
dispersion of wages among observationally similar workers (see, e.g., Albrecht and Axel 1984,
Burdett and Mortensen 1998, Bontemps, Robin and Van Den Berg 2000, Postel-Vinay and
Robin 2002, Bagger et al. 2014, Lise and Postel-Vinay 2018, Gregory 2020, Morchio and
Moser 2020). In contrast, our paper is focused on understanding the e¤ect of declining search
frictions on wage inequality between di¤erent groups of workers.


                                               2
    Our paper is part of a broader research e¤ort aimed at understanding the macro conse-
quences of declining search frictions. Martellini and Menzio (2020) identify conditions under
which there exists a BGP where unemployment, vacancies and workers'transition rates re-
main constant over time in the face of declining search frictions. They show that, in such a
BGP, declining search frictions contribute to economic growth by allowing workers to ...nd
more jobs that suit them better. Brugemann, Gautier and Tyros (2020) study the e¤ect
of a one-time decline in search frictions on the ...rm's choice between technologies requiring
general or specialized skills. In the context of the product market, Menzio (2020) identi...es
conditions under which there exists a BGP where price dispersion for similar goods does not
vanish as search frictions decline. He shows that, in such a BGP, declining search frictions
lead to economic growth by allowing ...rms to design products that are more specialized. Our
paper contributes to this line of research by showing that declining search frictions may have
di¤erent rates of return for di¤erent agents in the economy depending on their degree of
specialization.


2     Environment
The economy is populated by a measure i of workers of type i = 1; 2; :::N , with i 2 [0; 1]
     P
and N  i=1 i = 1. Di¤erent types of workers belong to di¤erent labor markets. Within
their own labor market, workers of type i are distributed uniformly along a circle with unit
circumference. The worker'   s type captures characteristics (e.g. educational attainment,
preferences over broad lines of work, etc. . . ) which determine the labor market where the
worker sells his labor. The worker's location along the circle captures the type of tasks for
which the worker is best suited. The objective of a worker of type i is to maximize the
present value of   ow income discounted at the rate r > 0, where      ow income is given by
some wage wi;t when the worker is employed and by some unemployment bene...t bi;t when
the worker is unemployed.
    The economy is also populated by a positive measure of ...rms. The objective of a ...rm is
to maximize the present value of pro...ts discounted at the rate r. The ...rm hires workers by
opening, maintaining, and ...lling vacancies. The ...rm opens a vacancy in labor market i and
locates it randomly along the circle of unit circumference. The ...rm pays a       ow cost ki;t > 0
to maintain the vacancy. The location of the vacancy along the circle captures the type of
tasks required by the ...rm. Once the vacancy is ...lled, the ...rm and the hired worker produce
an income      ow of yi;t zi ( ), where yi;t is a component of productivity that is common to all
matches between a ...rm and a worker of type i, and zi ( ) is a component of productivity that
is speci...c to a particular match between a ...rm and a worker of type i. Speci...cally, zi ( ) is
a strictly positive and strictly decreasing function of the distance 2 [0; 1=2] between the
location of the worker and the location of the ...rm'     s job along the circle. We refer to as
the ...rm-worker skill distance.
    Labor markets are subject to search frictions. Unemployed workers and vacancies need


                                                3
to search the market to locate each other.2 The outcome of the search process is a            ow
At M (ui;t ; vi;t ) of random, bilateral meetings between unemployed workers and vacant jobs,
where ui;t and vi;t are the measures of unemployed workers and vacant jobs in labor market i,
M is a constant return to scale function,3 and At is the e¢ ciency of the search process. The
rate at which an unemployed worker meets a vacancy is At p( i;t ), where i;t = vi;t =ui;t is the
tightness of labor market i, and p( ) M (1; ) is a strictly increasing and concave function
such that p(0) = 0 and p(1) = 1. The rate at which a vacancy meets an unemployed
worker is At q ( i;t ), where q ( ) p( )= is a strictly decreasing function such that q (0) = 1
and q (1) = 0.
    Upon meeting, a ...rm and a worker observe the distance between them. After observing
 , the ...rm and the worker decide whether to match or not.4 If they do, the ...rm and the
worker bargain over the terms of an employment contract and start producing an income
  ow of yi;t zi ( ). Production continues until the match is broken o¤. If they do not match,
the worker remains unemployed and the ...rm'     s job remains vacant.
     The terms of the employment contract are determined by the axiomatic Nash bargaining
solution. That is, the terms of the employment contract maximize the product between the
worker'  s gains from trade taken to the power of and the ...rm' s gains from trade taken to the
power of 1       , with 2 (0; 1). The worker'  s gains from trade are de...ned as the di¤erence
between the value of the employment relationship to the worker and his disagreement point,
which we take to be the value of unemployment. Similarly, the ...rm'      s gains from trade are
de...ned as the di¤erence between the value of the employment relationship to the ...rm and
its disagreement point, which we take to be the value of an un...lled vacancy. The contract
speci...es a path for the worker'
                                s wage and, directly or indirectly, a break-up date. We assume
that the contract has enough contingencies to guarantee that the break-up date maximizes
the joint value of the match. Since the wage transfers income from the ...rm to the worker at
the rate of 1-to-1, the Nash bargaining solution is such that the worker captures a fraction
   and the ...rm captures a fraction 1      of the surplus, which is de...ned as the di¤erence
between the joint value of the match and the sum of the disagreement points.
   The economic environment is non-stationary, as both the production and the search
technologies improve over time. Speci...cally, the common component of productivity yi;t
grows at some constant rate gy;i  0, and the e¢ ciency of the search process At grows at
some constant rate gA > 0. Additionally, the unemployment income bi;t and the vacancy
   2
     We assume that workers can search the labor market only when unemployed. As shown in Martellini
and Menzio (2020, Appendix C), the conditions and properties of a BGP are essentially the same in a version
of the model where workers are allowed to search on the job. The same is true for the results on unequal
growth, which are the focus of this paper.
   3
     Without population growth, the assumption of constant returns to scale in M is essentially without loss
in generality. With population growth, the returns to scale in M provide an additional source of declining
search frictions (see Martellini and Menzio 2020).
   4
     Since a ...rm and a worker perfectly observe the distance before deciding whether or not to start an
employment relationship, we say that ...rm-worker matches are pure inspection goods (as in, say, Pissarides
1984). As discussed in Martellini and Menzio (2020), a BGP does not exist if ...rm-worker matches are pure
experience goods.


                                                     4
cost ki;t grow, respectively, at the rates gb;i and gk;i .
      The model is a version of Martellini and Menzio (2020) in which the economy is populated
by N types of workers. Di¤erent types of workers operate in distinct labor markets and they
di¤er along two crucial dimensions. First, di¤erent types of workers use di¤erent production
technologies, each associated with its own level of productivity yi;t and its own growth rate
gy;i .5 For example, one type of worker may use a production technology that grows at a high
rate. Another type of worker may use a production technology that grows at a lower rate.
Second, di¤erent types of workers face a di¤erent relationship zi ( ) between the component
of productivity that is speci...c to a particular match and the distance between the worker' s
individual skill and the job'  s skill requirements. For example, one type of worker may face
a function zi ( ) with a very low elasticity of z with respect to . This type of worker is a
"jack of all trades,"as he is essentially equally productive doing any kind of job (within his
labor market). Another type of worker may face a function zi ( ) with a very high elasticity
of z with respect to . This type of worker is a "master of one trade," as he is much more
productive doing a job that requires skills similar to those that he possesses, rather than
doing a job that requires skills di¤erent from the ones he has.


3       Balanced Growth Path
We focus on a Balanced Growth Path (BGP), an initial condition and an associated equilib-
rium path along which-- for each type of worker-- the unemployment, vacancy rate, UE and
EU rates are all constant over time. In a model with only one type of worker, the focus on
a BGP is natural, given the lack of any clear secular trend in the aggregate unemployment,
vacancy, UE and EU rates during the last 100 years of US history (see Martellini and Menzio
2020). In a model with multiple types of workers, the focus on a BGP seems like a natural
starting point, as the stationarity of unemployment, vacancy, UE and EU rates for each type
of worker guarantees the stationarity of these objects at the aggregate level.6 Moreover,
the stationarity of the aggregate rates requires the type-speci...c rates to eventually become
constant-- as long as the type-speci...c rates do not feature o¤setting cycles.
     To formally de...ne a Balanced Growth Path (BGP), we need some notation. Let Vi;t (z )
denote the joint value of an employment relationship of quality z between a ...rm and a
worker of type i. Let Ui;t denote the value of unemployment for a worker of type i. Let
Si;t (z ) Vi;t (z ) Ui;t denote the surplus of a match of quality z between a ...rm and a worker of
type i. Further, let i;t denote the tightness of labor market i, ui;t the measure of unemployed
workers of type i, and Gi;t (z ) the c.d.f. of employed workers of type i across match qualities.
    5
     Throughout the paper, we will refer to yi;t as productivity and gy;i as the growth rate of the production
technology. More generally, though, yi;t represents revenues and depends on both technology (which a¤ects
the quantity of output produced) and preferences (which a¤ect the price of the output). Similarly, gy;i is the
growth rate of revenues, which depends not only technological progress but also on the shape of preferences.
   6
     In this paper, we keep things simple and we do not consider the possibility of trends in the measure of
di¤erent types of workers. We do not expect such trends to generate quantitatively signi...cant departures
from aggregate stationarity of unemployment, vacancy, UE and EU rates.


                                                      5
The initial state of the economy is the distribution of workers across employment states at
date t = 0, i.e. fui;0 ; Gi;0 g. A rational expectation equilibrium is a path for Vi;t , Ui;t , i;t , ui;t
and Gi;t such that the agents'decisions are optimal, markets clear, and the evolution of ui;t
and Gi;t is consistent with the agents'decisions and the initial state. A BGP is an initial
state and an associated rational expectation equilibrium such that the unemployment rate,
the vacancy rate, the UE and the EU rates are constant over time for all types of workers,
while the distribution of employed workers, Gi;t , grows at some constant, endogenous rate
gz;i -- in the sense that every quantile of the distribution grows at the rate gz;i .7
   The value Vi;t (z ) of a match of quality z between a ...rm and a worker of type i is such
that                                    Z t+T
                        Vi;t (z ) = max       e r( t) yi; zd + e rT Ui;t+T .             (3.1)
                                     T 0    t

At date      2 [t; t + T ], the ...rm and the worker produce a  ow yi; z of income. At date t + T ,
the ...rm   and the worker break up. After the break up, the worker'     s present value of income
is Ui;t+T   and the ...rm'   s present value of income is the value of an un...lled vacancy, which
must be     zero because ...rms are free to open and close vacancies at will.
       The optimal break-up date T is such that

                                zyi;t+T + Ui;t+T       rUi;t+T , and T    0,                           (3.2)

where the two inequalities hold with complementary slackness.8 The left-hand side of (3.2) is
the marginal bene...t of delaying the break-up, which is given by the ow income of the match
plus the time-derivative of the value of unemployment to the worker. The right-hand side of
(3.2) is the marginal cost of delaying the break-up, which is given by the annuitized value
of unemployment to the worker. Condition (3.2) states that either T = 0 and the marginal
cost of delaying the break-up exceeds the marginal bene...t, or T > 0 and the marginal cost
equals the marginal bene...t.
       The reservation quality Ri;t is de...ned as

                                           yi;t Ri;t = rUi;t   Ui;t .                                  (3.3)

It follows from (3.2) that an existing match between a ...rm and a worker of type i is main-
tained at date t i¤ its quality z exceeds Ri;t . Similarly, a meeting between a ...rm and a worker
of type i is consummated i¤ its quality z exceeds Ri;t . That is, Ri;t is the lowest quality for
which existing matches are maintained and new matches are consummated. From (3.1) and
(3.2), it also follows that Si;t = Vit (z ) Ui;t is strictly positive i¤ z exceeds Ri;t .
   7
     This is a standard condition for a BGP in which one of the equilibrium objects is a distribution of
productivities or some other variable that grows over time (see, e.g., Lucas and Moll 2014 or Perla and
Tonetti 2014).
   8
     Condition (3.2) is obviously necessary. As explained in Martellini and Menzio (2020), condition (3.2) is
also su¢ cient.




                                                       6
   The value Ui;t of unemployment for a worker of type i is such that
                                                        Z    zi 1 (Ri;t )
                      rUi;t = bi;t + Ai;t p( i )                             Si;t (zi ( ))2d + Ui;t .   (3.4)
                                                         0

The left-hand side of (3.4) is the annuitized value of unemployment to the worker. The ...rst
term on the right-hand side of (3.4) is the worker'    s   ow income when unemployed. The
second term is the worker'   s option value of searching, which is the rate at which the worker
meets a ...rm times a fraction of the expected surplus of the meeting between the worker and
the ...rm. The last term is the time-derivative of the value of unemployment to the worker.
Note that the expression for the expected surplus makes use of the fact that the distance
between the worker and the ...rm is a random variable that is distributed uniformly over the
interval [0; 1=2] and that only matches with a distance       z 1 (Ri;t ) are consummated.
   The tightness of labor marker i is such that
                                                             Z       zi 1 (Ri;t )
                          ki;t = Ai;t q ( i )(1          )                          Si;t (zi ( ))2d .   (3.5)
                                                                 0

The left-hand side of (3.5) is the cost to the ...rm from maintaining a vacancy in labor market
i. The right hand side is the bene...t, which is given by the rate at which the vacancy meets
a worker times a fraction 1       of the expected surplus of the meeting between the vacancy
and the worker. Condition (3.5) states that, in equilibrium, the tightness i equates the cost
and the bene...t of maintaining an additional vacancy in labor market i.
   In a BGP, the unemployment rate, the market tightness, the UE and the EU rates are
required to be constant for each worker type. These requirements are ful...lled i¤
                                                  1
                               At p(   i;t )2zi       (Ri;t ) = hi
                                                                 ue ,                                   (3.6)
                                       G0i;t (Ri;t )Ri;t = hi
                                                            eu ,                                        (3.7)
                                                      ui hi
                                                          ue = (               i       ui )hi
                                                                                            eu .        (3.8)

The UE rate at date t is the product between the rate at which an unemployed worker meets
a ...rm and the probability that the distance between the worker and the ...rm is below the
reservation distance z 1 (Ri;t ). Condition (3.6) states that the UE rate is constant over time.
The EU rate at date t is the product between the density of the Gi;t distribution at the
reservation quality Ri;t and the time-derivative of Ri;t . Condition (3.7) states that the EU
rate is constant over time. The condition for the stationarity of the unemployment rate is
(3.8), which states that the    ow of workers out of unemployment equals the      ow of workers
into unemployment. The condition for the stationarity of the market tightness is implicit in
(3.5), which requires the market-clearing tightness to be constant.
      In a BGP, the distribution Gi;t (z ) is required to grow at some endogenous constant rate
gz;i . That is, zi;t (x) = zi;0 exp(gz;i t) for all x 2 [0; 1] and all t 0, where zi;t (x) is the x-th




                                                             7
quantile of Gi;t . The condition is satis...ed i¤

                (   i   ui;t )G0i;t (zi;t (x))zi;t (x)gz;i + ui At p( i )2 z 1 (Ri;t )   z 1 (zi;t (x))   (3.9)
            = (     i   ui;t )G0i;t (Ri;t )Ri;t :

The left-hand side of (3.9) is the   ow of workers into matches with quality lower than an
x-th quantile growing at the rate gz;i . The right-hand side is the  ow of workers out of
matches with quality lower than an x-th quantile growing at the rate gz;i . Condition (3.9)
thus guarantees that the measure of workers in matches below an x-th quantile growing at
the rate gz;i remains constant over time.


4      Unequal Growth
For each worker type, the de...nition of a BGP is the same as in Martellini and Menzio (2020).
Therefore, the necessary and su¢ cient conditions for the existence of a BGP are exactly the
same as in Martellini and Menzio (2020, Theorems 1 and 2) applied to each di¤erent type
of worker. The necessary and su¢ cient conditions are reported below, together with the
characterization of the properties of a BGP.

Theorem 1. (Existence and Properties of a BGP).
    1. A BGP exists i¤ for each worker type i = 1; 2; : : : N : (a) the function zi ( ) has the
       isoelastic form zi;` 1= i for some zi;` > 0 and some i > 1; (b) the growth rate gk;i of
       the vacancy cost and the growth rate gb;i of the unemployment income are both equal
       to gy;i + gA = i ; (c) the discount rate r is such that r > gy;i + gA = i .
    2. If a BGP exists, it is unique and, for each worker type i = 1; 2; ::N , such that: (i) un-
       employment, vacancy, UE and EU rates are constant; (ii) Gi;t is a Pareto distribution
       with coe¢ cient i truncated at Ri;t , and grows at the constant rate gz;i = gA = i ; (iii)
       average labor productivity grows at the rate gy;i + gA = i .

    The ...rst part of Theorem 1 lists the necessary and su¢ cient conditions for the existence of
a BGP. The intuition is simple. On the one hand, improvements in the search technology lead
to an increase in the rate at which unemployed workers meet vacancies. On the other hand,
improvements in the search technology increase the reservation quality for workers and ...rms,
thus reducing the probability that a meeting turns into a match. The two e¤ects o¤set each
other and, thus, the UE rate remains constant i¤ the function zi ( ) has constant elasticity
1= i and the vacancy cost and the unemployment income grow at the rate gy;i + gA = i . The
EU rate remains constant as long as the distribution Gi;t is Pareto, which is the case as long
as the initial distribution Gi;0 is Pareto. The unemployment rate is stationary because the
UE and EU rates are constant.
  The conditions on the growth rate of the vacancy cost and the unemployment income
may appear to be knife-edge, but they are not. To understand why this is the case, note that

                                                        8
gy;i + gA = i is the growth rate of the average productivity of workers of type i. Thus, the
vacancy cost grows endogenously at the rate gy;i + gA = i as long as the input in maintaining
a vacancy in labor market i is some constant amount of labor supplied by workers of type i.
For the same reason, the unemployment income grows endogenously at the rate gy;i + gA = i
as long as bi;t is some constant fraction of the average output of workers of type i. These
observations are formalized in Martellini and Menzio (2020, Appendix B).
    The second part of Theorem 1 lists some of the key properties of a BGP. First, in a BGP,
the unemployment, vacancy, UE and EU rates are constant for each type of worker and,
hence, they are constant at the aggregate level. Second, in the BGP, the distribution Gi;t of
workers of type i across match qualities is a Pareto distribution with coe¢ cient i truncated
at the reservation quality Ri;t and grows at the rate gz;i = gA = i . To understand this second
property, note that, when a ...rm and a worker of type i meet, the distance between the
worker' s skills and the ...rm' s job requirements is a random draw from a uniform distribution
with support [0; 1=2]. The match between the ...rm and the worker is consummated i¤
    z 1 (Ri;t ) and, if so, the quality of the match is given by zi ( ) = zi;` 1= i . Therefore, the
distribution of quality between newly-created matches is

                          Pr(~
                             z     z)   = Pr(         z 1 (z )j   z 1 (Ri;t ))
                                                                                              (4.1)
                                        =1      (Ri;t =z ) i :

The above expression shows that the distribution of new matches is a Pareto with coe¢ cient
  i truncated at Ri;t . Since previously created matches are also distributed as a Pareto with
coe¢ cient i and survive i¤ their quality exceeds Ri;t , the overall distribution Gi;t is also
given by (4.1). The distribution Gi;t grows at the rate gz;i = gA = i , as this is the growth
rate of the reservation quality Ri;t .
    The second part of Theorem 1 also states that the growth rate of the average productivity
of labor for workers of type i is given by gy;i + gA = i . To see why this is the case, note that
Gi;t is given by (4.1) and, hence,
                                Z
                                                        i
                                   yi;t zdGi;t (z ) =       yi;t Ri;t .                     (4.2)
                                                      i   1

The above expression grows at the rate gy;i + gA = i , as yi;t grows at the rate gy;i and Ri;t
grows at the rate gz;i = gA = i . The growth rate of average productivity for workers of type i
has two distinct sources. The ...rst source is gy;i : progress in the production technology used
by workers of type i. The second source is gA = i : progress in the search technology which
has a return on the productivity of workers of type i that is equal to the elasticity 1= i of
zi ( ) with respect to . That is, the return of declining search frictions on the productivity
of workers of type i is equal to the elasticity of the idiosyncratic component of productivity
of a match with respect to the distance between the skills of a worker of type i and the
requirements of a ...rm's job.
   The growth rate of productivity translates into wage growth. Following Pissarides (1985)


                                                  9
and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), let us assume that a ...rm and a worker bargain over
the wage at time intervals of length dt ! 0. Then, it is easy to show that the wage for a
worker of type i in a match of quality z is given by

                               wi;t (z ) = yi;t z + (1            )yi;t Ri;t .             (4.3)

From (4.1) and (4.3), it follows that the wage distribution Li;t (w) for workers of type i is
                                                                                 i
                                                     yi;t Ri;t
                            Li;t (w) = 1                                             ,     (4.4)
                                             w     (1      )yi;t Ri;t

and the average wage for workers of type i is
                        Z
                                              i
                          wdLit (w) =                      + (1        ) yi;t Ri;t :       (4.5)
                                              i        1

Clearly, the average wage for workers of type i grows at the rate gy;i + gA = i , which is the
same as the growth rate of average productivity.
   We are now in the position to state the main theorem of the paper.

Theorem 2. (Unequal Growth) Consider two worker types i and j , i 6= j . Wage growth
for workers of type i may be higher than for workers of type j because of: (a) technological
progress in production is biased towards workers of type i: gy;i > gy;j ; (b) technological
progress in search has a higher rate of return for workers of type i: 1= i > 1= j .

   Theorem 2 identi...es two sources of unequal wage growth for di¤erent groups of workers.
The ...rst source of unequal wage growth between workers of type i and workers of type j is
that progress in the production technology is biased in favor of workers of type i. This is
the canonical explanation for the rise in the college premium (i.e. progress in the production
technology is biased in favor of college graduates) or for the decline in the wages of routine
workers relative to non-routine workers (i.e. progress in automation erodes the surplus
generated by routine workers).
    The second source of unequal wage growth is novel. Speci...cally, the second source of
unequal wage growth between workers of type i and workers of type j is that progress in
the search technology has a higher rate of return for workers of type i. The logic is simple.
Suppose that workers of type i are specialists, in the sense that their productivity is more
elastic to the distance between their idiosyncratic skills and the skill requirements of their
job. In contrast, workers of type j are generalists, in the sense that their productivity is less
elastic to the distance between their idiosyncratic skills and the skill requirements of their
job. Declining search frictions allow both workers of type i and workers of type j to become
more selective with respect to the jobs they accept. The increase in selectivity, however,
is going to have a higher rate of return in terms of productivity-- and, hence, wages-- for
workers of type i than for workers of type j .
   As a matter of interpretation, it is useful to point out that the notions of specialists

                                                  10
and generalists is relative to jobs. That is, workers of type i may be more specialized than
workers of type j because they are more productive at jobs that suit them well and less
productive at jobs that do not suit them well. Equivalently, workers of type i may be more
specialized than workers of type j because the jobs that are available to them are more
heterogeneous in terms of skill requirements. In either case, workers of type i end up facing
more heterogeneity in the component of their productivity that is match-speci...c.
    Declining search frictions cause unequal growth i¤ di¤erent types of workers have a
di¤erent elasticity of productivity with respect to the ...rm-worker skill distance. In turn,
di¤erences in the elasticity of productivity with respect to the ...rm-worker skill distance
manifest themselves as di¤erences in wage dispersion. Hence, declining search frictions cause
unequal growth i¤ there are di¤erences in the extent of wage dispersion across di¤erent types
of workers. Speci...cally, declining search frictions cause higher growth for the types of workers
displaying more wage dispersion.
   It is easy to formalize the above argument. From (4.4), it follows that the ratio between
the x1 -th and the x0 -th quantiles of the wage distribution for workers of type i is given by
                                                       1=
                               wi (x1 )   (1    x1 )        i
                                                                + (1   )
                                        =              1=
                                                                         .                    (4.6)
                               wi (x0 )   (1    x0 )        i   + (1   )

Unless there are di¤erences in bargaining power, the wage quantile ratio in (4.6) is di¤erent
for two types of workers i and j i¤ the elasticity of productivity with respect to the ...rm-
worker skill distance is di¤erent between the two types. In turn, the growth rate induced
by declining search friction is di¤erent for workers of type i and workers of type j i¤ the
elasticity is di¤erent. Moreover, since (4.6) is strictly increasing in 1= , the growth rate
gA = induced by declining search frictions is higher for workers of type i than for workers of
type j i¤ the wage quantile ratio (4.6) is higher for workers of type i.
   We have thus established the following result.

Theorem 3. (Wage Dispersion and Growth) Consider two groups of workers i and j , i 6= j ,
with gy;i = gy;j . Wage growth for workers of type i is higher than for workers of type j i¤,
for any x0 , x1 in [0; 1] with x1 > x0 , the ratio between the x1 -th and the x0 -th quantile of the
wage distribution is higher for workers of type i than for workers of type j .

    Theorem 3 suggests an empirical test for the hypothesis that di¤erential returns to declin-
ing search frictions are a quantitatively important cause of unequal growth across di¤erent
groups of workers. If the hypothesis is true, we should expect to see a positive relationship
between wage dispersion and wage growth across di¤erent groups of workers. If the hypoth-
esis is false, there may or may not be a positive relationship between wage dispersion and
wage growth.
   We implement the empirical test using wage and salary income data from the Decennial
Census (1980) and the American Community Service (2015). We construct our sample using
workers aged 25 to 55 who are neither in the military nor enrolled in school. We further

                                                11
                     Figure 1: Wage Dispersion and Growth by Occupation


restrict attention to "full-time" workers, i.e. individuals who work at least 35 hours per
week and 45 weeks per year with an annual income of at least 5; 000 US$, where income is
measured in 2014 dollars. We proxy a worker'    s type as their 3-digit occupation,9 using the
crosswalk developed by David Dorn to maintain a consistent de...nition of occupation over
the years.
   Figure 1 is a scatter plot of wage dispersion and wage growth. Wage dispersion is mea-
sured as the ratio between the 75th and the 25th percentile of the wage distribution in 1980.
Wage growth is measured as the ratio between the average wage in 2015 and the average
wage in 1980. The relationship between wage dispersion and wage growth is quite noisy
but positive, as revealed by a linear regression. On average, occupations with more wage
dispersion in 1980 have higher wage growth between 1980 and 2015.
    Next, we want to entertain the hypothesis that declining search frictions might be the
cause of unequal wage growth between routine and non-routine occupations. To this aim, we
follow Autor and Dorn (2013) and classify each occupation based on the degree of routineness
of the tasks it involves. We then aggregate occupations into 20 equally-sized clusters with
increasing degrees of routineness. We de...ne the wage dispersion of a particular cluster as the
average of the 75th -to-25th wage percentile ratios in 1980 across all occupations that belong
to that cluster.10 We de...ne the wage growth of a particular cluster as the average of the
   9
     The choice of occupation as a proxy for a worker' s type is not without aws. In particular, while the
type is assumed to be a permanent trait of a worker in the model, workers do switch occupations in the
data. This discrepancy between model and data might be mitigated by using clusters of occupations with a
similar degree of routineness as our proxy for a worker's type.
  10
     Theorem 3 applies to any wage percentile ratios. In the main text, we use the 75th -to-25th percentile


                                                    12
         (a) Wage Dispersion and Routineness                 (b) Wage Dispersion and Growth



                    Figure 2: Wage Dispersion and Growth by Routineness

2015-to-1980 wage growths across all occupation that belong to that cluster.
    Figure 2(a) shows that occupations that are more routine have a systematically lower
wage dispersion than occupations that are less routine. The ...nding has a natural interpreta-
tion in light of our theory. In a routine occupation, jobs are-- almost by de...nition-- similar
to each other. Hence, the productivity of a particular worker is bound to be similar across
di¤erent jobs. In contrast, in a non-routine occupation, jobs are-- almost by de...nition--
di¤erentiated and, hence, the productivity of a particular worker is likely to be quite di¤er-
ent in di¤erent jobs. In other words, workers in routine occupations are jacks of all trades
(because all jobs involve the same tasks and require the same skills) and workers in non-
routine occupations are masters of one trade (because di¤erent jobs involve di¤erent tasks
and require di¤erent skills).
   Figure 2(b) shows that occupations in which wage dispersion is lower-- which are the
routine occupations-- display a systematically lower wage growth than occupations in which
wage dispersion is higher-- which are the non-routine occupations. The relationship between
wage dispersion and wage growth is now much clearer than in Figure 1, presumably be-
cause we have averaged out some of the occupational-speci...c noise. The coe¢ cient on wage
dispersion in a regression of wage growth is :36, and the R2 of the regression is 40%.11
    We now take a somewhat more structural approach to measure the contribution of declin-
ing search frictions to wage growth in routine and non-routine occupations. First, using (4.6),
ratio. In Appendix A, we use the 90th -to-10th percentile ratio and ...nd the same patterns.
  11
     The reader may be concerned that some of the di¤erences in wage dispersion across occupation clusters
may be due to di¤erences in the rate at which workers accumulate human capital over the life-cycle. To
address this concern, Appendix B shows that the same relationships between routineness, wage dispersion
and wage growth hold if we restrict attention to male workers aged 25 to 35.

                                                   13
we can recover the return of declining search frictions, 1= i , from the extent of wage disper-
sion in the occupation cluster i. Since some wage dispersion may be caused by di¤erences
in worker-speci...c productivity rather than in match-speci...c productivity, we choose 1= i
so that it generates some fraction x 2 [0; 1] of the wage dispersion in cluster i.12 Second,
as explained in Martellini and Menzio (2020), we can recover the rate of decline of search
frictions, gA , from the growth rate of the average number of applications received by a ...rm
before ...lling its vacancy. We ...nd that gA averages about 2% per year between 1980 and 2010.
Third, we multiply the estimates of gA and 1= i to obtain a measure of the contribution of
declining search frictions to the growth of wages in cluster i.
    Figure 2(b) illustrates our ...ndings. The three lines represent the wage growth caused by
declining search frictions for x = 0:1 (bottom), 0:2 (middle) and 0:3 (top).13 The three lines
are computed assuming that the worker'     s share of the surplus is equal to 0:9.14 For x = 0:2,
the wage growth due to declining search frictions goes from about 9% for the most routine
occupations (i.e. those with the least wage dispersion) to about 15% for the least routine
occupations (i.e. those with the most wage dispersion). In the data, wage growth for the most
routine occupations is about 0 and wage growth for the least routine occupations is about
20%. Thus, heterogeneous returns on declining search frictions account for about 6 out of 20
percentage points of the growth di¤erential between routine and non-routine occupations.
The residual wage growth di¤erential may be due to biased technological change, as suggested
by Autor and Dorn (2013). If we assume that x is 0:1 (0 :3 ) rather than 0:2, i.e. we assume
that the fraction of wage dispersion coming from di¤erences in match-speci...c productivity
is lower (higher ), we ...nd that declining search frictions generate lower (higher ) growth for
all occupations and they account for about 3 (7 ) percentage points of the growth di¤erential
between routine and non-routine occupations. In any case, the message is similar: Declining
search frictions appear to have bene...tted more non-routine than routine workers.




  12
     To isolate match-speci...c heterogeneity from worker-speci...c heterogeneity (due to, say, di¤erences in
human capital among young workers and di¤erences in human capital between young and old workers) we
would need a life-cycle model estimated using panel data. We plan on carrying out this more ambitious
exercise in the future.
  13
     For x = 0:2, the average value of is about 7. For x = 0:1, the average value of is 12. For x = 0:3,
the average value of is about 4:5. These are conservative values for the thickness 1= of the tail of the
distribution of match-speci...c productivity. For instance, using data on the wage paths of individual workers
and a model similar to ours, Martellini (2019) estimates to be 3:6.
  14
     For the sake of simplicity, our model abstracts from search on the job. In on-the-job search models,
multiple ...rms compete for the services of a particular worker and, hence, the share of the surplus accruing
to workers end up being quite large (see, e.g., Bagger, Fontaine, Postel-Vinay and Robin 2014, Menzio,
Telyukova and Visschers 2016, Gregory 2019 or Martellini 2019). We set equal to 0.9 to capture this
important feature of on-the-job search models.


                                                     14
References
 [1] Acemoglu, D., and P. Restrepo. 2018. "The Race Between Man and Machine: Implica-
     tions of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment." American Economic
     Review, 108: 1488-1542.

 [2] Albrecht, J., and B. Axell. 1984. "An Equilibrium Model of Search Unemployment."
     Journal of Political Economy, 92: 824-840.

 [3] Autor, D., and D. Dorn. 2013. "The Growth of Low Skill Service Jobs and the Polar-
     ization of the U.S. Labor Market." American Economic Review, 103: 1553-1597.

 [4] Bagger, J., F. Fontaine, F. Postel-Vinay, and J. Robin. 2014. "Tenure, Experience, Hu-
     man Capital, and Wages: A Tractable Equilibrium Search Model of Wage Dynamics."
     American Economic Review, 104: 1551-1596.

 [5] Bhuller, M., A. Kostol, and T. Vigtel. 2019. "How Broadband Internet A¤ects Labor
     Market Matching."Manuscript, Norges Bank.

 [6] Bontemps, C., J. Robin and G. Van den Berg. 2000. "Equilibrium Search with Contin-
     uous Productivity Dispersion: Theory and Non-Parametric Estimation." International
     Economic Review, 41: 305-358.

 [7] Brugemann, B., P. Gautier, and S. Tyros. 2020. "Sorting, Technology Choice and Spe-
     cialization."Manuscript, Tinbergen Institute.

 [8] Burdett, K., and D. Mortensen. 1998. "Wage Di¤erentials, Employer Size and Unem-
     ployment." International Economic Review,.39: 257-273.

 [9] Card, D., and J. DiNardo. 2002. "Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
     Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles." Journal of Labor Economics, 20: 733-783.

[10] Ellison, G., and S. Ellison. 2018. "Match Quality, Search, and the Internet Market for
     Used Books."NBER Working Paper 24197.

[11] Gregory, V. 2020. "Firms as Learning Environments."Manuscript, NYU.

[12] Katz, L., and K. Murphy. 1992. "Changes in Relative Wages: 1963-1987: Supply and
     Demand Factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107: 35-78.

[13] Krusell, P., L. Ohanian, J. Rios-Rull, and G. Violante. 2000. "Capital-Skill Comple-
     mentarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis." Econometrica, 68: 1029-1053.

[14] Lise, J., and F. Postel-Vinay. 2020. "Multidimensional Skills, Sorting, and Human Cap-
     ital Accumulation." American Economic Review, 110: 2328-2376.

[15] Lucas, R., and B. Moll. 2014. "Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of Time."Journal
     of Political Economy, 122: 1-51.

                                            15
[16] Martellini, P. 2019. "The City-Size Wage Premium: Origins and Aggregate Implica-
     tions."Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

[17] Martellini, P. and G. Menzio. 2020. "Declining Search Frictions, Unemployment and
     Growth." Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.

[18] Menzio, G. 2020. "Product Design, Competition and Prices with Declining Search Fric-
     tions."Manuscript, New York University.

[19] Menzio, G., I. Telyukova and L. Visschers. 2016. "Directed Search over the Life Cycle."
     Review of Economic Dynamics, 19: 38-62.

[20] Morchio, I., and C. Moser. 2020. "The Gender Pay Gap: Micro Sources and Macro
     Consequences."Manuscript, Columbia University.

[21] Mortensen, D., and C. Pissarides. 1994. "Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
     Theory of Unemployment." Review of Economic Studies, 61: 397-415.

[22] Pissarides, C. 1984. "E¢ cient Job Rejection." Economic Journal, 94: 97-108.

[23] Pissarides, C. 1985. "Shirt-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies
     and Real Wages." American Economic Review, 75: 676-690.

[24] Perla, J., and C. Tonetti. 2014. "Equilibrium Imitation and Growth." Journal of Polit-
     ical Economy, 116: 21-44.

[25] Postel Vinay, F., and J. Robin. 2002. "Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and
     Employer Heterogeneity." Econometrica, 70: 229

[26] Ray, D. and D. Mookherjee. 2020. "Growth, Automation, and the Long-Run Share of
     Labor."Manuscript, New York University.




                                            16
Appendix
A   90-10 Percentile Ratio




       (a) Wage Dispersion and Routineness        (b) Wage Dispersion and Growth



          Figure 3: 90-10 Percentile Ratio and Growth by Routineness




B   Male Workers Aged 25-35




       (a) Wage Dispersion and Routineness        (b) Wage Dispersion and Growth



      Figure 4: Wage Dispersion and Growth by Routineness, Males 25-35




                                             17
