                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            BUSINESS INCOMES AT THE TOP

                                     Wojciech Kopczuk
                                        Eric Zwick

                                     Working Paper 27752
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27752


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




We benefited from helpful comments from Timothy Taylor, Enrico Moretti, Gordon Hanson,
Alan Auerbach, Jerry Auten, Roger Gordon, Daniel Reck, John Sabelhaus, David Splinter, and
Owen Zidar. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.Parts of the paper draw on Zwick's
testimony before the Joint Economic Committee of Congress on October 11, 2019.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Wojciech Kopczuk and Eric Zwick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Business Incomes at the Top
Wojciech Kopczuk and Eric Zwick
NBER Working Paper No. 27752
August 2020
JEL No. D31,D33,E25,H24,H25,H32

                                         ABSTRACT

Business income constitutes a large and increasing share of income and wealth at the top of the
distribution. We discuss how tax policy treats and shapes how businesses are organized and how
they distribute economic gains to owners, with the focus on closely-held and pass-through firms.
These considerations influence whether and how labor and capital income is observed in
economic data and feed into research controversies regarding the measurement of inequality and
the progressivity of the tax code. We discuss the importance of these issues in the US, and
highlight that limited evidence from other countries suggests that they are likely to be important
elsewhere.


Wojciech Kopczuk
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
MC 3323
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wk2110@columbia.edu

Eric Zwick
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ezwick@chicagobooth.edu
   When it comes to business income, the exact boundary between labor and capital can be
nebulous. When a person in a partnership receives business income, in addition to regular wages,
should the additional payment be categorized as "wages" or "profits"? Although this topic may
seem arcane, it turns out that changes in the tax treatment of business income over time--and
the resulting changes in organizational form and how business income is paid out over time--
have profound implications for interpreting trends in income inequality. In addition, shifts in how
business income is paid out have important consequences for interpreting tax reforms and for the
measurement of what is counted as "labor income."
   We begin with an overview of the different ways a country can choose to tax business income,
and how they arise in the US legal context as C-corporations, S-corporations, and partnerships.
Compared with 40 years ago, a much larger share of US business income is now passed through to
owner-managers, rather than being subject to the corporate profits tax. We highlight the role of
changing tax incentives and legal rules as crucial factors behind this shift.
   Recognizing the change in how business income is being paid out, and the shift to pass-through
organizational forms, raises questions about the measurement of top incomes, levels and trends
in income and wealth inequality, and the labor and capital share of top incomes. When the rules
change, the amount and timing of income visible on tax returns adjusts. One consequence, we argue,
is that a considerable part of the increase in the top 1 percent share of income since the 1980s can
be accounted for as a shift to the pass-through corporate form, not an actual rise in business income
for this group. In addition, we argue that pass-through income has a substantial human capital
component: for example, when the partners in a law firm or the doctors in a medical practice
receive their end-of-year profit distributions, these are closer to labor income for the previous year
than a return to capital.
   We also discuss how changes in the form in which business income is paid out feeds into research
controversies over changes in the concentration in wealth and over the progressivity of the US tax
code. Income inequality in the United States has clearly risen by a variety of measures, but recent
literature has been battling over the magnitude and underlying causes of increases (Piketty, Saez,
and Zucman 2018; Auten and Splinter 2019). We critically discuss a number of the underlying
assumptions in this work, focusing on those that pertain to business income, and state which ones
we currently prefer. But perhaps the key point is that conclusions here can depend heavily on
underlying assumptions, which remain unsettled, but matter for fundamental questions about the
interpretation and implications of changes in inequality in the U.S. and elsewhere. We point toward
how new data might help narrow the gap between results based on competing assumptions.
   At the end of the paper, we provide an overview of how these issues of pass-through and stand-


                                                  1
alone corporate forms play out in other high-income countries, some of which offer choices for the
corporate organizational form and methods of paying out business income that do not exist in the
US. We discuss fruitful avenues for future research on these topics, including the impact of relevant
changes in the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.


Pathways for Payout of Business Income

Different Forms of Businesses and their Taxation

Conceptually, there are two ways of taxing a business. One is to allocate any business income to
the owners. This method is commonly used everywhere to tax small unincorporated businesses--
and self-employed individuals in particular--but it can also extend to larger firms. This approach
automatically integrates the taxation of business and individual income, with the implication that
business income will be taxed by the progressive marginal rates of the personal income tax. The
other approach involves entity-level taxation--namely, a corporate tax. In that case, business
income is taxed at the firm level, and then typically taxed again when income leaves the firm and
is paid to owners/shareholders.
   When policymakers decide how to tax business income, they make choices about whether to
have both regimes for different types of firms, or rules that decide which firms belong in each
regime, and how exactly personal and corporate taxes interact. Taxation on accrual--in which all
profits are allocated to owners as profits are earned--implies no tax advantage to retaining funds
within a firm. Conversely, an entity-level tax with additional income taxation when owners are
compensated directly may imply tax consequences of retaining earnings within a firm. In some
countries, particular small businesses can be taxed in a lump-sum or withholding-tax fashion. In
Australia, the corporate tax is integrated with personal income taxation so that owners receiving
corporate dividends can claim offsetting credit for corporate taxes that were paid. We will discuss
some international variations in a later section.
   In the United States, a business more complex than a sole proprietorship can organize multiple
ways. If electing corporate form, there are two possibilities: C- or S-corporation. A C-corporation
is usually the only feasible choice for publicly traded firms, because it has no limit on the number
of shareholders, it can have foreign or corporate owners, and it can have multiple classes of stock.
Profits of a C-corporation might be distributed to shareholders as dividends (or share repurchases),
but often the profits are reinvested in the firm, with the shareholders hoping to make a profit via
capital gains when they sell their stock. A C-corporation falls under the traditional corporate tax




                                                    2
regime: an entity-level tax coupled with individual-level taxes on dividends and capital gains.1
However, firms can also finance their operations through debt, so that receipt of interest income
on corporate debt becomes another possible stream of (taxable) compensation.
      The S-corporation structure is more restrictive. Its shareholders are limited to individuals,
estates and certain types of tax-exempt entities and trusts, and US residents. It also imposes
limitations on "passive income" (which in this context includes income from royalties, dividends,
interest payments, and certain other sources). In an S-corporation, profits each year must be
passed through directly to the owners, which means that business income falls under the individual
income tax. Most S-corporations could choose to be C-corporations, which leads to important
consequences. On one hand, businesses choosing non-pass-through treatment will be subject to
corporate taxation, and then shareholders will be taxed either for dividends or capital gains, but
the timing and consequences of these payouts are to some extent under the owner's control. On the
other hand, businesses choosing pass-through treatment avoid the corporate income tax, but each
year, owners pay personal ordinary income tax treatment on their business income. With pass-
through treatment, losses can also be passed through to owners, which allows for the possibility
that owners could use those losses to offset other types of income. A corporation can easily switch
its status between C- and S- (assuming it meets the legal conditions), except that switching can't
be done more often than once every five years, and in some cases transition can entail additional
one-time taxes.
      An alternative to incorporation is a partnership form. Since the 1990s, as the result of state-level
legal innovations, limited liability partnerships have become an option for a broader range of firms.
A partnership allows for less transparency to the broad public, does not have restrictions on the
types of shareholders, and allows for much more flexibility in allocating income to shareholders than
corporate forms do. A partnership can easily choose to be taxed as either an S- or a C-corporation
through a "check-the-box" rule. A disadvantage of partnership form relative to S-corporations
is that active partnership income is subject to self-employment taxation, while in the case of S-
corporations the payroll tax applies only to the salary portion of income (which has to be set at a
"reasonable" level).


The Big Shift of Business Income to Pass-Through Firms

The category of pass-through businesses--both S-corporations and partnerships--includes, among
others, consultants, lawyers, doctors, and owners of large non-publicly traded businesses, such as
auto dealers and wholesale distributors. It turns out that a majority of the top income earners in
  1
      See Gordon and Sarada (2019) for an in depth discussion of the role of corporate taxation.



                                                          3
the United States are owners of "pass-through" businesses (Smith et al. 2019). In 2014, 69 percent
of the top 1 percent of income earners and 84 percent of the top 0.1 percent of income earners
accrued some pass-through business income. In absolute terms, that amounts to more than 1.1
million pass-through owners with annual incomes above $390,000 and 140,000 pass-through owners
with annual incomes of more than $1.6 million. In both number and aggregate income, these groups
far surpass the top executives at public companies, who have been the focus of much inequality
commentary. As shown in Figure 1, the 10,700 top public company executives earned a total of
$33 billion in 2014 in salary and options. In contrast, the 14,900 business owners in the top 0.01
percent of the income distribution received more than $100 billion in income from S-corporations
and partnerships. In 2014, approximately 270,000 wage earners in the top 1 percent and 27,000
wage earners in the top 0.1 percent worked for public companies, earning a total of $260 billion
and $110 billion in wages and salaries, respectively. For every public company employee in the top
1 percent and top 0.1 percent, there are four and five pass-through owners, respectively.
   In short, the typical top 1 percent earner is not a public company executive or tech billionaire;
instead, a top earner is typically a doctor, lawyer, or the owner-operator of a middle-sized business.
These top pass-through owners are predominantly working age, in contrast to the older top earners
whose income comes from other categories of capital. Looking at those with more than $1 million
in annual income, Smith et al. (2019) find that 60-70 percent of the millionaires who get a majority
of their income from either wages or pass-through ownership are in their 40s and 50s. However,
the millionaires who get a majority of their income from C-corporation dividends or other capital
tend to be older with about two-thirds falling into age brackets from their 50s to their 70s.
   Since the 1986 Tax Reform Act, tax incentives have favored pass-through treatment. The
trend to more S-corporations started soon after, further encouraged by later rule changes that
allowed for more shareholders. The trend toward rising partnerships followed in the mid-1990s,
reflecting the state-level changes that allowed for more flexible limited liability company forms
and federal guidance on how these entities would be taxed. Cooper et al. (2016) assemble data
from de-identified administrative tax records on the population of US businesses linked to their
owners and workers, and document that the role of pass-through businesses in the US economy
has been rising since the Tax Reform Act of 1986. Clarke and Kopczuk (2017) also document the
rise of pass-through businesses in recent decades. In 1960, the US economy had about 1 million
C-corporations, 1 million partnerships, and almost no S-corporations. By 1980, the number of C-
corporations had risen to 2.2 million, the number of partnerships to 1.4 million, and S-corporations
had reached about 500,000. But by 2012, the number of C-corporations had declined to 1.6 million,
while partnerships had climbed to 3.4 million and S-corporations to 4.2 million.


                                                  4
   Specific C-corporations tend to have greater revenues and profits than single S-corporations and
partnerships, but these shifts in numbers of firms also show up clearly in business income. As shown
in Figure 2, the share of business income going to C-corporations was 90 percent and higher in
the late 1970s. But by 2012, C-corporations represented only about 40 percent of business income,
while partnerships represented about 30 percent of business income and S-corporations and the
category of "RICs and REITs" each made up about 15 percent of business income. A "regulated
investment company" (RIC), like most mutual funds or closed-end investment funds, must legally
pay out at least 90 percent of its income each year to its owners; similarly, a "real estate investment
trust" (REIT) must also pay a minimum of 90 percent of its income to its shareholders each year.
Thus, both RICs and REITs are pass-through forms of corporate organization for certain types of
mostly publicly held investment firms.


How Categorization of US Business Income Responds to Shifting
Rules

When tax laws shift, and tax revenues shift in response, does the change represent a real shift in
economic behavior or just a shift in accounting practices? In this section, we review the choices
about how and when to receive business income. In the next section, we discuss some implications.
As Gordon and Slemrod (2000) argued, shifts between receiving business income in personal or in
corporate form might help to explain what otherwise look like changes in inequality or in the labor
share of income.
   Let's start by imagining a firm with current profits to be distributed to owners. To make the
exercise concrete, we focus on a representative pass-through firm owned by a top earner using data
from 2014 (as specified in Smith et al. 2019a). The firm has $10 million in sales, $1 million in
profits, 50 employees, and two owners. The firm makes $1.5 million in payments to the two owners:
that is, it pays each owner $250,000 in salary and $500,000 in profits.
   How might an enterprising owner-manager choose to receive the corporate profits? One possi-
bility is for the owner to receive an annual bonus, which would be categorized as part of an overall
wage compensation payment. Or the owner might pay herself a dividend, which would be issued
based on percent ownership of the firms. For a US pass-through entity, any profits not distributed
as wages would be deemed as automatically distributed based on the owner's percent ownership of
the firm, even if the money sits in the firm's bank account. (This provision prevents pass-through
business owners from storing funds in their firm as a method of deferring taxes.) The owner would
then classify these as-if distributions as ordinary business income on a personal tax return.


                                                  5
   Each of these choices faces particular rules, but the rules do allow considerable leeway. For
example, if our example firm is an S-corporation and the "reasonable compensation" rules consider
$250,000 an appropriate salary for such a business owner, then the owner can pay the remaining
$500,000 due to her as profits--and thus avoid payroll taxes on the latter income. In contrast, a
partnership would not be able to avoid the payroll tax. If the firm is a C-corporation, then the
owner would likely prefer to pay this amount as a one-time bonus, so that it is not included in the
base for the corporate income tax.
   Now consider an owner who makes a loan to the firm. In this case, the owner might receive
compensation via some combination of principal returned and interest paid on that loan (subject
to rules about the interest rate that can be charged). Such arrangements might make sense if the
tax rate on interest payments received is lower than the tax rate on payouts, although this is not
the case under the current US tax law. Alternatively, interest rates on loans against a personal
residence and on direct loans against business assets need not be the same, in which case owners
might arbitrage by borrowing against their personal residences rather than taking a more expensive
business loan.
   Finally, the owner might choose to consume through the firm. The menu of allowable fringe
benefits and deductions might include meals and entertainment, club membership, travel expenses,
technology, transportation, or even housing if the owner lives in the same building where the firm
operates. The owner could also choose to give to charity through the firm--even a charity that the
owner personally supervises--which would prevent that money from being taxed as a distribution.
In administrative data, this form of income would not appear to have been paid to the owner,
because the firm would report these expenditures as business expenses or charitable contributions.
   The consumption strategy has been less appealing recently, because such deductions have be-
come more limited in the tax rules. However, active literature in the 1970s and early 1980s con-
sidered the effect of tax preferences for non-wage compensation on the use of perks for executives
(Clotfelter 1979, 1983; Long and Scott 1982; Woodbury 1983). Surveys during the Carter admin-
istration suggested that these deductions could amount to 20-30 percent of total compensation
for managers at that time, and owner-managers would have a particular incentive to use this op-
tion. For example, Clotfelter (1983) focused on how tax policy affects non-wage compensation in
the form of travel, meals, and entertainment expenses for sole proprietors. He references colorful
contemporaneous press accounts from this time period: the president of the Philadelphia Phillies
baseball team reported that "at least half the tickets were held by business [...which also. . . ] ac-
count for 70 percent of the sales of season tickets," and a survey of compensation practices at 468
companies found that, inter alia, 53 percent paid for country club memberships and 79 percent paid


                                                  6
for travel of spouses.2 This line of research withered in the wake of the 1986 Tax Reform, which
attenuated incentives for non-wage compensation by substantially reducing top income tax rates.
The deduction for business meals and entertainment expenses was also limited in 1986 and 1993
(when deductibility was limited to 50 percent; see Schmalbeck and Soled, 2009 for discussion). The
2017 tax reform repealed the business entertainment deduction altogether.
       Timing issues are another major difference between the corporate tax and pass-through taxation.
Pass-through taxation requires that profits be distributed to owners each year; indeed, even if
business income of a pass-through firm in a given year is not actually transferred to the owner, it
is subject to personal income taxation. Under the corporate tax, corporate income is taxed each
year. This approach prevents business owners from completely delaying taxation while income
accumulates within the firm. However, the corporation has more control over the timing of payouts
to owners and/or shareholders whether via dividends or through share buybacks. In addition, an
owner/shareholder of a C-corporation can defer business income from personal income taxation by
investing in a firm that reinvests a substantial share of its earnings, and waiting to make a profit
from selling stock holdings for a capital gain at some point in the future. Of course, this choice
also has to take into account the rate of return inside and outside of a business, including the fact
that returns to reinvesting profits within a business can be subject to corporate taxation.
       Though we usually only associate deferral of taxes with C-corporation distributions, both pass-
through and traditional C-corporations can also set up retirement accounts for their owners, which
allows them to defer taxation of earnings up to a certain amount until it is withdrawn. When
Mitt Romney ran for President in 2012, for example, it was reported by Cohan (2012) that his
private equity firm allowed partners to buy stakes in their funds with retirement account savings,
which ended up earning dramatically higher returns than typical public company investments in
retirement accounts.
       Firms can also buy life insurance or other annuity products on behalf of owners, which has the
effect of deferring income and taxes. The firm's contributions to these accounts are tax-preferred,
as are the accumulated earnings on investments made by the insurance companies on behalf of
their policyholders. Such arrangements are especially popular in European countries. For example,
in France, the rules governing life insurance-style savings accounts ("Assurance-Vie") have relaxed
over time, making such accounts the most important source of tax-deferred private savings. In
recent years, these accounts provide for tax-free accumulation, occasional taxed distributions during
   2
       Sources for these press accounts are "If Congress Taxes Those Business Perks" in U.S. News and World Report
(February 27, 1978, pp. 53--56), and "Executives' Privileges are Under Heavy Fire but Appear Resilient" in Wall
Street Journal (October 19, 1977, p. 1+).




                                                         7
life, and preferential inheritance tax with no contribution limits. In 2010, 83 percent of the top 1
percent of the wealth distribution had Assurance-Vie, accounting for nearly 20 percent of their total
wealth (Goupille-Lebret and Infante 2018). We are not aware of research that connects the use of
Assurance-Vie specifically to French business owners, though the incentives for them to participate
appear strong.
   Employees can also be compensated in the form of equity in the firm--either through stock
grants directly or through stock options. The market value of such equity compensation is not
easily observable for closely-held firms, creating an opportunity to understate it (the benefit of
which needs to be traded off against business-side tax consequences of reduced wage deductions).
   When founders and early employees of start-up companies accept low wages in exchange for
stock options, they are also deferring the recognition of income accruing to them in the form of
hoped-for capital gains as their options increase in value. Only when the options are exercised,
which can be many years after the shares are granted, does this income appear in administrative tax
data. Naturally, for all deferred compensation--whether it be retirement accounts, life insurance,
or stock options--the extent of deferral depends on the tax wedge between deferring and taking
that income now, which will differ by corporate form and for wage versus non-wage income.
   A final option for private firms is for the owner to plan to sell a share or all of the business, yet
another method of deferring business income. Of course, a sale means losing control over the firm,
and gives rise to taxation of realized capital gains. Alternatively, US tax law includes a "step-up in
basis" at death, which effectively forgives capital gains tax liability on assets transferred at death
(for a discussion, see Kopczuk 2017). There are also estate tax-planning strategies that involve
transferring some shares into a trust whose beneficiaries are the owner's children. In this case,
business income accrues to the children and subsequent estate taxes or capital gains taxes can be
avoided. Finally, depending on the business and type of assets, there are options for deferring or
avoiding capital gains tax such as "like-kind exchanges" (especially in the case of commercial real
estate) or sale to an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP).
   These considerations are not theoretical: for example, evidence from different countries and
times shows responses to corporate versus pass-through tax treatment. In most countries, the main
choice is between sole proprietorship and a corporation. Romanov (2006) finds that incorporations
in Israel respond strongly to changing tax incentives, Thoresen and Alstadsæter (2009) find similar
responsiveness in Norway, Edmark and Gordon (2013) in Sweden, Sivadasan and Slemrod (2008)
in India, Waseem (2018) in Pakistan, Tazhitdinova (2020) in the UK, Goolsbee (1998) in the US
using pre-World War II data, and Onji and Tang (2017) in 19th century Japan. In the modern US
economy, such responses are facilitated by the existence of pass-through business forms that allow


                                                  8
even large businesses to be subject to individual income tax treatment. Gordon and MacKie-Mason
(1994), MacKie-Mason and Gordon (1997), and Goolsbee (2004) provide evidence of the shifts
between C- and S-corporation forms. Auten, Splinter, and Nelson (2016) decompose the growth
of S-corporations around the Tax Reform Act of 1986 into conversions and new incorporations,
showing that conversions spiked immediately after the reform but continued through the 1990s.


Implications for Inequality

Measurement of Income Inequality

Because business income is concentrated at the top, the murky character of business income im-
plicates several recent lines of research on income and wealth inequality. First, if business income
is reported, its measurement and classification depends on whether it is reported before or after
entity-level taxes and whether it takes the form of reported capital or labor. Second, there are
several cases--such as consumption through the firm, retained earnings, deferred compensation,
contributions to pension plans or life insurance, and other forms of tax avoidance and evasion--
where such income may not be observed at all, or at least not at the individual level.
       Reorganizing from C-corporation to S-corporation form can alter measures of inequality based
on income tax returns. For example, after the Tax Reform Act of 1986 there is a massive conversion
of C-corporations to S-corporations. The unadjusted Piketty and Saez (2003) series, which only
includes fiscal income appearing on individual tax returns, shows a 4 percentage point jump in the
top-1 percent share in two years, from 9 percent to 13 percent (their Figure II, p.12). This jump is
certainly not a pure reflection of an underlying change in pre-tax income inequality. Instead, when
firms switch from C-corporation to S-corporation form, there is a corresponding shift in income tax
data from observing business income only when it is realized--and after corporate tax is paid--to
observing it annually as it accrues--and before tax is paid. This induces a mechanical increase in
top fiscal income shares. A number of different studies, including Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018)
and Auten and Splinter (2019), have suggested ways to remove this bias by allocating C-corporation
retained earnings and corporate taxes to individuals, but considerable controversy remains over the
underlying assumptions.
       The example raises the question of how to interpret trends at the top of the income distribution.
In Figure 3, the line with solid dots shows the share of fiscal income received by the top 1 percent
following Piketty and Saez (2003).3 Cooper et al. (2016) calculate what the income share of the
   3
       This fiscal income series includes realized capital gains, which partly obscures the 1986­88 increase in income due
to corporate form reorganization. The reason is that the tax reform also raised capital gains taxes, which induced a



                                                             9
top 1 percent would be if the share of pass-through income was held constant at its 1980 level. As
shown by the hollow points in Figure 3, nearly half of the rise since 1980 in the fiscal income share
of the top 1 percent comes from pass-through business. Auten and Splinter (2019, see their Online
Appendix Table B6) conduct a similar exercise using a panel of individual tax returns in the window
around the 1986 reform and find that 20­25 percent of the short-run increase in the top 1 percent
fiscal income share comes from pass-through business. Both income from new pass-throughs and
limitations on allowed losses from old pass-throughs are responsible for this pattern.
    Clearly, holding the share of pass-through income constant at 1980 levels does not alter the broad
pattern of changes in inequality in the last century: that is, a fall in (pretax) income inequality
from higher levels in the 1920s and 1930s to lower levels from the 1950s through the 1970s and then
a rise in income inequality after that. However, one's perspective on the size of the rise in inequality
is affected by whether one views the rise in pass-through income as an actual increase in income for
those at the top of the income distribution, or whether it only means that business income that top
income-earners would have received in other forms has now shifted to the pass-through channel.
    In this spirit, Smith et al. (2019) use two complementary approaches to explore this question.
According to their estimates, though the majority of the post-1986 growth in pass-through income
reflects real economic growth, a significant share (approximately 30 percent) reflects businesses
reorganizing to pass-through form without a real increase in pre-tax income inequality. This re-
organization continued through the 1990s and 2000s and even accelerated after the 2001 tax cuts
during the Bush administration.


A Broader View of Inequality and the Role of Business Incomes

The income reported on tax records is roughly half of gross national income and 60 percent of
net national income. Thus, Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018) have been pursuing "distributional
national income accounts"--that is, seeking to measure a distribution of income that includes all
national income. This task is intertwined with the question of business income, because it involves
deciding who in the income distribution should be credited with retained business income, entity-
level corporate taxes, underreported business income, and pension income.
    This is an area of research where, because of missing data, the assumptions play a large role, and
an active debate rages on over these assumptions. Angus Deaton (2020) summarized the current
state of play in this way:

      Piketty, Saez and Zucman (PSZ) have done a great service by calculating a set of
      distributionally disaggregated national accounts for the United States. The basic idea
large amount of acceleration to retime capital gains into 1986.


                                                         10
     is irresistible. Yet these first attempts have raised many serious difficulties that were
     not apparent at first. Most immediately, only about half of national income appears on
     individual tax returns. Allocating from tax returns is hard enough, because tax units are
     neither individuals nor households, but allocating the other half of national income is an
     immensely more difficult task, requiring assumptions that are rarely well supported by
     evidence, and often seem arbitrary. Because distribution is such a controversial topic,
     these assumptions leave plenty of scope for politically-biased challenges, in which each
     commentator can choose their own alternatives and get almost any result they choose,
     inequality is increasing, inequality is not increasing, and everything in between.

   Saez and Zucman (this volume) provide a discussion of their approach. Garbinty, Goupille-
Lebret, and Piketty (2019, 2020) take a similar but not identical approach for France. Auten and
Splinter (2019) provide an alternative set of assumptions for the US economy. Smith et al. (2019,
in their Online Appendix) offer some additional comments on the methodology and explore the
robustness of their results under different approaches for allocating retained earnings. Smith, Zidar,
and Zwick (2020) use refined wealth estimates (described below) to improve allocation assumptions.
Each of these studies proposes and defends a preferred inequality series.
   Fundamentally though, as highlighted by Deaton's quote, there is currently no information
allowing us to assign certain macroeconomic aggregates from the National Accounts to individuals,
and the lack of micro data means that researchers resort to imputations. The vast differences
in the resulting levels of inequality and trends reflect the extent of underlying uncertainty. That
uncertainty is not explicit when one presents the results as definitive series measuring inequality
rather than as estimates relying on a large number of assumptions and therefore with a large margin
of error. For that reason, we'll refer to these results as "imputations" rather than as "estimates."
   Much business income is not directly assigned to individuals in tax data, and so one possible
approach is to make assumptions about asset ownership across the income distribution. Piketty,
Saez, and Zucman (2018) start with the income tax data showing taxable capital income received
from financial investments or other assets and then, with a set of auxiliary assumptions, infer the
underlying distribution of wealth. The wealth imputation method proposed by Saez and Zucman
(2016) scales up, or "capitalizes," the income observed on tax returns to impute wealth. Piketty,
Saez, and Zucman (2018, following Saez and Zucman 2016) infer this distribution in broad asset
categories: for example, fixed income, stocks, pass-through business, housing, and pensions. For
example, if the tax data reveals a certain level of interest payments received, a researcher can then
try to infer what wealth was needed to receive these interest payments. Clearly, this approach
relies upon having an accurate mapping of income to wealth, or equivalently, knowing the rates

                                                 11
of return earned on different types of income by different groups of people. Saez and Zucman
(2016) deploy the simplifying assumption that all tax units get the same rate of return within an
asset class; Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018) also assume the same rate of return across asset
classes, but instead use a "divide-by-two" method to attribute wealth to individuals within mar-
ried tax units. The tax return data and wealth imputations are then combined with aggregate
data from the national income accounts to impute distributional national income accounts. The
overall approach is somewhat circular--we go from (observed) income to (unobserved) wealth to
(unobserved) income--but the results by construction will "add up" to published aggregates.
   If one is interested in the distribution of household wealth at a point in time, income tax data
is not the natural starting point. The natural alternative is the Survey of Consumer Finances done
triennially by the Federal Reserve (Bricker et al. 2016). It has its weaknesses--including lack of
the coverage of the extreme top of the wealth distribution, and the modern version of the survey
only goes back to 1983 (with precursor surveys going further back, but more consistent design
since 1989)--but it does not require imputation exercises. It also allows for observing the joint
distribution of income and wealth, avoiding the need for another set of assumptions. The Federal
Reserve now builds on the Survey of Current Finances to construct the so-called Distributional
Financial Accounts (Batty et al., 2019) that provide quarterly estimates of the US household
income and wealth distribution since 1989.
   Other assumptions need to be made in moving from the income data to estimates of the un-
derlying wealth that generates business income: for example, how to attribute the ownership of
C-corporations? Saez and Zucman (2016) assume that C-corporation wealth directly held by house-
holds is distributed in proportion to the sum of dividends and realized capital gains. Smith, Zidar,
and Zwick (2020) propose an alternative assumption that weighs dividends and realized gains based
on their relative informativeness in predicting stock wealth in the Survey of Consumer Finances;
this method results gives less weight to realized capital gains. For pass-through business, Saez
and Zucman (2016) assume that pass-through business income has equal returns across industries.
Alternatively, Smith, Zidar, and Zwick (2020) adjust the valuation of pass-through business for the
human capital component of business income and allow returns to vary across narrowly defined in-
dustries. Another notable assumption is whether receiving pension income means that you "own"
a certain amount of pension wealth. In a defined contribution plan, the pension recipient does
own underlying wealth (although the amount is not directly observed in administrative data); in
a defined benefit plan, the recipient of pension income does not hold such wealth--and if the plan
is underfunded, the underlying wealth may not exist. Both Saez and Zucman (2016) and Smith,
Zidar, and Zwick (2020) use a combination of wages and pension distributions to infer pension


                                                12
wealth (see also Sabelhaus and Henriques Volz 2020). Both papers do not attribute any wealth
based on the "off-balance-sheet" public pension benefit known as Social Security (Catherine et al.
2020; Sabelhaus and Henriques Volz 2020).
   Distributional national income accounts require allocation of income from assets not reported
on tax returns, such as C-corporations, pensions, and underreported business income. Thus, the
imputations for wealth inequality then feed back into the imputation of distributional national
income accounts, along with tax data and macro data from the national income accounts. In this
way, constructed measures of inequality of wealth are used to impute the distributional national
income accounts for top income shares (and shares for labor and capital income shares, as discussed
in the next section).
   Several studies have raised concerns about the set of assumptions required for this imputation,
as well. For example, one concern is that the equal returns assumption can bias wealth estimates
toward the top when top wealthholders actually earn higher returns than average. Kopczuk (2015)
suggests these adjustments are especially important when average returns are close to zero, such
as was the case for interest rates in the wake of the Great Recession, because a relatively small
shift between two very low rates of return will imply a large shift in implied wealth (say, from 0.5
percent to 1.0 percent cuts the implied wealth by a factor of 2). Fagereng et al. (2016), Bricker et
al. (2019), and others also emphasize the evidence that those at the top of the income distribution
typically get higher returns for a given asset class.
   Smith, Zidar, and Zwick's (2019) preferred results, using a range of literature to estimate
rates of return across wealth groups and geographic areas, find a rise in wealth concentration
similar to the data of the Survey of Consumer Finance. The assumption of equal returns across
asset classes also implies that fixed income wealth should be rapidly increasing as a share of top
portfolios. In contrast, the evidence-based patterns of returns they use lead to an estimated portfolio
concentration of top wealth holders that aligns reasonably well with estimates from the Survey of
Consumer Finance and from estate tax data, in that private business is more important than
fixed income, and rivals or exceeds public equity holdings at the top. Smith, Zidar, and Zwick
(2019) also use their wealth results to construct distributional income estimates, which allocate
components of capital income not observed on tax returns: for example, fixed income earned in
non-taxable accounts, retained earnings of C-corporations, accumulated returns to assets held in
pension accounts, and taxes whose statutory incidence does not fall on individual owners. They
find top income shares somewhat lower than in Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018), but the trends in
concentration are similar. However, the composition of top incomes and their recent growth skews
much more toward labor than in the Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018) series.


                                                  13
      Other important assumptions concern allocating "underreported" income (that is, income not
reported to tax authorities) and pension income. Auten and Splinter (2019) propose and defend
alternative assumptions for these categories. The largest disagreement they emphasize concerns
how to allocate underreported income for non-corporate business. Auten and Splinter (2019) use
IRS audit data to allocate underreported income; Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018) allocate this
income in proportion to positive fiscal non-corporate business income, under the assumption that
the distributions of observed and unobserved income in this category are the same. The fact that
assumptions about underreported income are so consequential highlights the central role missing
data on business income plays in controversies about income inequality.4
      To allocate all of national income post-tax (rather than pre-tax), additional assumptions are
needed that are not necessarily related to wealth, such as who benefits from defense spending and
other public goods. Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018) allocate these public goods "neutrally" in
proportion to income; in contrast, Auten and Splinter (2019) argue that a significant proportion of
such spending should be allocated equally across people.
      Finally, Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018) take an additional step in using the pretax distribu-
tional national income accounts together with aggregate tax payments--such as payroll tax, sales
tax, property tax, estate tax, and corporate tax--to estimate the post-tax distribution of income
and thereby a measure of broad tax rate progressivity. Conceptually, this measure of tax rates has
all of an income group's imputed national income in the denominator and all of their imputed tax
payments in the numerator. Saez and Zucman (2019) take a similar approach but make different
assumptions to measure tax rate progressivity. Again, a number of assumptions undergird such
calculations. A main focus of our discussion has been the flexibility in allocating business income
across various corporate forms, and a follow-up question that arises here is the incidence of the
corporate tax across income groups. Another one is the incidence of the payroll tax. Questions less
related to the allocation of business income include the incidence of the sales tax and the treatment
of various social support programs that include transfers and refundable tax credits, such as the
earned income tax credit.
      As Splinter (2019, 2020) points out, the assumptions in Saez and Zucman (2019) lead to a
conclusion that the overall US tax code is more-or-less proportional. In contrast, a wide variety
of other sources including the Joint Committee on Taxation, the US Treasury, the Congressional
Budget Office, the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center, and Piketty and Saez (2007) all find that the
federal tax system is progressive, although somewhat less so than it used to be. The assumptions in
  4
      Sabelhaus and Park (2020) also note the particularly large gap between the national income and product account
and the Survey of Consumer Finances for non-corporate business incomes.



                                                         14
Saez and Zucman (2019) are often non-standard and a departure from the widely accepted practice
by agencies and economic literature, including their own work (Piketty, Saez, and Zucman 2018). At
the top, they make an unusual "statutory incidence" assumption to load all corporate tax burden on
shareholders (rather than allocating part of it to other capital or labor), although they continue the
standard practice of disregarding statutory incidence and assigning the burden of sales taxation
to consumers and employer portion of payroll tax to workers--even though these taxes are also
legally and administratively collected from firms. They also make unorthodox assumptions about
the distinction between taxes and transfers and assign sales tax burden based on transfers-financed
consumption, while not including transfers in measures of income, thereby artificially inflating
effective tax rates at the bottom of the distribution (for details, see Splinter 2019; Kopczuk 2019).


Taking Stock

This task of developing distributional national income accounts that cover all of national income is
clearly an active area of research.5 We see value in continuing attempts to reconcile these different
approaches to estimating wealth, to imputing all of national income to different groups, and to
thinking through the tax incidence and tax burden issues. Given the current state of this research,
it would seem appropriate here though to acknowledge the vast uncertainty of any imputations in
a much more systematic way than has been the case so far.
       Yet another challenge is the changing tax treatment of various categories of business income,
which makes comparisons across years very challenging. First, the tax treatment of capital gains
changes over time, which affects imputed stock wealth of C-corporations and imputed retained
earnings. Second, the tax incentives to shelter income in corporations or through corporate con-
sumption changes over time, which affects how much income we observe on tax returns. Third,
stock options appear partly as wages and partly as capital gains (when realized), which clouds
both the timing and reported nature of this important component of top executive compensation.
Fourth, the tax treatment and rules for pensions have changed over time, which can affect the
amount of business income distributed into pension savings. Finally, the tax treatment of business
losses means that some wealthy individuals can appear to be at the bottom of the income distribu-
tion in a given year despite having substantial cash incomes, and this issue has also changed over
time.6
   5
       For other attempts to allocate income, transfers, and taxes not observed on individual tax returns or in household
surveys, see the work from the Congressional Budget Office (for example, Congressional Budget Office 2016) and from
economists at the US Bureau of Economic Analysis, including Fixler, Gindelsky, and Johnson (2019) and works cited
therein.
   6
     In their imputations, Auten and Splinter (2019) attempt to account for business losses in three cases: 1) adding



                                                            15
    Future data collection and refinements of methodology could address these various controversies.
First, if partnerships and C-corporations were required to trace and report their ultimate owners,
this linked data could be used to allocate macroeconomic business income, in the spirit of Cooper
et al. (2016). Second, Internal Revenue Service data from random audits could be used to improve
our understanding of underreported income, refine inequality estimates, and reconcile disputes.
For example, DeBacker et al. (2020) use random audit data from 2006 to 2014 and find that,
because top earners have higher rates of compliance, measures of income inequality are lower after
accounting for noncompliance. Third, more data collection on retirement account balances and
portfolio composition could help allocate the assets and income flows accruing in these accounts.


Labor Versus Capital Income

Researchers care about the allocation of "labor income" and "capital income" for at least three
reasons. First, it provides insight into the role of technology and economic factors versus institutions
and public policy in driving economic inequality. Second, it speaks to the nature of typical paths
to the top of the income distribution, and thus offers insights about intergenerational mobility and
barriers to such mobility. Third, studying the labor share can guide policy reforms designed to
reduce inefficiencies in markets, alter the post-tax distribution of income, and raise tax revenues.
    For all the reasons given in the discussion above, when we wish to compare labor to capital
income--especially over time or across countries--we must take into account the effects of changes
in the tax code on how income is categorized. Smith et al. (2019) present a comprehensive analysis
of pass-through business income with the goal of answering the question: how important is human
capital at the top of the US income distribution? Human capital in this research is defined broadly
to refer to all factors embodied in people, including labor supply, networks, reputation, and rent-
seeking ability. Human capital contrasts with nonhuman or financial capital because (in the modern
economy) human capital can't be sold, and it is not bequeathed at death. Combining descriptive
analysis with natural experiments, Smith et al. (2019) find that human capital, as opposed to
financial capital, remains central to rising top incomes in the US economy.
    This finding depends crucially on how we think about pass-through income, which Smith et
al. (2019) estimate to have a human capital share of 75 percent even though it appears for tax
purposes as business profits. They construct this estimate by following firms after premature owner
net operating loss carryovers from past years. because they are unrelated to current national income; 2) applying
the limit on business losses from the Tax Reform Act of 1986 to data from before the passage of that law; and 3)
allocating underreported income following the audit data analysis of Johns and Slemrod (2011). In contrast, Piketty,
Saez, and Zucman (2018) only use positive business profits to impute wealth and business income.



                                                        16
deaths and retirements and observing the impact of withdrawing owners from their firms. When
ignoring pass-through income, it appears that only a minority of top earners are human- capital
rich. However, when defining labor income comprehensively to include that share of pass- through
income, this assessment reverses: most top earners are human-capital rich, not financial-capital
rich, as shown in Figure 4. In follow-on work, Smith et al. (2020) find that neglecting how taxes
influence income reporting would lead us to overstate how much economic growth has accrued to
capital instead of labor since the 1980s. Thus, they add yet another factor that can help account
for the recent decline in the labor share of national income in the US economy (Elsby, Hobijn, and
Sahin 2013; Karabarbounis and Neiman 2014; Autor et al. 2020; de Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger
2020).
   Again, a unifying message is that the underlying assumptions--especially those relevant to how
business income is treated and wealth is estimated--will strongly affect one's view of the role of
labor and capital income. In Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018), the estimate of rapidly growing
wealth underlies the finding that top capital shares have surged in the past 20 years, reaching 56
percent in 2014. Conversely, the alternative assumptions in Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2019) imply
that, in 2014, only 41 percent of income for the top 1 percent comes from capital. Approximately
half of this adjustment comes from differences in wealth estimates discussed earlier. The remainder
arises because of the Smith et al. (2019) allocation of 75 percent of pass-through income to labor,
rather than attributing it all to capital.
   To be clear, our reading of the evidence based on our preferred assumptions is not that inequality
in America is low or that it has not increased. Rather our reading is that the increase has been more
modest than some well-known estimates suggest. In addition, we believe that the nature of that
increase--what factors contribute, who benefits--skews away from the passive capital highlighted
in Piketty (2014) and toward human capital, labor, and entrepreneurial activity. We stress also
that this belief does not imply the returns to human capital at the top are fair, nor that they
necessarily reflect the social returns to labor, rather than the private returns, which could well
include unproductive or even destructive activity (Baumol 1990; Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny
1991).


Some International Perspective and Comparisons

With the US shift to more widespread use of pass-through taxation of business income, the United
States now taxes business income quite differently from some other countries. The US economy
now taxes about 40 percent of business income at the corporate or entity level, while for the United



                                                 17
Kingdom, Canada, and Australia during the last 30 years, 65-80 percent of the business income
that is reported on tax returns is subject to entity-level or corporate taxation, rather than to pass-
through taxation (Clarke and Kopczuk 2017, see Fig. 1). However, the US economy is not an
isolated exception. The Joint Committee on Taxation (2013) reports that, in 2007, only 34 percent
of business incomes in Germany were subject to corporate tax and the corresponding number for
Japan was 50 percent.
   The rules that guide pass-through taxation of business income vary by country. Sole proprietors
are usually taxed by individual income tax or, sometimes, through alternative small business tax
regimes. Corporate tax treatments apply to large firms. In between, there are usually some
lines drawn concerning limited liability and organizational form. US tax law does not tie pass-
through treatment to a lack of limited liability: instead, pass-through of business income in US
law applies not just to sole proprietors and farm income, but also to some incorporated businesses
(S-corporations) and partnerships. A similar approach is also used in Canada, Germany, and the
United Kingdom, with partnerships generally eligible for pass-through treatment (even if they have
limited liability), but these countries have no equivalent to S-corporations. Australia taxes most
partnerships as companies, as long as at least one partner is subject to limited liability (Joint
Committee on Taxation 2013). As another example, Poland nominally ties pass-through treatment
to lack of limited liability, but allows a hybrid form with both limited and unlimited liability
partners to be eligible as well.
   On the international stage, comparisons of top income shares and labor/capital shares ultimately
derive to a large extent from tax data. While researchers and statistical agencies do attempt to
adjust for some of the measurement issues discussed here, a systematic analysis of the implications
for international comparisons remains to be done. For researchers, problems arise in both the
measurement of retained business income and in attempts to attribute that income to specific
individuals. Gollin (2002) provided an early demonstration that correcting for different treatments
of self-employment can reconcile large cross-country differences in factor income shares. More
recently, Gutierrez and Piton (2020) argue that, after correcting for inconsistent treatment of
entrepreneurial income (and the inclusion of housing rents in the corporate sector), the decline of
the labor share is no longer apparent in advanced economies outside the United States and Canada.
   It seems likely that the issues discussed in this paper can make a large difference in other coun-
tries, too. For example, in many European countries, such as in France, where income inequality
series based on tax data often imply low and stable inequality, we know that closely-held private
businesses are even more important for economic activity than in the United States. These coun-
tries often have tax rules that encourage business owners to keep income within the firm and off


                                                 18
their personal tax returns. In Norway, Alstadsæter et al. (2016) showed that omitting retained
business income leads to a large mismeasurement of inequality; conversely, accounting for it doubles
the income share of the top 1 percent and triples the share of the top 0.1 percent in some years.
They also find that in the Norwegian data, these issues also affect the trends in inequality in the
aftermath of a reform that created strong incentives for businesses to retain earnings. Alstadsæter
et al. (2014) find some evidence that retained business earnings were disproportionately invested
in financial instruments and durable goods (cars, ships, planes) and thus may have substituted for
private investment or consumption. Atkinson (2007) estimated that during the 1950s and early
1960s in the United Kingdom, including retained company profits raises income shares of the top
1 percent (excluding capital gains) by about half. Burkhauser, Hahn and Wilkins (2015) showed
that a 1985 Australian tax reform captured a larger share of capital gains and corporate profits on
individual tax returns, thereby increasing measured income shares of the top 1 percent by about
one sixth.
   As another example of potential issues that arise, return to the role of life insurance in France
mentioned earlier. Garbinty, Goupille-Lebret, and Piketty (2018) suggest that retained earnings
and corporate dividends in France were each around 10­12 percent of GDP circa 2014. Moreover,
dividends paid by French firms as a share of GDP have roughly doubled since 1990. This rise
coincided with the expanding importance of life insurance assets (Assurance-Vie), which contain
large amounts of indirectly-held corporate equity, for overall national wealth in France (Piketty
2011; Garbinty, Goupille-Lebret, and Piketty 2020). In the US data, retained earnings and div-
idends are each only about 4-5 percent of GDP during this period, consistent with a larger role
for pass-through firms in the United States. Clearly, how a researcher decides to measure and
attribute total business income and retained earnings can influence measures of inequality and the
labor share of income.
   Attributing business income to individual owners is complex in other countries, as well, although
some countries allow for linking individual tax information to business ownership and accounting
data. Examples include work in Denmark (le Maire and Schjerning, 2013), Canada (Wolfson et al.,
2016), Chile (Fairfield and Jorratt De Luis, 2016), Norway (Alstadsæter et al., 2016), and Finland
(Harju and Matikka, 2016), each of which uses direct links between firms and owners to correct for
unobserved, unrealized income.
   It would be a useful research project to make a systematic comparison of the rules regarding
taxation of business income across countries. Such a project requires thinking about, different
organizational forms and their flexibility, the role of limited liability, and tax incentives associated
with both corporate and non-corporate treatment. In turn, the different approaches to realizing


                                                  19
business income have implications for how and when business income is reported and taxed, which
in turn has consequences for data availability.


Looking Forward

Business income reflects a mix of capital and labor income. The implications of this fact require a
nuanced understanding of business activity and a thorough understanding of the various connections
between payout, retained earnings, corporate, and non-corporate profits, employee compensation,
and the compensation of owner-managers. We believe that a bottom-up micro-based approach to
these questions is most likely to be productive.
   We see a number of exciting research directions related to incentives and business income at the
top. First, as the complexities of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 unfold, a number of research
opportunities should emerge. On one hand, the law reduced the marginal and effective corporate
tax rates, creating--for the first time since 1987--a stronger incentive to shift business income away
from a pass-through to a C-corporation structure. As an offset for capital-intensive pass-throughs
that are more likely to consider C-corporation form in the first place, the 2017 legislation also
introduced a new tax deduction ("Section 199A deduction") on personal income tax returns that
amounts to a 20 percent reduction in taxes on business income in this form. As an acknowledgement
of the incentives to characterize entrepreneurial income in the tax-preferred form, this rate is not
available to a large number of "specified service businesses," including lawyers, doctors, consultants,
and similar types of firms that rely primarily on human capital. Goodman et al. (2019) simulate
the effect of the 199A deduction for pass-through owners based on 2016 data and conclude that
while it benefits business owners throughout the income distribution, over 72 percent of tax savings
accrues to the top 5 percent. Henry, Plesko and Utke (2018) discuss the complex interaction of tax
incentives regarding the choice of the organizational form in the aftermath of the 2017 legislation.
   Second, there is much work to be done in countries outside the United States in drawing
links from private businesses to their owners and studying the implications for inequality and tax
policy. In addition to the papers already mentioned, Miller, Pope, and Smith (2019) and Aghion
et al. (2019), who use newly assembled data on the United Kingdom and France, respectively,
are prominent recent examples. We have much to learn from how different incentive structures
and rules in other countries affect the measurement and realization of top business income. For
example, we are not aware of research that has connected the large pension and insurance industries
outside the United States to trends in top income shares and the income-realization behavior of
owner-managers.



                                                   20
   Finally, future changes in the rates of corporate, personal, or capital gains taxation will further
alter the balance between different organizational forms. Steps to increase transparency of gains to
wealth are likely to have differential effects across corporate forms as well. For example, valuation
of assets for the purposes of a wealth tax is straightforward for publicly traded firms, but much
less so for closely held firms. Thus, a wealth tax or other steps like requiring financial assets to be
marked-to-market each would tend to make ownership forms with less effective transparency, like
partnerships and S-corporations, more appealing. Both the public finance literature in particular,
and more broadly any study relying on administrative tax data, should be aware of the need to
take the possibility of shifts in organizational form of businesses into account.




                                                  21
References

Aghion, Philippe, Vlad Ciornohuz, Maxime Gravoueille, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2019.
"Reforms and dynamics of Income Evidence Using New Panel Data." Harvard and College de
France, mimeo.

Alstadsæter, Annette, Martin Jacob, Wojciech Kopczuk, and Kjetil Telle. 2016. "Ac-
counting for Business Income in Measuring Top Income Shares: Integrated Accrual Approach Using
Individual and Firm Data from Norway." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
22888.

Alstadsæter, Annette, Wojciech Kopczuk, and Kjetil Telle. 2014. "Are Closely-Held Firms
Tax Shelters?" Tax Policy and the Economy, 28, 1­32.

Atkinson, Anthony B. 2007. "The Distribution of Top Incomes in the United Kingdom 1908-
2000." In Atkinson, Anthony B. and Thomas Piketty, eds., 82-140. Top Incomes over the Twentieth
Century. A Contrast between Continental European and English- Speaking Countries. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Auten, Gerald, and David Splinter. 2019. "Income Inequality in the United States: Using
Tax Data to Measure Long-Term Trends." Treasury and JCT, mimeo.

Auten, Gerald, David Splinter, and Susan Nelson. 2016. "Reactions of High-Income Tax-
payers to Major Tax Legislation." National Tax Journal, 69(4): 935­964.

Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen. 2020. "The
Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2):
645­709.

Batty, Michael, Jesse Bricker, Joseph Briggs, Elizabeth Holmquist, Susan McIn-
tosh, Kevin Moore, Eric Nielsen, Sarah Reber, Molly Shatto, Kamila Sommer, Tom
Sweeney, and Alice Henriques Volz. 2019. "Introducing the Distributional Financial Accounts
of the United States," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-017. Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System.

Baumol, William J. 1990. "Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive."
Journal of Political Economy, 98(5): 893­921.

Bricker, Jesse, Alice Henriques, and Peter Hansen. 2019. "Wealth Concentration in the
U.S. After Augmenting the Upper Tail of the Survey of Consumer Finances," Economics Letters,
184.

                                                22
Bricker Jesse, Alice M. Henriques, Jake A. Krimmel, and John E. Sabelhaus. 2016
"Measuring Income and Wealth at the Top Using Administrative and Survey Data," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1:261­331.

Burkhauser, Richard V., Markus H. Hahn, and Roger Wilkins. 2015. "Measuring Top In-
come Using Tax Record Data: A Cautionary Tale from Australia." Journal of Economic Inequality,
13(2): 181-205.

Catherine, Sylvain, Max Miller, and Natasha Sarin. 2020. "Social Security and Trends in
Inequality." Wharton and Penn Law, mimeo.

Clarke, Conor, and Wojciech Kopczuk. 2017. "Business Income and Business Taxation in
the United States since the 1950s." Tax Policy and the Economy, 31: 121­59.

Clotfelter, Charles T. 1979. "Equity, Efficiency, and the Tax Treatment of In-Kind Com-
pensation." National Tax Journal, 32(1): 51­60.

Clotfelter, Charles T. 1983. "Tax-Induced Distortions and the Business-Pleasure Borderline:
The Case of Travel and Entertainment." American Economic Review, 73(5): 1053­ 1065.

Cohan, William. 2012. "What's Really Going on with Mitt Romney's $102 Million IRA," The At-
lantic. September 10, https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2012/09/whats-really-
going-on-with-mitt-romneys-102-million-ira/261500/

Cooper, Michael, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph Sul-
livan, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2016. "Business in the United States:
Who Owns it and How Much Tax Do They Pay?" Tax Policy and the Economy, 30: 91­128.

Congressional Budget Office. 2019. "The Distribution of Household Income, 2016." Congres-
sional Budget Office report.

Deaton, Angus. 2020. "Beyond GDP." Survey of Current Business. Forthcoming.

De Loecker, Jan, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger. 2020. "The Rise of Market Power and
the Macroeconomic Implications." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2): 561­644.

Edmark, Karin, and Roger H. Gordon. 2013. "The choice of organizational form by closely-
held firms in Sweden: tax versus non-tax determinants." Industrial and Corporate Change, 22(1):
219­243.

Elsby, Michael W.L., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. 2013. "The Decline of the U.S.
Labor Share." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2013(2): 1­63.



                                              23
Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, Davide Malacrino, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2016. "Het-
erogeneity in Returns to Wealth and the Measurement of Wealth Inequality." American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, 106(5): 651­55.

Fairfield, Tasha, and Michel Jorratt De Luis. 2016. "Top Income Shares, Business Profits,
and Effective Tax Rates in Contemporary Chile." Review of Income and Wealth, 62: S120­S144.

Fixler, Dennis, Marina Gindelsky, and David Johnson. 2019. "Improving the Measure of
the Distribution of Personal Income." AEA Papers and Proceedings, 109: 302­306.

Garbinti, Bertrand, Jonathan Goupille-Lebret, and Thomas Piketty. 2018. "Income
Inequality in France, 1900-2014: Evidence from Distributional National Accounts (DINA)." Journal
of Public Economics, 162: 63­77.

Garbinti, Bertrand, Jonathan Goupille-Lebret, and Thomas Piketty. 2020. "Accounting
for Wealth-Inequality Dynamics: Methods, Estimates, and Simulations for France." Journal of the
European Economic Association.

Gollin, Douglas. 2002. "Getting Income Shares Right." Journal of Political Economy, 110(2):
458­474.

Goodman, Lucas, Katherine Lim, Bruce Sacerdote, and Andrew Whitten. 2019. "Sim-
ulating the 199A Deduction for Pass-through Owners." U.S. Department of Treasury Office of Tax
Analysis Working Paper 118.

Goolsbee, Austan. 1998. "Taxes, organizational form, and the deadweight loss of the corporate
income tax." Journal of Public Economics, 69(1): 143 ­ 152.

Goolsbee, Austan. 2004. "The impact of the corporate income tax: evidence from state orga-
nizational form data." Journal of Public Economics, 88(11): 2283 ­ 2299. Trans-Atlantic Public
Economics Seminar.

Gordon, Roger H., and Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason. 1994. "Tax Distortions to the Choice of
Organizational Form." Journal of Public Economics, 55(2): 279­306.

Gordon, Roger H., and Sarada, Sarada. 2019. "The Role of the Corporate Tax." Cambridge
Elements in Public Economics.

Gordon, Roger H., and Joel Slemrod. 2000. "Are "Real" Responses to Taxes Simply Income
Shifting Between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases?" In Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic
Consequences of Taxing the Rich. , ed. Joel Slemrod. New York:Harvard University Press and
Russell Sage Foundation.

                                              24
Goupille-Lebret, Jonathan, and Jose Infante. 2018. "Behavioral Responses to Inheri- tance
Tax: Evidence from Notches in France." Journal of Public Economics, 168: 21­34.

Guti´          an, and Sophie Piton. 2020. "Revisiting the Global Decline of the (Non-
    errez, Germ´
Housing) Labor Share." American Economic Review: Insights. Forthcoming.

Harju, Jarkko, and Tuomas Matikka. 2016. "The elasticity of taxable income and income-
shifting: what is "real" and what is not?" International Tax and Public Finance, 23: 640­669.

Henry, Erin, George A. Plesko, and Steven Utke. 2018. "Tax Policy and Organiza- tional
Form: Assessing the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017." National Tax Journal, 71(4):
635­660.

Joint Committee on Taxation. 2013. "Foreign Passthrough Entity Use in Five Selected Coun-
tries." Report prepared by the Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation.

Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman. 2014. "The Global Decline of the Labor Share."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 61­103.

Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2015. "What Do We Know About the Evolution of Top Wealth Shares in
the United States?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(1): 47­66.

Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2017. "U.S. Capital Gains and Estate Taxation: A Status Report and
Directions for a Reform." In The Economics of Tax Policy., ed. Alan Auerbach and Kent Smetters,
265­91. Oxford University Press.

Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2019. "Comment on Saez and Zucman's `Progressive Wealth Taxation."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2019 (Forthcoming).

le Maire, Daniel, and Bertel Schjerning. 2013. "Tax bunching, income shifting and self-
employment." Journal of Public Economics, 107: 1­18.

Long, James E., and Frank A. Scott. 1982. "The Income Tax and Nonwage Compensation."
Review of Economics and Statistics, 64(2): 211­219.

MacKie-Mason, Jeffrey K., and Roger H. Gordon. 1997. "How Much Do Taxes Discourage
Incorporation?" Journal of Finance, 52(2): 477­505.

Miller, Helen, Thomas Pope, and Kate Smith. 2019. "Intertemporal income shifting and
the taxation of owner-managed businesses." Institute for Fiscal Studies Working Paper W19/25.

Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1991. "The Allocation of
Talent: Implications for Growth." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2): 503­530.


                                               25
Onji, Kazuki, and John P. Tang. 2017. "Taxes and the Choice of Organizational Form in Late
Nineteenth Century Japan." Journal of Economic History, 77(2): 440­472.

Piketty, Thomas. 2011. "On the Long-Run Evolution of Inheritance: France 1820­2050." Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, 126(3): 1071­1131.

Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Bellknap Press.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. "Income Inequality in the United States,
1913-1998." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118: 1­39.

Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2007. "How Progressive is the U.S. Federal Tax
System? A Historical and International Perspective." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(1):
3­24.

Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. "Distributional National
Accounts: Methods and Estimates for the United States." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
133(2): 553­609.

Romanov, Dmitri. 2006. "Corporation as a Tax Shelter: Evidence from Recent Israeli Tax
Changes." Journal of Public Economics, 90(10-11): 1939­54.

Sabelhaus, John, and Alice Henriques Volz. 2020. "Social Security Wealth, Inequality, and
Lifecycle Saving." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 27110.

Sabelhaus, John, and Somin Park. 2020. "U.S. income inequality is worse and rising faster
than policymakers probably realize." Washington Center for Equitable Growth, May. https:
//equitablegrowth.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/052720-income-ineq-ib.pdf

Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. "Wealth Inequality in the United States since
1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2):
519­78.

Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. 2019. The Triumph of Injustice: How the Rich Dodge
Taxes and How to Make Them Pay: Online Appendix. 1st ed., W. W. Norton & Company.

Schmalbeck, Richard and Jay A. Soled. 2009. Elimination of Deduction for Business Enter-
tainment Expenses. Tax Notes, May 11, 2009: 757-764

Sivadasan, Jagadeesh, and Joel Slemrod. 2008. "Tax law changes, income-shifting and
measured wage inequality: Evidence from India." Journal of Public Economics, 92(10-11): 2199­
2224.



                                                 26
Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2019. "Capitalists in the
Twenty-first Century." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(4): 1675­1745.

Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2020. "The Rise of Pass-
Throughs and the Decline in the Labor Share." Working Paper.

Smith, Matthew, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2020. "Top Wealth in America: New
Estimates and Implications for Taxing the Rich." U.S. Treasury, Princeton and Chicago Booth,
mimeo.

Splinter, David. 2019. "U.S. Taxes are Progressive: Comment on Progressive Wealth Taxation,"
October 8, unpublished note, http://www.davidsplinter.com/Splinter-TaxesAreProgressive.
pdf

Splinter, David. 2020. "U.S. Tax Progressivity and Redistribution." National Tax Journal,
Forthcoming.

Thoresen, Thor O., and Annette Alstadsæter. 2009. "Shifts in Organizational Form Under
a Dual Income Tax System." Finanz Archiv/Public Finance Analysis, 66(4): 384­ 418.

Waseem, Mazhar. 2018. "Taxes, informality and income shifting: Evidence from a recent
Pakistani tax reform." Journal of Public Economics, 157: 41­77.

Wolfson, Michael, Michael Veall, Neil Brooks, and Brian B. Murphy. 2016. "Piercing
the Veil ­ Private Corporations and the Income of the Affluent." Canadian Tax Journal/Revue
Fiscale Canadienne, 64(1).

Woodbury, Stephen A. 1983. "Substitution between Wage and Nonwage Benefits." American
Economic Review, 73(1): 166­182.




                                              27
         Figure 1: Pass-Through Owners Prevail at the Top of the Income Distribution

                                                                     Number of People (K)
      250




                                                                  Public company execs     10.7
                                                                  Owners in P99-99.9     1,004.3
                                                                  Owners in P99.9-99.99 123.5
      200




                                                                  Owners in P99.99-100     14.9




                                      $100.5
         150
 Income (B)




                                                             $61.6
100




                                                                                       $41.6



                                     $110.8
      50




                                                             $86.9
                                                                                       $74.4

                 $32.7
      0




               Execucomp           P99-99.9              P99.9-99.99             P99.99-100
                     Salary + Options                S-corporation                 Partnership

                            Source: Smith, Yagan, Zidar, Zwick (2019).




                                               28
Figure 2: The Evolution of the Share of Business Income Accounted for by Different Types of
Entities

                    1
                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                    C-corporations
                                                        qqqqqqq
                                                    q             q                                                                 S-corporations
                         qqqq
                                qqqqq          qq                          q
                                                                               q                                                    Partnerships
                                        qqqq                          qq           q
                   0.8                                                                 qq                                           RICs and REITs
                                                                                            q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                          qq
 Share of income




                   0.6                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                   q                            q
                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                            q       q
                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                               q        q
                   0.4                                                                                                                                  q           q
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                   0.2


                    0


             -0.2
                         1960            1970               1980                        1990                           2000                                 2010
                                                                           Year
Source: Clarke and Kopczuk (2017), Figure 3




                                                                      29
                                                Figure 3: Role of Pass-Through Income in Rising Top-1% Income Share
                                          25
     Share of income earned by top 1% (%)
                                20




                                                                                                                         4.1 p.p. increase
                                                                                                                         via pass-through
                                                                                   10.1 p.p.                             business income
                      15




                                                                                   increase
                                                                                                                         6.0 p.p. increase
                                                                                  since 1980
                                                                                                                       via salaries and other
                                                                                                                          capital income
            10           5




                                               1920   1930   1940   1950   1960 1970       1980   1990   2000   2010
                                                                              Year

                                                               Actual
                                                               Pass-through income share fixed at 1980 level


Source: Cooper, McClelland, Pearce, Prisinzano, Sullivan, Yagan, Zidar, Zwick (2016). Income in this figure is pretax
fiscal income including capital gains.




                                                                                      30
                                                     Figure 4: Are Top Earners Human-Capital Rich?
         2,000
           1,500




                                                                 Labor Income=77%




                                                    773.4
Income (B)
  1,000

                   Entrepreneurial Income=39%




                                                    118.1
                                                                                            339.1
                                                                                                        71%




                                                    403.6                                      59.5                     245.8
         500




                                                                                                                                     69%
                                                                                                                         41.5
                                                                                    44%




                                                                                            263.0
                                                                                                                45%




                                                    134.5                                                               208.9
                                                    108.7                                   87.7                         69.6
                                                                                            76.7                         65.2
                                                    141.6                                   100.4                        84.0
         0




                                                  Top 1%                            Million-dollar earners            Top 0.1%
                                                        Non-owner wages                                       Owner wages
                                                        Pass-through labor                                    Pass-through capital
                                                        C-corporation dividends                               Other capital income


                                                Source: Smith, Yagan, Zidar, Zwick (2019). Shares of Fiscal Income.




                                                                                          31
