                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MONOPSONY IN MOVERS:
            THE ELASTICITY OF LABOR SUPPLY TO FIRM WAGE POLICIES

                                         Ihsaan Bassier
                                         Arindrajit Dube
                                          Suresh Naidu

                                      Working Paper 27755
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27755


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




Dube acknowledges support from the Washington Center for Equitable Growth. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ihsaan Bassier, Arindrajit Dube, and Suresh Naidu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monopsony in Movers: The Elasticity of Labor Supply to Firm Wage Policies
Ihsaan Bassier, Arindrajit Dube, and Suresh Naidu
NBER Working Paper No. 27755
August 2020
JEL No. J2,J3,J31,J42

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide new estimates of the separations elasticity, a proximate determinant of the labor
supply facing a firm with respect to hourly wage, using matched Oregon employer-employee
data. Existing estimates using individual wage variation may be biased by mismeasured wages
and use of wage variation unrelated to firm choices. We estimate the impact of the firm
component of wage variation on separations using both firm fixed effects estimated from a wage
equation as well as a matched IV event study around employment transitions between firms.
Separations are a declining function of firm wage policies: we find that the implied firm-level
labor supply elasticities generated are around 4, consistent with recent experimental and quasi-
experimental evidence, and that they are approximately 3 to 4 times larger that those using
individual wages. Further, we find lower separations elasticities for low wage workers, high
turnover sectors, and periods of economic downturn but with little heterogeneity by urban status
or labor market concentration. We conclude that monopsonistic competition is pervasive, and
largely independent of forces driving classical monopsony.

Ihsaan Bassier                                 Suresh Naidu
University of Massachusetts Amherst            Columbia University
ibassier@umass.edu                             420 West 118th Street
                                               New York, NY 10027
Arindrajit Dube                                and NBER
Department of Economics                        sn2430@columbia.edu
University of Massachusetts
Crotty Hall
412 N. Pleasant Street
Amherst, MA 01002
and NBER
adube@econs.umass.edu
1     Introduction

How elastic is the supply of labor to a single rm?                The rm-level labor supply elasticity


measures the degree of monopsony in the labor market, estimates of which have proliferated


in recent years. Small values of this elasticity imply signicant degrees of monopsony power,


while large values imply close to competitive behavior in labor markets. In models of dy-


namic monopsony, Manning (2003) shows that the steady-state elasticity of the labor supply


facing a rm can be expressed as twice the separations elasticity (or as a linear combination


of separations and job-to-job share of recruits elasticities), estimates of which are readily


available in matched-worker rm data. In this paper, we revisit this estimation strategy us-


ing plausibly causal eects of rms on hourly wages and high quality administrative data to


address measurement and identication shortcomings that may have biased previous results.


As we show, adopting this approach makes a substantial dierence in the conclusions we can


draw about the competitiveness of the U.S. labor market.


    Following Manning (2003), researchers have typically estimated separations elasticities


with respect to individual earnings, conditional on observable control variables. However,


there are a number of     a priori       reasons to believe this may induce biases in the estimates for

                                     1
the labor supply elasticity,     .       The key challenge in quantifying monopsony power is estimat-


ing the extent to which separations and recruitment vary when a rm pays a higher versus a


lower wage to all its workers, something we refer to as a wage policy. However, individual


worker's wages vary for many reasons that go beyond a rm's wage policy.                        For example,


wage dierences across workers reect permanent dierences in skills and other characteris-


tics, or transitory shocks to the job prospects of workers (perhaps reecting personal health,


family circumstances, social networks, changes in schooling or skills, or learning about job


opportunities). Measuring the separation response to these components of the wage is not


informative about the central question of monopsony power, which measures the responsive-

    1 In this paper, for convenience, we will refer to the elasticity of labor supply facing a rm, or residual
labor supply elasticity, simply as the labor supply elasticity.   Note that this is not the elasticity of labor
supply to the market.



                                                       2
ness of a rm's labor supply to the component of wages that is specically due to arbitrary


dierences in wages set by employers.           This discrepancy may perhaps explain why recent


quasi-experimental estimates of labor supply elasticity tend to nd values between 2 and 5


(Caldwell and Oehlsen (2018), Cho (2018), Kroft et al. (2020), see also the multiple estimates


from Dube, Manning, and Naidu (2019) and the meta-analysis by Sokolova and Sorensen


(2018), who report that the median separations-based labor supply elasticity estimate is 1.7),


even though some recent papers using the traditional approach (e.g., Webber (2015),Booth


and Katic (2011) and Bachmann, Demir, and Frings (2018)) continue to nd much smaller


elasticities of between 1 and 1.2, while others nd elasticities approaching 3 and 4 (Hirsch,

                                  2
Schank, and Schnabel (2010).          To the best of our knowledge, no paper has estimated labor


supply elasticities using the rm component of pay. The Appendix to Card, Heining, and


Kline (2013) considers a regression similar to ours (where they regress tenure on rm eects),


without interpreting the coecients as rm labor supply elasticities.


   A nal concern is that many of the existing papers rely on quarterly or annual earnings


(rather than hourly wages), which may create additional bias.                 Most importantly, use of


earnings is likely to attenuate the estimated labor supply elasticity due to the measurement


error associated with hours.       On the other hand, if hours are correlated with unobserved


heterogeneity in separations, then the direction of bias may be dicult to pre-determine.


   In this paper, we propose an alternative approach using a new data source that addresses


these concerns. Using hourly wage information from matched employer-employee data from

                          3
Oregon from 2000-2017 , we identify the separation response to rm wage policies: how sep-


arations respond for otherwise similar workers who happen to start new jobs at rms paying


dierent wages. This allows us to estimate what happens to the separations rate when rms


that hire otherwise similar workers happen to pay somewhat dierently. Here we draw on the



   2 Additionally, Dube, Giuliano, and Leonard (2019) use exogenous, discontinuous raises at a major retailer
and nd separation elasticities of around 12but show that these are largely driven by peer concerns.
Partialling out the peer eects, they nd a rm-level labor supply elasticity of around 4.
   3 This contrasts with other matched employer-employee dataset like the Longitudonal Employer House-
hold Dynamics (LEHD) data in the US or matched employer-employee data in many European countries.



                                                     3
mover-based design used in other recent contexts, such as studying the impact of location


on health, intergenerational mobility, and other outcomes (e.g., Finkelstein, Gentzkow, and


Williams (2016), Chetty and Hendren (2018)).


   As a rst pass, we isolate the component of individual wages determined by rm wage


policies using the log additively separable model proposed by Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis


(1999)hereafter AKM. We take the estimated rm eects, and estimate the eect of just


this component of the wage on separations.     Similar to previous work, we nd rms play


an important role in wage setting, though the use of hourly wages reduces the rm eect


contribution to log wage variance from 19 to 14 percent; we also nd clear evidence of


rising sorting over time between high-wage workers and high-wage rms in Oregon.           Use


of the AKM rm eect allows us to focus on the wage variation that is likely arising from


similar workers receiving dierent pay due to their employers, but not due to other arbitrary


wage dierences across individuals, for example due to skill.     However, as we show, rms


with dierent AKM eects may also systematically draw dierent types of workers, which


confounds our ability to use aggregate, rm-level variation in AKM and separation rates to


identify labor market power. In addition, there is a concern that the AKM approach does not


allow the assignment of workers to rms to be based on match eects, something we nd in


our data. For these reasons, we develop a matched event study approach in which we consider


workers with very similar past histories (in terms of wage levels, growth, past employers, and


past tenure) who happen to start new jobs at rms with dierent co-worker wages and hence


receive dierent wage bumps, and we then track their subsequent re-separation response.


This renement allows us to control for much richer forms of worker-level heterogeneity in


both wage and separation dynamics that are predicted by past outcomes and history. By


estimating the wage premia and separations elasticities jointly for the same set of workers,


we allow for possibly heterogeneous rm premia, and can recover a local average treatment


eect (LATE) estimate of the potentially heterogenous separations elasticity.


   We nd that the rm component of wageas measured using either AKM or our matched




                                              4
event study approachare clearly negatively correlated with the overall separation rate and


particularly the job-to-job separation rate, consistent with the rm eects reecting better


jobs.   The baseline AKM-based separations elasticity is around -1.4, where use of a split-


sample instrument that corrects for measurement error in the estimation of the rm eects


produces a slightly larger labor supply elasticity, as expected.   The separations elasticity


estimate from our preferred matched event study approach is -2.1. These results imply labor


supply elasticities of around 3 and 4, respectively. Importantly, use of the rm component of


wages increases the labor supply elasticity estimates by a factor of 2.5 to 4 as compared to


the standard approach using individual wages. Our preferred labor supply elasticity of 4.2


suggests a moderate amount of monopsony power in the U.S. labor market, but much less


than the very high degree of labor market power suggested using the traditional approach


which tends to generate labor supply elasticities that are one-third or one-fourth as large


as the ones we nd here.      To put this in perspective, the traditional approach suggests


markdowns of around 50%, while our estimates suggest markdowns of around 20%.


   While our labor supply estimates are substantially larger than those using the standard


approach, we conrm that the labor supply elasticity is procyclicalsimilar to the ndings


in Webber (2018); while it was around 4.0 during the recessionary period 2008-2010, it rose


to around 4.8 during the balance of the 2004-2014 period.     Importantly, we nd that the


degree of monopsony power is substantially larger in low-wage labor markets. For example,


the labor supply elasticity is around 2.4 in art, accommodation and food services, while it is


around 7.8 in professional, business, and nancial services. Similarly, we nd the labor supply


elasticity to be smaller (2.9) in the bottom quartile of prior wages than for the top quartile


(4.6). We nd some evidence consistent with the relevance of labor market concentration:


the labor supply elasticity in the (less concentrated) Portland metro area is around 4.5, as


opposed to 3.9 in rest of Oregon. However, these dierences are modest and could reect a


wide variety of dierences beyond concentration between the urban and rural labor markets.


Indeed, when we calculate commuting zone by industry by year HHI, we nd no evidence




                                              5
that labor supply elasticities are decreasing with concentration, as measured using either


payroll or employment.        This stands as a cautionary note on the strategy of using labor


market concentration to proxy for monopsony power.


    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes our data source.


Section 3 describes the research design.         Section 4 presents the empirical results from the


AKM-based model, and highlights potential issues with that strategy.                  Section 5 presents


empirical results from the matched event study approach. Section 6 concludes.




2          Data

As part of the Oregon's unemployment insurance (UI) payroll tax requirements, all employers


are obliged to report both the quarterly earnings and quarterly hours worked for all employ-

       4
ees.       We obtained Oregon's micro-data as part of a data sharing agreement with the state,


allowing us to construct hourly wage information for nearly all workers using high quality


administrative sources. The resulting administrative matched employer-employee microdata


covers a near census of employee records from the state. The payroll data relies on quarterly


contribution reports submitted by the private sector as well as government employers for


the purposes of unemployment insurance. We use 18 years of data from 2000-2017, or 72


quarters; this dataset consists of around 136 million observations that correspond to 317,000


dierent rms and 5.3 million workers. An advantage of this data is that we observe quar-


terly wages as well as hours for each worker, allowing us to gain precision in distinguishing,


for example, higher paid part-time workers from lower paid full-time workers. We observe


all employer-employee quarterly matches: therefore, in the unprocessed data, a worker may


have multiple observations in a given quarter that have been reported by dierent rms.


Oregon has a median household income that is close to the national median, and has his-


torically followed similar trends. Oregon experienced recessions in 2001-2002 and 2008-2009


    4 Only three other states (Washington, Minnesota and Rhode Island) require employers to similarly report
hours of work as part of their UI systems.



                                                     6
along with the rest of the country, and this is included in our sample period.


    Our sample construction attempts to follow the literature using matched employer-


employee data as exemplied by Card, Heining, and Kline (2013), Lachowska et al. (2020),


Lamadon, Mogstad, and Setzler (2019), Song et al. (2018), and Sorkin (2018). We describe


the steps and justications in much greater detail in our Online Appendix B; here we provide


a summary. We drop employment spells (consecutive quarter runs with the same employer)


with less than 100 hours per quarter on average over the spell, with any wage less than


$2/hour, and spells that are less than 3 quarters in length (which is the necessary duration


to obtain at least one full quarter of wage information). Where spells overlap, we convert


to a worker-level quarterly panel by selecting the spell with the highest average earnings.


We restrict the data to private-sector rms with more than 20 employees; this is similar to


Song et al. (2018), although in our case the restriction is based on state-level employment.


This allows for meaningful estimation of within-rm statistics, and as we show, this also


mitigates the impact of limited mobility bias in estimating rm eects. After applying these


screens, our nal dataset consists of 87.6 million observations and contains information on


3.4 million workers and 55,000 rms.             Table B1 in the appendix summarizes the data by


6-year periods (the ndings are also discussed below in section 4.1). Each period has over 28


million observations. The national median annual earnings for 2013 reported by Song et al.


(2018) is $36,000, which corresponds to the 2013 Oregon median of $39,000, once comparable

                         5
restrictions are made.       The average quarterly separation rate is 0.08, and about half of all

                                            6
hires come directly from other rms.             We observe more than one rm for 40% of workers


within each 6-year panel. As we explain later,           movers   between rms drive the identication


of the rm eects.


    One limitation of using data from a single state is that separations to rms outside Oregon



   5 Song et al. (2018) exclude workers who earn less that the equivalent of minimum wage for 40 hours per
week for 13 weeks. Data for the 75th and 90th annual earnings percentiles are comparable too, with national
earnings at $63,000 and $104,000 respectively compared to Oregon with $62,000 and $96,000 respectively.
   6 The quarterly separation rate is 0.17 before sample restrictions, which is similar to the separation rate
of 0.15 reported by Webber (2015) using the LEHD.



                                                     7
are not counted as job-to-job separations, but rather job-to-non-employment separations.


However, we note that for our primary analysis using all separations, the precise destination


is immaterial. Moreover, any bias in estimating the job-to-job component of the elasticity


is likely limited given the share of workers who likely moved out of Oregon (3% in 2016,


based on data from American Community Survey) is much smaller than the share of workers


leaving their jobs in our main sample (26% in 2016).




3          Research design

We begin by sketching a simple model of dynamic monopsony, and relate it to statistical


models of wage determination (like AKM). Suppose a worker                                      i    employed at rm                j,   denoted


by    fijt , transitions to rm j .               As a starting point, assume that worker's marginal product has


worker-specic component                       Ai   that is xed across rms and, crucially for our approach, does


not aect transition probabilities across rms. Marginal productivity also has a rm-specic


component denoted                   pj , with overall match marginal product given by yij = Ai pj .                               We denote


as    P r(fij t+1 |fijt )        the probability of transitioning to rm                  j   at time   t+1     given          i   was at rm


j   at time      t,   so    sijt  1 - P r(fijt+1 |fijt )        is the separations rate. In a stationary distribution,


      j   P r(fij t )P r(fijt |fij t ) = P r(fijt ).        Rewriting the steady-state condition, dening                               Rij   and


qij       as total recruit and employment probabilities, respectively, of type                                    i   by rm             j,   and


suppressing time subscripts we have:




                                            P r(fij |fij )P r(fij ) = P r(fij ) (1 - P r(fij |fij ))
                                     j =j                                         qij         sij
                                                    Rij



          In steady state, a monopsonist will choose wages to pay workers of type                                         i   to maximize

                                                             Rij (Wij )
      i qij (Ai pj    - Wij )       subject to      qij =    sij (Wij )
                                                                        .       The marginal cost of employment of                      i    with

                                                     dwij
probability           qij   is   Wij (qij )(1 +    dlog (qij )
                                                               ) where   wij  logWij .       Since the labor-supply elasticity

                                                                                                          dwij                1
is solely a function of the rm component of wages, we impose that
                                                                                                        dlog (qij )
                                                                                                                      =       j
                                                                                                                                  is constant



                                                                            8
for all     i   given   j.   At the optimum, we will have that the log wage is                 wij = i + j ,           where


i  log (Ai )          is the portable component of wages (e.g., skill, but could reect other factors)


while      j  log (j pj ) is the rm-specic component of the wage that is chosen by rms,                                  with

                                     j
a markdown of               j =     1+   j
                                             .   Since the portable component        i   is common across rms, the


key assumption we are making is that only the rm-specic component of the wage changes


along with the employer's choice of                     q,   and so the marginal cost of additional employment is

                   j    d                                                                                           dwij
Wij (qij )(1+ dlog(q ij )
                          ), or equivalently that labor supply is solely a function of j                 and
                                                                                                                  dlog (qij )
                                                                                                                                =
   dj                                                dj                            1                             1    dE [Rij ]
dlog (qij )
            . But by the steady-state assumption, dlog(qij )
                                                                          =    (j )- (j )
                                                                                          , where    (j ) =   E [Rij ] dj
                           1 dE [sij ]
and        (j ) =       E [sij ] dj
                                       are the recruitment and separation elasticities, respectively.                     The


labor supply elasticity facing the rm is given by                         (j ) =  (j ) -  (j ).        Further, if both


    and         are constant, as Manning (2003) imposes in his empirical implementation along

                                                                                                              7
with most subsequent work in this sub-literature, then it is easy to see that                                     - = 
and so we have                 = -2 ,            which ties the separations elasticity to half the labor supply


elasticity. Even when the separations elasticity is not constant but the recruitment elasticity


is, the recruitment elasticity is a simple weighted average of the separations elasticities for

                                                               sj Nj
each rm:           =           j   j j       where   j =                is the share of all separations from rm                 j.
                                                               j sj N j

More generally, even when both the recruit and separation elasticities are heterogeneous, the


average recruitment and separations elasticities are equal for some set of weights (Manning


2003, pp. 96-104).


    By imposing rm-specic elasticities that are common to all workers and having output


yij = Ai pj       we are ruling out complementarity in log productivity and heterogeneous rm


labor supply curves across workers within a rm.                            Both of these would generate worker-


rm specic wages, violating the AKM decomposition of wages.                                  Complementarity in log


productivity and heterogeneous labor supply elasticities would imply that log wages                                    wij =
yij + ij        where    yij   is match-specic productivity and               ij   is a match-specic markdown (for


example due to rm-specic wage discrimination policies, as in Card, Cardoso, and Kline

    7 Dierentiating the steady-state condition with respect to log wage and summing gives                         Rij  (j ) =
                                                                                                              j
-     j   sij  (j )   and total recruits must equal total separations.



                                                                   9
(2016)).   The AKM decomposition would not be identied when pooled across types of


workers; and even if attention were limited to exogenous rm switches, it could be a poor


t; and even if rm-eects were estimated, the probability                      qij   would depend on (all of )              wij ,
not just the   j   component. But a fact that we will use below (in Section 5) is that even


without assuming the AKM decomposition, we can isolate the variation in wages changes


that are common to workers transitioning to a given rm                      j,   by instrumenting             wij - wij    for


a given worker with the average dierence in log wages across rms                         ¯j - w
                                                                                         w    ¯j         . Therefore, our


general framework allows for a rm-component of wage that may be heterogeneous across


worker types, and allows the labor supply elasticity to be heterogeneous as well.


   The traditional approach to estimating the separations elasticity is to simply regress a


worker's separation rate (or hazard) on own log wages, and to check robustness to controls.


But from the rm's perspective, the relevant separations elasticity                      is based on what happens
as the rm changes its wage policy, which in this context is varying                          j ,   and so an estimate


of the separations elasticity facing the rm will be given by:




                                  E [sijt |wijt ] = E [sijt |j (i,t) ] =  (j (i,t) )                                       (1)



   Where   sijt   takes on the value of 1 when worker             i   leaves rm     j   at time     t.   We can recover

                                                                                               (j (i,t) )
an estimate of the elasticity from the slope of this curve via                         ^ =     E [ sj ]
                                                                                                          .    However, if


we simply use      wijt   as the key independent variable, instead of isolating the rm-specic


component, then we our estimated            ~ will generally be attenuated due to measurement error.
For example, if equation (1) were identifed under an AKM-based strategy (the approach

                                                                      var(j (i)t )
taken in section 3.1 below), then         ~ =       where     =        var(wijt )
                                                                                   is the share of the variation in


wages that is due to rm eects. It is not clear why we would expect a worker's separation


probability to another rm to be higher if                i    is lowerafter all it is the component of a


worker's wage that is invariant to the rm. We would expect the separation to be higher


if it is a bad job (i.e.,     j    is lower) because in this case there is a greater chance of the


worker receiving oers that dominate current employment. In our data, rm eects explain



                                                         10
roughly 14 percent of the hourly wage variation (see section 4.1).                 This suggests that the


standard approach may recover an estimate that is roughly one-seventh as large, and so the


use of individual level wages can signicantly overstate the extent of monopsony power. In


practice, if    Cov (i ,j (i) )= 0,   and there is sorting of workers and rms, the extent of bias


will also depend on the covariance term. However, as we will see below, with sorting, the


identication strategy of estimating equation (1) using AKM rm eects is unlikely to be


valid as rms with high         j   may be attracting very dierent types of workers.




3.1      Approach based on AKM


The previous section establishes the importance of focusing on the rm-specic component of


wage variation when estimating the degree of monopsony power in the market. What is the


best way to accomplish this? One approach builds on AKM and Card, Heining, and Kline


(2013). We begin with the Card-Heining-Kline (henceforth CHK) assumption necessary to


identify the coecients        j    in the wage regression specication given by




                                      wijt =        j fijt + i + t +   ijt                                (2)
                                                j

   Where       fijt   is an indicator variable denoting whether worker        i   is employed at rm   j   at

                                                                                             8
time   t , i   is a worker xed eect,      t    is a time xed eect and        is an error term.   CHK give


a sucient condition for identication:




                          fijt = E (Jit = j ) = E (Jit = j | ) = Gjt (1 , ..., J , i )                    (3)



   Equation 3 says that the probability of a worker being employed by a particular rm


is a function of only the rm wage eects and the worker xed eects.                         On its own,      G
does not impose severe economic restrictions on the assignment process between workers


and rms, and is consistent with assignment rules that include both sorting of high ability


   8 CHK also include an autocorrelation parameter in the error.



                                                       11
workers to high-wage employers as well as high productivity employers paying higher wages


for identical workers.                     However, to interpret a regression of rm separations on rm wage


eects as reecting the causal separations elasticity facing rms, we need to impose further


assumptions on                  G.       Namely, we need         fijt   to be a monotonic and increasing function of


j ,   independent of the worker's type and independent of the wage policies of other rms.


With these assumptions, we can decompose the assignment function into a monopsonistically


competitive labor supply component that depends only on the rm eect                                              j   and a non-


monopsony component                            h,   which includes eects of sorting and strategic-interactions eects


that depend on the worker eect                           i   and the other rms   k .   If the residual labor supply curve


were the only constraint on the rm, and there was no sorting, equation 1 would obtain with


a very strict monopsony-like structure on                          G    that is more than sucient:




                                     P r(fijt ) = Gjt (1 , ..., J , i ) = (j (i,t) ) = -2 (j (i,t) )                                  (4)


                                                                                               1 dsij                    dP r(fijt |fijt )
      Under equation (4), we have the empirical elasticity given by
                                                                                            E [sij ] dj
                                                                                                          = - E [1
                                                                                                                 sij ]        dj
                                                                                                                                             =
               P r(fijt )
- E [1     1
     sij ] 2      dj
                            = ^.           Note that any approach that regresses separations on rm eects


must rule out pure sorting, i.e.,                            Cov (i , j ) > 0,   if we allow     i    to have an eect on


rm assignment                   fijt .     Sorting is allowed by equation 3 but would violate the identifying


assumption needed to recover the causal separation response from a regression of rm


separations on rm wage eects.                                 But note that we can allow heterogeneity in                          as a


function of worker xed eects and other rm eects, so long as they only interact with


the labor-supply component.                            For example, we can admit a function,              Gjt (1 , ..., J , i ) =
 (j , {j }j =j ) + h(i , {j }j =j );                     when we do this, we have an estimated elasticity given by

           1 dsij                  1
                                           ¡
^=      E [sij ] dj
                            =   E [sij ]
                                               j (j , {j }j =j )dH ({k }),    where    H   is the distribution of the rm


wage eects. i.e., heterogeneity based on the wage policies of other employers. Note that


   or      cannot depend on the individual worker wage eects in our framework above, be-


cause this would induce worker specic markdowns within a rm and violate the additive


separability of wages in AKM.



                                                                        12
    What we cannot admit is a function of the form                       Gjt ({j }, i ) = (i , {j }j =j , j ) +
h(i , j , {j }j =j , );   if   hj = 0,   then regressing   sj   on   j   does not produce a consistent causal


estimate of      because       j   also aects separations via        h   . For example,       h   could capture the


sorting: the fact that certain workers may be both high                         type and sort into rms with


higher   j   and be less likely to separate is an example of this bias as in Shimer and Smith


(2001). While this form of          G is still sucient to identify AKM, it is not sucient to identify
the separations elasticity using AKM. This highlights an important limitation of our purely


AKM-based approach, which needs to assume away the ecological fallacy. The issues here


are the same as in any ecological regression: a regression of                   sj   on   j   does not recover the

                             i
causal eect of     j      onfjt if there is sorting of workers that induces a correlation between


separations and rm eects that does not operate through the labor supply elasticity.




3.2      Extension to Include Unemployment


While the approach presented above relies solely on steady states and constant elasticities,


it does not apply exactly in the presence of recruits from non-employment.                              The method


implemented by Manning (2003) augments the separation and recruitment functions above


to incorporate unemployment. One equation governs the separation rate from rms that pay


w   into either unemployment (EU ) or other employers (EE ):




                                           s(w) = sEU (w) + sEE (w)                                               (5)



    The second equation governs the recruitment rate into rms paying                              w,   and similarly,


recruits are given by




                                          R(w) = RU E (w) + REE (w)

    Manning then breaks these equations up into recruitment from and separations into


employment and non-employment, exploiting the fact that recruits from employment into




                                                      13
a rm must, on average, equal job-to-job transitions out of a rm in steady state.                                   If the


recruitment and separation elasticities are constant, then the steady-state assumption implies


that the negative of the separations elasticity,             EE , is equal to the recruitment elasticity from
employment          EE ,   and we get




     = -(R + S ) EE - (1 - S ) EU + (1 - R ) U E = -(1 + R ) EE - (1 - R ) EU - EE
                                                                                                                     (6)




     where   S     and     R   give the proportion of separations to and recruits from employment,

      EE
and      = (1 - R )( EE -  U E )               is the elasticity of the share of recruits out of employment.


The last equality follows because in steady-state,               S = R ,      since the ows out of employ-


ment equal the ows into employment and the total ows between employers nets to 0.


The augmented-Manning-approach versus the simpler 2-times-the-separations-elasticity


approach may yield similar estimates if the elasticity of the share of recruits from non-

            UE
employment ( ) is small and if the separation elasticities into employment and non-


employment are similarly sized.                 As we will see below, in practice, this seems to be the


case in our sample.




3.3      Estimation


One additional challenge in implementing the above approach is that the AKM eects are


estimated, leading to the usual generated regressor problem. We address this using sample


splitting, in which we randomly split the workers (in each 6-year period) into two groups, A


and B, stratied on moving. (The sample-splitting approach was also used by Goldschmidt


and Schmieder (2017).) Using these two samples, we generate two sets of AKM rm eects,


^A   and   ^B .9   Next, we take the individuals in sample          A   and regress   sijt   on   ^A   while instru-
 j          j                                                                                      j

     9 Sample splitting means that the connected sets used to estimate    j   vary in samples     A   and   B.   However,
in practice, there is a very high degree of overlap in the connected sets: 99.9% of rms in the pooled connected
set are also in the A-connected set; and 99.8% of them are in B-connected set. (Moreover, the correlation
coecient between      ^A
                            and   ^B
                                       is 0.965.)
                       j           j


                                                           14
menting the latter with       ^B .
                                     This ensures that a worker's separation indicator is not entering
                               j

into both the right and the left side of the equation, thus eliminating any mechanical cor-


relation induced by an individual's separation inuencing the estimate of             ^j .
                                                                                            In addition,


because the   ^A
                   and   ^B
                              are from separate samples, assuming that the estimation errors are
               j          j

uncorrelated, we can use the latter to instrument the former to alleviate the attenuation bias


stemming from a generated regressor.


    After decomposing wages, we estimate the following equation:




                                       sijt =       ^j f i + Xit  + ijt
                                                                                                     (7)
                                                        jt
                                                j

    We calculate the rm eects using the AKM approach, by 6-year periods. The details


of implementation, including assessment of limited mobility bias, are provided in Online


Appendix C. After estimating the AKM model, we decompose the variance of the wage in


the worker and rm eects, as in CHK and Song et al. 2018.                  For all reported estimates


of the separations and labor supply elasticities (excepted where noted), we exclude public


administration and trim the top 2.5% and bottom 2.5% of the rm eects distribution.


However, as we discuss below, the core elasticity estimates are not substantially aected by


the trimming.




4     Results From AKM-based Model


4.1    Descriptive statistics and wage inequality in Oregon's adminis-


       trative data


During the 2000-2017 period, the variance in log hourly wages in our Oregon estimation


sample was mostly stable. A similar pattern is observed when we consider hourly or quarterly


earnings, and when we consider the full sample of workers or our main estimation sample


(restricting by rm size and earnings, as described in the data section). However, the variance




                                                       15
of log wages masks considerable heterogeneity in trends by wage percentile, as shown in


Appendix Figure B3.     During this period, the largest growth in hourly wages occurred at


the top (e.g., 90th and 95th percentiles), while the real wage fell in net in the middle (50th


percentile).   However, during the same period, wages rose faster at the bottom (5th and


10th percentiles); in part, this was likely due to Oregon's minimum wage policies.       So in


sum, hourly wage inequality grew in the upper half of the distribution, mirroring other


states (e.g., Lachowska et al. (2020)), even while it fell in the bottom half.   The patterns


are qualitatively similar if we instead consider quarterly earnings; however, the 90-50 gap in


earnings grew somewhat more than the equivalent gap in hourly wages over this period.


   Appendix Table C1 provides the AKM decomposition in wage and earnings inequality for


6-year blocks between 2000-2017, as well as for the full panel. For both log quarterly earnings


and log hourly wages, there is a slight increase in the overall variance between the 2000-2005


and 2012-2017 periods (0.37 to 0.41 for wages, and 0.59 to 0.64 for earnings). In the full


panel, rm eects explain around 19% (14%) of the variance of quarterly earnings (hourly


wages), and worker eects explain around 48% (55%) of the variance. This is similar to the


ndings of Lachowska et al. (2020) using hourly wage data from the state of Washington; they


estimate the rm eects' share of variance to be 19% and 12% of log earnings and log wages,


respectively. There is also assortative matching of workers and rms, with the covariance


term explaining around 14% (18%) of the variance. Consistent with other work (e.g., Song


et al. 2018), we see a clear increase in the covariance term for both wages and earnings


over this period consistent with greater sorting: for quarterly earnings (hourly wages), the


contribution of the covariance term rises from 11% (14%) in 2000-2005 period to 14% (17%)


in the 2012-2017 period. At the same time, there is a slight increase in the rm component


of quarterly earnings variance, but a small decrease in the case of hourly wages. Broadly,


again, these trends are similar to the ndings of Lachowska et al. (2020) using hourly wage


data from Washington. We discuss further details of the AKM estimation in Appendix C,


including an evaluation of limited mobility bias, which we conclude is not a major concern




                                              16
in our context given our relatively long (6-year) and higher frequency sample.




4.2    AKM-based separations elasticities


Figure 1 replicates the event study gure illustrating interquartile transitions in Card, Hein-


ing, and Kline (2013) and shows largely parallel trends prior to a transition, similar to Card,


Heining, and Kline (2013). In Appendix Figure A1 we augment this picture with size of ows,


showing that the separation rates of rms in these quartiles behave as expected, where sep-


arations from low-wage rms to high-wage rms are more frequent than separations from


high-wage rms to low-wage rms, even though the wage changes are symmetric (see gure


A2).


   Figure 2 presents the key ndings of this section. Using a control function approach, the


binned scatter plot shows the overall separations rate (divided by the average separations


rate) against the AKM rm xed eects in hourly wages, controlling for the rst stage


residuals (where AKM rm eects using one sample are instrumented by the rm eects


estimated using the other sample).     The AKM model is estimated using stacked 6-year


samples, so this is a stacked panel. The gure shows a clear, negative relationship between


separations and rm eects on log wages, with a precisely estimated average separations


elasticity of -1.4 after trimming 2.5 percent of the sample from above and below.        (The


untrimmed estimate is -1.3.)    We present the analogous gures for E-E separations, E-E


recruits, and the Labor Supply Elasticity in Appendix Figures A3-5.


   Table 1 shows the results of our regressions using a variety of outcome variables.      All


regressions are run at the individual worker level, clustered by rm and control for quarterly


xed eects. We report estimates using any separation as an outcome variable, as well as


employment-to-employment separations (E-E), employment to non-employment separations


(E-N), and employment-to-employment recruits (E-E recruits, which are restricted to obser-


vations corresponding to hires only). We then present the share of recruits from employment,


and calculate labor supply elasticities based on equation 6, with standard errors calculated



                                              17
via the delta method; but as we will see in our main specications, they are remarkably


similar to those implied by simply doubling the separations elasticity.       Column 1 shows


the standard hazard rate specication using quarterly earnings: the separations elasticity is


-0.282, and the implied labor-supply elasticity     is very small (0.355). Column 2 uses hourly


wages instead and produces somewhat larger magnitudes of separations and labor supply


elasticities (-0.510 and 0.879, respectively), although they are still quite small. Column 3


uses a linear probability model instead of the hazard model, and the resulting separations


elasticities all increase (with only a small decrease in the E-E recruitment elasticity); the


resulting estimate of     almost doubles relative to columns 1 and 2, but at 1.345, it is still


low. The increase in elasticity due to the change in specication is in line with the literature,


as reviewed by the meta-analysis of Sokolova and Sorensen (2018).


   Columns 4-5 use rm eects instead of individual wages as the key independent variable,


and column 4 shows that this results in larger separations elasticity (-1.342 for all sepa-


rations).    The resulting estimates of   are around 2.69.   Column 5 (preferred AKM-based


specication) uses sample splitting to instrument the rm xed eect in order to correct for


attenuation bias of a generated regressor.    Doing so increases the magnitude of the sepa-


rations elasticity modestly to -1.448 and the labor supply elasticity to 2.912. Importantly,


accounting for recruits from non-employment in calculating the elasticity does little to the


estimates in columns 4 and 5; instead, had we simply used the rule of multiplying the sep-


arations elasticity by -2, we would have obtained labor supply elasticities that are nearly


identical.


   Table 2 shows how these results vary based on dierent specications and controls.


Columns 1 and 2 show that the sample-splitting IV modestly increases the magnitudes


of the separations elasticity in the hazard specication as well. Column 3 shows that use of


annual (quarterly) earnings in place of hourly wage produces a substantially smaller separa-


tions elasticity (-0.776 (-0.809) instead of -1.448 in column 5 of Table 1); this highlights the


importance of using hourly wage data. In contrast, the separations elasticity estimates are




                                               18
fairly robust to other changes we consider. Without trimming the rm eects distribution,


the separations elasticity is -1.262. Controlling for tenure changes the separations elasticity


to -1.228. Including controls for industry (1-digit level) by county xed eects results in a


labor supply elasticity of -1.336; controlling for industry and tenure produces an estimate


of -1.406.   (We recognize that controlling for past tenure when estimating the separation


response is problematic, as it is related to the outcome; we are able to do this much more


carefully in our worker-level matched-event study design.)




4.3    Testing the Assumptions of the AKM-based approach


There are two core assumptions at the heart of our approach.            The rst is that AKM is


identied, that is, equations 2 and assumption 3 hold. The second is that equation 4 holds,


so the co-variation between separations and rm eects is driven by movements along the


(possibly heterogeneous) residual labor supply curve, not other omitted variables (e.g., sort-


ing) that are correlated with rm wages and separations. Let us examine these assumptions


in turn.


   The rst assumption is that there are no other omitted variables contaminating the rela-


tionship between   sij   and   j . As discussed above, controlling for worker wage eect i   should


not aect the estimate of         ;   the fact that it does could be a violation of the identifying


assumption for our separations regression. Even if the assumptions underlying AKM as a


statistical model of wages were correct, non-causal sorting of workers can present an im-


portant problem for using the relationship between AKM rm eects and separations. For


example, if high-wage workers sort to high-wage rms (as is the case empirically), and high-


wage workers have dierent exogenous (to wage) separation rates, it is dicult to separate


the rm-versus-worker component of separations. Moreover, there may be other systematic


dierences in exogenous separations at high- versus low-wage rms: for example, if workers


at higher wage rms tend to be more connected (and hence have greater rates of separa-


tions) this could confound the relationship between the rm eect and separation rates. As



                                                   19
a test for these concerns, we consider how separations respond to various components of


the wage eects (i.e., worker, rm, average match residuals) in Table A1. In column 1, we

                                                                                  10
reproduce the baseline OLS estimates from column 4 of Table 1.                         In supercolumn 2, we


report estimates from regressing separations on rm the xed eect as well as the worker


xed eect. We nd that inclusion of the estimated worker xed eects greatly reduces the


magnitude of the rm eects coecient (from -1.3 to -0.7).                    This highlights the challenge


that the sorting of high-wage workers to high-wage rms presents for the ecological regres-


sion. Moreover, it's not clear that inclusion of the worker xed eect actually reduces bias.


When there are multiple dimensions of heterogeneity in exogenous separations, controlling


for one dimension may even increase overall bias. For example, if high wage rms attract


both higher skilled workers (with lower exogenous separations) and more connected work-


ers (with higher exogenous separations), simply controlling for the AKM worker xed eect


would tend to exacerbate the bias from the other omitted variable (connectedness). Overall,


then, the sensitivity of the separations elasticity to the inclusion of worker xed eects (in


wages) makes it dicult to assess the causal import of the AKM-based ndings.


    A second issue arises from whether the AKM assumption about mobility does, indeed,


hold in our data. An important assumption shared by both our model and the AKM frame-


work generally is that match-specic wage eects are irrelevant for rm assignment. If we


denote by   µij   the match-specic component of the wage, in order for AKM to be identied,


the assignment probability       Gjt must not be a function of match eects, µij . If it were, then the
rm indicator would be correlated with match eects in the residual. More formally, suppose

 i                                                                                                   i
fjt = Gjt ({j }, i , µij ).   It follows that estimates of rm eects from           wijt =     j   j fjt + i +   ijt

will be biased because     Cov (fjt , µij ) = 0   and   µij   is a component of    ijt .

    CHK provide several types of evidence against the importance of match eects.                           First


they show that unrestricted match eects modeli.e., a separate                 µij      for every pair, instead


of rm eects       j does      not improve the share of explained wages very much. We also nd

   10 This allows for more comparability between AKM components than the preferred split-sample speci-
cation.



                                                        20
something similar:          the adjusted R-square in the unrestricted match eects model in our


sample from 2000-2017 (2012-2017) is 0.88 (0.91) while the AKM model adjusted R-square


is 0.84 (0.90). Second, they argue that the wage losses and gains going from lower to higher


rm eect quartiles and vice versa are symmetric, and that in general there is little in the


way of wage gains when moving within rm eect quartiles. If mobility were driven by match


eects, we would not expect the symmetry to necessarily hold.                         We also provide evidence


that wage changes from upward and downward movements between quartiles are symmetric


(see Appendix Figure A2).


    However, the fact that the              µij   do not improve the share of wages explained is not disposi-


tive about whether assignment of workers to rms depends on match eects. We can directly


test if the pattern of assignment is inuenced by match eects. To do so, we compute                          µij   as


µ^ij =
             1      Tij
                            wijr - ^i - ^j ,       which is the mean residual of the wage over a job spell,
         Tij -tij   r=tij

conditional on worker and rm eects, and check if the rm eect of the subsequent rm


j (i,t+1)   is correlated with     µ^ij .   If these are indeed random eects (as assumed under AKM),


they should not predict the direction of future ows. In Table 3, we consider two tests. In


columns 1 to 4, the outcome is the subsequent rm's xed eect at date                             t + 1,   which we


regress on the match eect (mean residuals) and the rm eect at date                              t.   Without any


controls in column 1, we nd that match eects are indeed predictive of future rm eects,


in violation of AKM assumptions. Including controls for industry and tenure at date                           t   in


column 4 renders the coecient small and insignicant. In columns 5 to 8 we consider the


direction of change in the rm eect between dates                       t   and   t + 1.   Here too, we nd that


high match eects (mean residual wage) positively predicts the direction of change in rm


eects upon separation; moreover, while inclusion of industry by tenure controls reduces the


magnitude of the coecient, it continues to be statistically signicant.


    Overall, these ndings suggest that the assumption for identication of AKM may not


hold in our sample. While the quantitative importance of                     µij   may be unimportant for ex-


plaining wage variation, as discussed above, it may be important for estimating separation




                                                             21
elasticities. To clarify, the failure of AKM and the possibility of omitted variables in the sep-


arations regression need not imply that that AKM-based separations elasticities are severely


biased: indeed, they may be approximately correct. However, these failures do suggest the


need for an alternative strategy that does not impose the AKM assumption on the wage


generating process, while still isolating the portion of wages due to rm wage policies.


    This is exactly what we do in the next section, where we consider worker-level event


studies where workers with very similar histories (or wages, rm assignment, past job stabil-


ity) who then transition to rms with dierent wages, and we then follow their behavior and


measure how separation rates respond to their having received a higher wage boost. Doing


so helps us better isolate how separations respond to plausibly exogenous dierence in wages


accounting for rich forms of worker heterogeneity in both separations and wages.




5       Using Matched Movers to Identify Separations Elastic-

        ity

In this section, we show that controlling for worker wage and employer histories in an event


study approach can addresses the failures in the AKM approach documented above. Instead


of equation 3, suppose assignment at time             t   is governed by the following equation:




                                       fijt = Gjt ({w
                                                    ¯k }, {wir , fik r }r<t )                             (8)



    Where     wir   and   fikr   are variables denoting past individual wages and rm assignments,


while   {w
         ¯k } is a vector of rm average log wages.             This assumption says that the rm average


wage    w
        ¯j   predicts assignment, rather than the rm eect               j ;   therefore, conditional on a rich


set of covariates, including past wages and employment histories, the match and worker


xed eects add no predictive value to the assignment function. Whether this assumption


is weaker or stronger than the CHK assumption can be debated: CHK allow no role for




                                                          22
histories except via a worker xed eect, while equation 8 imposes that worker xed eects


(as well as match eects) do not matter conditional on controls for history. Unlike CHK,


this assumption is non-Markovian, and allows for path-dependence, where a worker's past


employers, employment history, and past wages, inuence their probability of matching with


a rm   j.
                      i
   This implies   E [fjt   ijt ]   =0   where       is from the dynamic equation below:




                              wijt =            ¯j fijt + L({wir , fik r }r<t ) +
                                              j w                                    ijt                     (9)
                                          j
                                                               L(Historyi,t )

   Note that, since the history includes lagged wages and xed eects for lagged rms,


focusing on the time of transition            t,   equation 9 can be rewritten as




               wijt - wijt-1 = ~(w
                                 ¯j - w     i
                                      ¯j )(fjt - fji t-1 ) + L(historyi,t ) + ijt                          (10)




   which is similar to the specication estimated by Finkelstein, Gentzkow, and Williams


(2016), but augmented with controls; Finkelstein et al. show that under the AKM assump-

                                                                                                       j - j
tions, the coecient on the change in log average wage can be interpreted as                      ~=
                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                       ¯j -w
                                                                                                      (w   ¯j )

which is the share of the mean dierence in log wages across rms within a quarter explained


by rm eects. However, we do not have to impose this interpretation on the coecient                          ~ in
                                                                                                            
this specication and can still use equation 10 as a rst-stage for the wage. Under our as-


sumptions, and contra AKM, we do not necessarily impose homogeneity of rm eects: here


the rm pay premium         j       can be heterogeneous (possibly reecting match eects), allowing


dierent workers get dierent raises when they switch to the same rm. Put dierently, we


do not need to impose that rms have the same eect on wages for all workers in order to


use the change in rm average wage as an instrument for own wage changes. We regress the


separation rate at time      t+k        on the wage change at time          t   associated with the move, while


controlling for the pre-move history:




                                                          23
                               sit+k =  wijt + L(historyi,t ) +          ijt+k                              (11)



   with the rst-stage given by equation (10). Note here that the separation rate                         sit+k   is


dened for workers who are still employed at the rm at time                       sit+k-1. This   approach thus


instruments the wage change of a mover,             wijt ,   with the change in the mean wage of the


rm,   wj .   The experiment captured by this specication is that we compare two workers


with the same past wage and employment history, both starting at the same origin rm                              j
and look at the wage change each worker receives from transitioning to a high-mean-wage


versus a low-mean-wage intermediate rm                 j;   we also look at how long they stay at this


intermediate rm before separating again to a nal rm or to non-employment.


   The advantage of this approach over the AKM-based approach in the previous section


is that the controls   L(historyi )   eectively remove the bias due to worker-specic separation


propensities correlated with rm wages that are not due to the elasticity of labor supply


facing the rm. These histories are, we would argue, much richer controls than simply the


worker wage eect       i ,   and we test this below.          Additionally, note that this formulation


allows the separations elasticity         to be heterogeneous across workers (unlike in AKM based


approach), which means the estimate from equation (11) can be interpreted as a weighted


LATE. This allows for a much wider range of monopsonistic behavior than is admissible


under AKM.


   The approach above does not nest AKM because it excludes worker eects                          i .   However,


a suciently rich set of both of lagged wages and past employment history should control


for much of the heterogeneity in wages captured by               i .   In addition, we could in principle


estimate a specication that is identied under strictly stronger assumptions than AKM,

                             i
where assignment is given byfjt        = Gjt ({k }, i , {wis , fis }s<t )   and wages are given by




                                                 i
                              wijt =          j fjt + i + L(historyi ) +      ijt
                                          j




                                                      24
     Unfortunately, as is well known, a specication with cross-sectional xed eects and


lagged dependent variables will induce Nickell bias in nite histories, and this could bias


our IV estimates. In principle a variety of GMM approaches could be used, but we do not


pursue them here. We do examine robustness of our estimates to controlling for estimates


i   from a previous period (Chen, Chernozhukov, and Fernández-Val, 2019).




5.1      Estimation


We implement this approach using a stacked event study design. We stack all observations by


the date of initial transition (t) when a worker                      i transitions from an initial rm, called Origin
O(i)   to another rm, called Intermediate                        I (i).   We then estimate the worker's subsequent


probability of re-separating from                      I (i)   to another rm       F (i)   (or to non-employment) over


the next    k    quarters (we take           k = 16      to allow for a suciently long post-transition period).


We take the transitioning worker's history (fully saturated interactions of indicator for the


Origin rm, octiles of initial wages at                       O(i) rm,     octiles of   O(i) rm tenure,        calendar quarter


of transition to        I (i)   from   O(i)    denoted as       d)   fully interacted with with event time,           t.   (This


means we are comparing workers with nearly identical wage and employment trajectories


at the same Origin rm and who transitioned to the Intermediate rm on the same date.)


Noting that separation             sI
                                    i,t+k   at date     t+k     is dened only for workers who had been working


at the   I (i)   rm through         t + k,     we regress




                      sI
                       i,t+k =  (wi,I (i),t - wi,O(i),t-1 ) + L(Historyi,t,d ) × 1t+k +                    i,t+k            (12)




Note that       L   contains a xed eect for                  O(i),   and includes wages at        O(i),    so all the variation


that identies           comes from          wi,I (i),t .11   To isolate the variation in      wi,I (i),t   that is due to rm


wage policies, we use a rst stage equation given by




    11 In our main specication, we only control for the starting wage at                   O(i)   so in principle there is some
variation in    wi,O(i),t-1 .   However, in a more saturated specication, we additionally control for              wi,O(i),t-1 .


                                                                     25
  wi,I (i),t - wi,O(i),t-1 = (w
                              ¯ i,I (i),t - w
                                            ¯i,O(i),t-1 )(fI (i),t - fO(i),t-1 ) + L(Historyi,t,d ) +    i,t    (13)




   with a corresponding reduced form given by




                  sI         ¯ i,I (i),t - w
                   i,t+k =  (w             ¯i,O(i),t-1 ) + L(Historyi,t,d ) × 1t+k +     i,t+k                  (14)



   In other words, we regress an indicator for re-separation from            I (i) at date t+k (conditional
on still working at the rm at date        t + k - 1) on the wage change obtained from transitioning
from    O(i) to I (i) at date t, instrumented by the dierence in coworker wages between I (i) and
O(i).   This   O - I - F inal   event study design allows us to construct a clean pre-treatment


period (i.e., prior to date t) where we match workers based on their past histories, a treatment


event (i.e., transitioning to dierent        I   rms with dierent average wages at time                 t),    and a


post-treatment period where we can track their re-separation responses to a nal rm or


non-employment.


   We report the rst stage coecient                  and the separations elasticities below, where the

                                                    
separations elasticity is estimated as       ^=      ·s
                                                        .




5.2      Results


In Table 4, we estimate the separations elasticity from our specication using a 16-quarter


window following the       O-I       transition.     Column 1 is the specication that corresponds


most closely to the Finkelstein, Gentzkow, and Williams (2016) approach (and to the AKM


approach) where we do not additionally control for worker histories. The rst stage coecient


of 0.12 is close to the share of wage variance due to variance in rm hourly wage eects we


nd in Appendix Table C1. The separations elasticity of -0.76 is smaller than what we found


in the AKM-based approach (-1.448 in column 5 of Table 1). However, once we control for


the identity of the   O-rm in column 2, we nd a much larger separations elasticity (-2.475).

                                                        26
This highlights the likely importance of heterogeneity of workers moving to high- versus


low-wage rms; in particular, past rm assignment (i.e,               O(i)    xed eect) seems to encode


substantial information about exogenous separation rates that vary across rms with high


versus low average wages.


    Our preferred specication in column 4 additionally interacts the              O(i)-rm        xed eect


with 8 categories of starting wages and tenure at            O(i)   rm, along with calendar quarter


xed eects; this saturated specication compares workers who started at                     O(i)   rms in the


same quarter, at the same wage, and transitioned to a               I (i)   rm at the same date      d,   but


with potentially dierent         I (i)   rm average wage (of their co-workers). This is a rich set of


controls, and we nd that for this sample, a 10% dierence in the                  I (i)   rm average wage


leads to a dierence in own wage of approximately 1.8%. The separations elasticity from our


preferred specication is -2.1; using the 2-times-separations elasticity rule, this suggests a


labor supply elasticity of around 4.2. Comparing this estimate to our preferred separations


elasticity estimates from the AKM approach above, the estimates from the matched event


study are somewhat larger in magnitude (-2.1 versus -1.4) but also more precise (standard


error is 0.054 versus 0.095).            Figure 3 shows the binned scatterplots of rst stage and IV


regressions that correspond to column 4 of Table 4, and it is clear there is little need to trim


or account for outliers, and the data is much closer to the tted line and appears close to


constant elasticity except in the tails. Appendix gure A7 shows the analogous binscatter

                            12
but for E-E separations.         Column 5 coarsens these controls to 4 categories of starting wages


and tenure at the origin rm; this makes little dierence to our estimates.


    Column 6 adds the O-I rm-pair xed eect as a control, and shows that it is the


wage dierence between two rms, not the specic transition, that drives the reseparation


probability.    This is a demanding specication that uses changes in rm average wages


over time for identication. While the point estimate is smaller in magnitude (-1.293), and

  12 As noted above, the AKM-based results suggest the labor supply elasticity estimated from just the
separations elasticity is very similar to when it is estimated using E-E separations, E-N separations and E-E
recruits. Evidence on the implicit steady state assumption is provided in Appendix Figure A6, which shows
that rm separations and rm recruits fall broadly along the 45 degree line.



                                                      27
the standard errors are much larger (0.513), it's worth noting that the lower bound of the


separations elasticity 95% condence interval of (-2.3) is similar to the lower bound in our


preferred specication in column 4 (-2.2).               In Column 8, we fully interact the controls, in


addition to the preferred specication controls, with the ending wage at                      O-rm          along with


an additional 3 lags in wages (to capture wage dynamics), and nd this has little impact on


the separations elasticity (-2.085), which suggests our baseline controls are quite successful


in nding otherwise similar workers who land at dierent                        I -rms.     Column 7 shows that


this is not simply due to sample changes induced by requiring such a rich set of covariates.


   We next revisit the specication check we conducted in the previous AKM-based ap-


proach in Column 5. We determine whether adding worker wage xed eects,                                ^i   , alters the


estimated separations elasticity. Recall that in the AKM-based approach, the inclusion of


the worker wage xed eects substantially altered the estimate of                       , thereby raising concerns
about omitted variables in our simple regression of                sit   on   j .   In column 9, we control for


estimates of worker wage eects         i   from a pre-t sample, thus eliminating the need to esti-


mate the incidental parameters       i   in the same sample. We nd that additionally controlling


for the worker's xed eects (based on data prior to date 0) has very little impact (raising


the separations elasticity to -2.163); this stands in sharp contrast to what we found in the


AKM-based approach in Table A1 and shows the value of controls for the origin rm and


origin rm wages in absorbing the heterogeneity in separations that are correlated with rm


wages.


   The key ndings are shown visually in Figure 4. In the rst panel, we show the rst


stage estimates of the change in wages for workers transitioning from                        O   to   I    rm. Here


we separately regress   wi,I (i),t - wi,O(i),t-1 ,   the wage changes between event quarter                 t-1   and


event quarters ranging from      t-9     to   t + 16,   on   ¯ iI (i)t - w
                                                             w           ¯iO(i)t-1 ,   the change in the average


rm wage between    O    (date   t - 1) and I    (date t). Here we use the same set of controls as our


preferred specication in column 4 of Table 2: fully interacted controls for                      O(i)       rm xed


eect, the starting wages of workers at         O(i)     in 8 categories, their tenure in 8 categories, and




                                                        28
the calendar quarter of transition from         O(i)    to   I (i).
      We nd that wages of workers going to high- versus low-wage                   I (i)   rms followed parallel


trends prior to the       O-I   transition conditional on controls (recall that in this specication,


we controlled for the starting wage at the           O(i) rm but not subsequent wages, so there is no
mechanical reason for this to be true). At the same time, there is a clear jump in own wages


of workers leaving the same        O(i)   rm after date 0 when they move to a rm with a higher

                   13
average wage.           The coecient of 0.18 at date        t means that, on average, if a worker moves to
an   I -rm   with 10% higher average wage, the worker's own wage increases by around 1.8%.


Following Finkelstein, Gentzkow, and Williams (2016), we can interpret this to mean that


around 18% of the variation in overall wages are due to the rm component, though in our


case these are conditional on controls for worker heterogeneity. The gains are persistent, as


the rst stage coecient remains around 0.14, even 16 quarters following the                      O -I   transition.


      How is separation behavior at the         I -rm       aected by wages there? Panel B shows this


visually using the survival function, i.e., plotting the impact of having a higher rm-average


wage    w   on   k -period retention probability for k  {1, 2, ..., 16}. We plot the average retention
probabilities of all workers in the sample in black, and the predicted retention probabilities


for workers who are assigned to an           I (i)   rm with one log point higher rm-average wage


(in red). The gap in the retention probability between the red and black lines is thus the


causal eect of being assigned to a rm with a log point higher rm-average wage; 4 quarters


out, this gap in the separations probability is about -0.1. This gap in probability persists


through the 16 quarters following the initial               O-I        transition. Note that the gure traces


out the impact of higher rm wages on the survival function                     ¯ t+k (w).
                                                                               R            To relate this to our


separation elasticities, note that the latter are based on the the impact of rm wages (w )


on the hazard of separating at time period             k,   i.e,
                                                                           ¯ t+k (w) - ln(R
                                                                        ln(R              ¯ t+k-1 (w) .   Pooling
                                                                   w

the impact on the hazard in periods           k  {1, 2, ..., 16}        produces the corresponding (reduced



     13 As explained in the Data Appendix on sample construction, we set wages in the actual quarters of tran-
sition (dates -1 and 0) to missing as these hourly wage observations likely contain substantial measurement
error associated with partly worked quarters.



                                                       29
form) separations elasticity.


    By focusing on the separations response to the wage change of the compliers, we eliminate


the risk of ecological bias in the previous AKM section.               This specication recovers the


separations elasticity from the change in individual wages driven by the change in rm


average wages.        Since we are not imposing the AKM separable log additivity, this event


study allows for heterogeneity in the wage change experienced by workers, for example match


eects. The AKM approach imposed that all workers experience exactly                       j - j   log wage


change upon transition from        j   to   j , and then imposed that separations only responded to j .
Workers who separated for reasons unrelated to wage changes at              j   (e.g. because of sorting)


would still be counted in the estimated separations elasticity. In the event study approach,


we are simply using the change in rm wages as an instrument for own wage change, and


if there is heterogeneity in the rst-stage (from e.g. match eects) it just makes our IV


estimate a (weighted) LATE applicable only to compliers, but still unbiased.




5.3        Robustness and Heterogeneity


Table 5 probes the robustness of our approach to a variety of other specication choices.


Column 1 contains our baseline specication for comparison. Column 3 controls for a measure


of rm amenities or attractiveness proposed by Sorkin (2018). Specically, we construct an


amenities value measure using the            V EE   concept based on the Google Page Rank algorithm.


Note      V EE   is supposed to reect the overall value of the job to a worker, inclusive of both


the wage and amenities components. One measure of the pure amenities component is then


the dierence between        V EE   and the AKM rm xed eect (of the              I (i)   rm). The inclusion


of this amenities measure has a very small impact on the estimated separations elasticity


with respect to wage, which changes to -1.992. The separations elasticity with respect to


the amenities value is -0.291. As an alternative, in column 2, we instead control for                V EE
itself.    In this case, the separations elasticity with respect to         V EE    is -0.22 (reported in


the table notes); this measures the separations elasticity with respect to the rm amenity



                                                        30
value (holding wages constant) and is similar to the estimate in column 3. To obtain the


separations elasticity with respect to the rm wage component, we now have to add the


coecient on instrumented own-wage change (-1.961) plus the elasticity with respect to


V EE   (-0.22), since   V EE   is supposed to contain the rm wage component as well as amenities


value.   This implies an amenities-corrected separations elasticity of rm wage of around -


2.16, which is virtually identical to our baseline estimate. Overall, we interpret these results


to suggest that the separation elasticities with respect to wage gains experienced by movers


with otherwise similar histories are not substantially aected by controlling for amenities


values as measured by the Sorkin approach.


   Our main specication uses changes in mean rm wage as an instrument for wage changes.


However, there are other ways of categorizing rm quality, such as the approach taken


in Bonhomme, Lamadon, and Manresa (2019), who cluster rms based on their empirical


earnings distribution. Following Bonhomme, Lamadon, and Manresa (2019), in Column 4


we replace the instrument from the change in mean rm wages to 10 clusters of the            I (i)
rm wage distribution (again, conditional on          O(i)   rm xed eects). Firms are partitioned


into these 10 clusters based on the proportion of workers in each ventile of the hourly wage


distribution using k-means clustering. Use of the 10 clusters as instrumentsinstead of the


rm average wagedoes little to change the separations elasticity, which in this case falls


slightly to -2.027.


   Column 5 reports the OLS estimate of separations elasticity with respect to the change


in individual wage at date       t,   without instrumenting with the change in rm wages. Despite


having all of the same controls as Column 1, the implied separations elasticity of -0.272


is around one eighth of the magnitude of the IV estimate, and is generally much closer to


the ndings in the standard approach presented in Manning (2003) and the other papers


mentioned in the introduction. This highlights the importance of instrumenting the wage


with the rm average wage to estimate the degree of monopsony power, even with controls,


the standard approach results in residual supply elasticities that are much too small to be




                                                    31
credible.


    Column 6 reproduces the main specication using quarterly earnings rather than hourly


wages.      Similar to the AKM-based estimates, the quarterly-earnings-based estimates are


substantially attenuated, with a separations elasticity of -1.536; this, again, highlights the


importance of adjusting for hours.


    A nal specication in this table (column 7) addresses selectivity concerns (e.g., time


varying worker heterogeneity not captured by history) around the       Origin - Intermediate
transition by only considering such transitions induced by mass layos. Following the WARN


Act denition, we dene a mass layo as when a rm with at least 100 full time workers


has either (a) 500 fewer workers in the following 4 quarters, or (b) 1/3 fewer workers in the


following 4 quarters. About 11,000 moves occur under these conditions. Overall, we nd very


similar results to the preferred specication (column 1) for the rst stage and separations


elasticities.


    Table 6 presents the heterogeneity in the separation elasticities. Using the 1-digit NAICS


super-sectors, we exclude agriculture, as well as mining, utilities and construction because


these industries have far fewer employees (less than half the number employed in the next


smallest industry). Panel A suggests that the implied labor supply elasticities (again, us-


ing the 2-times-separations-elasticity rule) are larger in manufacturing and especially in the


high-wage business, nancial and professional services at 4.6 and 7.8, respectively. In con-


trast, they are small in low-wage sectors of art, accommodation and food services (which


includes restaurants) and wholesale, trade and transport (which includes retail) at 2.4 and


2.8, respectively. This sectoral variation in the labor supply elasticity is much larger than the


ndings using the traditional approach in Webber (2015). It is also worth noting that one


may have assumed that low-wage sector like restaurants and retail would be more compet-


itive, especially given the frequency of job changes in those sectors. However, our evidence


suggests the opposite: the labor supply facing low-wage, high-turnover sectors appears to


be much less elastic than that facing high wage sectors. This pattern has important impli-




                                               32
cations when it comes to considering policies and wage regulations to address labor market


monopsony, as discussed in Naidu and Posner (2019).


   We also report elasticities separately for the Portland metro area and rest of Oregon


(Panel B). These two subsamples dier dramatically in levels of labor market concentra-


tion, where labor markets are dened at the level of commuting zone by 4-digit industry


by year (following Rinz et al. 2018). In metro Portland, the average employment (payroll)


Hirschman-Herndahl-Index (HHI) is 0.12 (0.14), while the average outside of the Portland


metro area the HHI is higher at 0.27 (0.29), conrming that concentration is higher in rural


labor markets. We do nd some evidence that the implied labor supply elasticities are 15%


larger in Portland (4.5) than outside (3.9), which is consistent with concentration playing


some role in determining labor market power. However, under the Cournot-based interpre-


tation of employment HHI, where the residual labor supply elasticity is the aggregate labor


supply elasticity divided by HHI, the residual labor supply elasticity would be expected to be


around 230% larger in Portland (using employment HHI), and for plausible aggregate labor


supply elasticities the residual labor supply elasticities in the non-Portland sample would be


much smaller than the ones we nd. Overall, these ndings suggest that concentration plays


at most a modest role in the overall explanation behind labor market power.


   Moreover, there are many dierences between metro Portland and rural Oregon other


than concentration, including sectoral composition, worker type, mobility costs and labor


market tightness. For this reason, we investigate heterogeneity by labor market concentration


directly in Panels C and D, where we compute commuting zone      ×   industry (4-digit)   ×   year


HHI for both employment and payroll. We investigate heterogeneity by cutos consistent


with high concentration in the literature, looking at HHIs less than 500, between 500 and 1500


, and greater than 1500. For comparison, the Horizontal Merger Guidelines consider markets


with concentration greater than 1500 to be moderately concentrated and those greater than


2500 to be very concentrated. Arnold (2019), for example, nds eects of mergers at only the


highest ventile of his (ows-based) concentration measure, which is greater than 2100. Most




                                             33
of our movers are in low-concentration labor markets but still face a considerable degree of


monopsony power, often more than those in more concentrated markets. For example, our


implied labor supply elasticity in the 1500+ employment HHI category is around 4.5, while


the elasticity is around 3.5 in the below 500 employment HHI category.


   In traditional Cournot models, the eect of concentration on wages is mediated by the


elasticity of labor supply facing the rm. Our results suggest approaching the interpretation


of recent studies with some caution (including Azar, Marinescu, and Steinbaum (2017),Rinz


et al. (2018), Arnold (2019) and Prager and Schmitt (2019), which show negative eects of


employment concentration on wages through the lens of the Cournot model).         First, even


low concentration areas may have substantial monopsony power, with policy implications


as in Naidu and Posner (2019).     In addition, the concentration may be picking up other


dierences between labor markets. Finally, the Cournot model of monopsony may not accu-


rately describe the wage-setting process. Jarosch, Nimczik, and Sorkin (2019), and Schubert,


Stansbury, and Taska (2020) both present bargaining-based models in which the eect of


concentration on wages is via lowered outside options rather than just the supply elasticity.


If wages are set by Nash bargaining in some rms and monopsonistic wage posting in others,


as in Flinn and Mullins (2019), then interpreting the eect of concentration solely through


its eects on the residual supply elasticity may miss the eect concentration has via lowering


outside options in bargaining.


   In addition, we nd the the labor supply elasticity is procyclical (Panel E). From 2007 to


2010, the period spanning the Great Recession, the implied rm-level labor supply elasticity


was around 4.1, while in the prior and subsequent expansionary periods it ranged between


4.7 and 5. The procyclicality of the labor supply elasticity is consistent with Webber (2018),


Depew and Sørensen (2013), and Hirsch, Schank, and Schnabel (2010), even though the


magnitudes in our ndings are larger than previous U.S. estimates.


   Importantly, we nd that the labor supply elasticities are substantially larger for higher


wage workers than for lower wage workers (Panel F). In particular, we divide our sample




                                             34
into quartiles of worker wages at   Origin rms, and assess the heterogeneity of the separation
response to the   Intermediate   rm wage by the wage levels they were earning at             Origin.   In


other words, we are comparing how separations at           I   respond to wages at   I   for two workers


who were earning identical wages at      O;   but now estimating this separately when the two


workers'   O-wage   fell at the bottom of the overall wage distribution versus higher in the


distribution. We nd a mostly monotonic increase in the magnitudes of the separation (and


hence labor supply) elasticities across wage quartiles.          The labor supply elasticity for the


bottom quartile is 2.9, while for the top quartile, it is much larger at 4.6. Generally, higher


wage workers seem to be in more competitive labor markets, which is consistent with our


industry-level ndings above.


   Finally, in we restrict the regression sample to dierent post-period lengths (Panel G).


While our preferred estimate uses a post transition window length of 16 quarters, the sepa-


rations elasticities are quite stable across windows using 4, 8 or 12 quarters, ranging between


-2.01 and -2.26.    The E-E separations elasticity is increasing in post period length, but


remains in a relatively narrow band (-3 at minimum compared to -4 for 16 quarters).


   One caveat to our results is that by restricting attention to rm wage policy variation, we


necessarily have to focus on movers: workers who switch rms. These workers may have in


general higher separations elasticities than those who stay at one rm throughout our sample


period As a consequence, our estimated labor supply elasticity (a weighted LATE among


movers) may be an upper bound on the degree of dynamic monopsony in the labor market.


While omitted from Table 6 for space reasons, we nd only moderate heterogeneity by pre-


Origin   number of moves, where the separations elasticity is very similar (-2.09 versus -2.08)


and the E-E separations elasticity is somewhat higher (-4.5 versus -3.8) for workers with one


or more moves before their switch from     Origin     to   Intermediate   compared to workers with


those with none.




                                                 35
6    Discussion and Conclusion

The individual separations elasticity with respect to own wage has been taken as evidence for


dynamic monopsony power. However, the literature estimating separations elasticities has


rarely successfully distinguished between the wage variation due to worker heterogeneity and


that due to rm wage-setting although the theory points towards rm wage-setting as the


relevant component of the wage. We isolate rm wage policies using two dierent approaches,


one that follows Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999), where wages are additively separable


into a xed worker component and a rm xed eect, and a second approach that estimates


the elasticity of separations with respect to the rm component of wages using a matched-


worker event study approach.    Estimating dynamic monopsony using the wage variation


generated by movers links the size of ows between rms and the causal eects of rms on


hourly wages: in models with dynamic monopsony, the tendency of workers to move between


two rms depends on dierences in rm eects on wages.


    Our second approach relies much less on the specic wage decomposition of AKM and


instead instruments individual wage changes of movers through the change in log average


wage between the origin rm and the new rm, controlling for a rich set of worker history


variables including xed eects for previous rm identity, past wage dynamics and prior


tenure. We then examine the re-separation probability of the moving worker as a function


of their instrumented wage change.


    Both approaches lead to broadly similar results; the advantage of the event study ap-


proach is not having to impose the AKM decomposition on wages.         Relative to estimates


obtained from our procedure, existing elasticities from individual level separations regres-


sions appear to be substantially downwardly biased in magnitude, consistent with attenua-


tion stemming from use of wage variation unrelated to rm choices. Our estimates suggest


a moderate amount of monopsony power in the U.S. labor market, with a labor supply elas-


ticity of around 4. Moreover, this is true even in thick urban labor markets. The degree of


monopsony power is greater in the low-wage, high-turnover sectors and for low-wage workers



                                             36
generally.


   Examining the response of separations to rm wage eects can also inform interpretation


of those eects.   One view (e.g., Sorkin 2018; Lamadon, Mogstad, and Setzler 2019), is


that a substantial part of rm xed eects reect compensating dierentials for rm-specic


disamenities. Our paper provides some evidence against this view. First, unlike most work


to date, our AKM eects are in hourly wages, so they are not driven by unobserved hours


variation, as would be the case in the LEHD or IRS data used in Sorkin (2018) and Lamadon,


Mogstad, and Setzler 2019.     Table 2 shows that our point estimates on the separations


elasticity are little aected by the inclusion of industry   ×   county and industry   ×   tenure


controls, and these controls are likely to correlate with a great deal of amenity variation.


Most directly, in our event study approach, we show that our separations elasticity estimates


are little aected by controlling directly for a revealed preference measure of job value. While


rms with higher estimated amenities values do have lower separation rates, controlling for


these amenities values does not substantially alter our estimated separations elasticity.


   Finally, we believe our estimand is closer to what models of monopsony imply. From the


perspective of a rm with labor-market power, the extent to which separations vary with


the portable component of worker wages is not something that can be aected through wage


policies. But the elasticity of separations with respect to rm wage policies is exactly the


constraint governing the wage-setting process of a monopsonistic rm.


   In sum, we document that there is pervasive but moderate monopsony power even in


thick labor markets, and especially in the low-wage segments; this monopsony power seems


at best weakly related to measures of labor market concentration. However, quantitatively


the extent of monopsony power is much smaller than has been suggested using the traditional


approach to measuring dynamic monopsony power using individual wages. Future work could


protably combine the dynamic monopsony framework in this paper with job dierentiation


and concentration to both unify and disentangle the sources of monopsony power across


labor markets.




                                              37
References

Abowd, John M, Francis Kramarz, and David N Margolis (1999).  High wage workers and


   high wage rms. In:    Econometrica     67.2, pp. 251333.


Andrews, Martyn et al. (2008).  High wage workers and low wage rms: negative assortative


   matching or limited mobility bias? In:    Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A
   (Statistics in Society)   171.3, pp. 673697.


Arnold, David (2019).  Mergers and acquisitions, local labor market concentration, and


   worker outcomes. In:       Local Labor Market Concentration, and Worker Outcomes (Oc-
   tober 27, 2019).
Azar, José, Ioana Marinescu, and Marshall I Steinbaum (2017).     Labor Market Concentration.
   Tech. rep. National Bureau of Economic Research.


Bachmann, Ronald, Gökay Demir, and Hanna Frings (2018).  Labour Market Polarisation


   and Monopsonistic Competition. In:


Bonhomme, Stéphane, Thibaut Lamadon, and Elena Manresa (2019).  A distributional


   framework for matched employer employee data. In:        Econometrica   87.3, pp. 699739.


Bonhomme, Stéphane et al. (2020).      How Much Should we Trust Estimates of Firm Eects
   and Worker Sorting?       Tech. rep. National Bureau of Economic Research.


Booth, Alison L and Pamela Katic (2011).  Estimating the wage elasticity of labour supply


   to a rm: What evidence is there for monopsony? In:         Economic Record   87.278, pp. 359


   369.


Caldwell, Sydnee and Emily Oehlsen (2018).  Monopsony And the Gender Wage Gap:Experimental


   Evidence from the Gig Economy. In:


Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline (2016).  Bargaining, sorting, and the


   gender wage gap: Quantifying the impact of rms on the relative pay of women. In:        The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics      131.2, pp. 633686.




                                               38
Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline (2013).  Workplace heterogeneity and the rise


   of West German wage inequality. In:   The Quarterly journal of economics 128.3, pp. 967
   1015.


Chen, Shuowen, Victor Chernozhukov, and Iván Fernández-Val (2019).  Mastering panel


   metrics: causal impact of democracy on growth. In:   AEA Papers and Proceedings. Vol. 109,
   pp. 7782.


Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren (2018).  The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenera-


   tional mobility I: Childhood exposure eects. In:     The Quarterly Journal of Economics
   133.3, pp. 11071162.


Cho, David (2018).   The Labor Market Eects of Demand Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from
   the Recovery Act.
Depew, Briggs and Todd A Sørensen (2013).  The elasticity of labor supply to the rm over


   the business cycle. In:   Labour Economics   24, pp. 196204.


Dube, Arindrajit, Laura Giuliano, and Jonathan Leonard (2019).  Fairness and frictions:


   The impact of unequal raises on quit behavior. In:    American Economic Review     109.2,


   pp. 62063.


Dube, Arindrajit, Alan Manning, and Suresh Naidu (2019).  Monopsony and employer mis-


   optimization account for round number bunching in the wage distribution. In:      Unpub-
   lished manuscript.
Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams (2016).  Sources of geographic


   variation in health care: Evidence from patient migration. In:   The quarterly journal of
   economics   131.4, pp. 16811726.


Flinn, Christopher and Joseph Mullins (2019).  Firms Choices of Wage-Setting Protocols in


   the Presence of Minimum Wages. In:


Goldschmidt, Deborah and Johannes F Schmieder (2017).  The rise of domestic outsourcing


   and the evolution of the German wage structure. In:   The Quarterly Journal of Economics
   132.3, pp. 11651217.




                                            39
Hirsch, Boris, Thorsten Schank, and Claus Schnabel (2010).  Dierences in labor supply to


   monopsonistic rms and the gender pay gap: An empirical analysis using linked employer-


   employee data from Germany. In:      Journal of Labor Economics   28.2, pp. 291330.


Jarosch, Gregor, Jan Sebastian Nimczik, and Isaac Sorkin (2019).     Granular search, market
   structure, and wages. Tech. rep. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kroft, Kory et al. (2020).   Imperfect Competition and Rents in Labor and Product Markets:
   The Case of the Construction Industry. Tech. rep. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lachowska, Marta et al. (2020).    Do rm eects drift? Evidence from Washington adminis-
   trative data. Tech. rep. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lamadon, Thibaut, Magne Mogstad, and Bradley Setzler (2019).          Imperfect competition,
   compensating dierentials and rent sharing in the US labor market. Tech. rep. National
   Bureau of Economic Research.


Manning, Alan (2003).    Monopsony in motion: Imperfect competition in labor markets. Prince-
   ton University Press.


Naidu, Suresh and Eric A Posner (2019).  Labor Monopsony and the Limits of the Law. In:


   Available at SSRN 3365374.
Prager, Elena and Matthew Schmitt (2019).  Employer consolidation and wages: Evidence


   from hospitals. In:   Washington Center for Equitable Growth Working Paper.
Rinz, Kevin et al. (2018).    Labor market concentration, earnings inequality, and earnings
   mobility. Tech. rep. Center for Economic Studies, US Census Bureau.
Schubert, Gregor, Anna Stansbury, and Bledi Taska (2020).  Monopsony and Outside Op-


   tions. In:   Available at SSRN.
Shimer, Robert and Lones Smith (2001).  Matching, search, and heterogeneity. In:     The BE
   Journal of Macroeconomics     1.1.


Sokolova, Anna and Todd Sorensen (2018).  Monopsony in Labor Markets: A Meta-Analysis.


   In:




                                              40
Song, Jae et al. (2018).  Firming up inequality. In:   The Quarterly Journal of Economics
   134.1, pp. 150.


Sorkin, Isaac (2018).  Ranking rms using revealed preference. In:   The quarterly journal of
   economics   133.3, pp. 13311393.


Webber, Douglas A (2015).  Firm market power and the earnings distribution. In:      Labour
   Economics   35, pp. 123134.


 (2018).  Employment Adjustment over the Business Cycle: The Impact of Competition


   in the Labor Market. In:




                                           41
Figure 1: Changes in hourly wages across job separations for rm quartile-to-
quartile transitions

                                8.5
      Mean log wage of movers




                                  8




                                7.5




                                  7
                                      -2                      -1                            0                  1
                                                                      Event year

                                                         1 to 1      1 to 2        1 to 3       1 to 4
                                                         4 to 1      4 to 2        4 to 3       4 to 4



  Note:                         The legend indicates origin quartile to destination quartile, where quartiles are dened
   along the distribution of the average rm wage, using only workers who stay at the rm over
   the 6-year period. The change in wage is shown for movers, who are dened as workers who
   make a between-rm job-to-job transition at any point during the period and are observed for
   at least 9 consecutive quarters at the each rm before and after the move. The quarter of sep-
   aration and the following quarter are omitted. This exercise is repeated for each 6-year period
   (2000-2005, 2006-2011 and 2012-2017), the mover wage proles are stacked, and the averages
   of the event quarter are plotted by quartile-transition categories.




                                                                     42
                                                 Figure 2:   Separations and rm wage eects


                                      1
    Separations (relative to mean)




                                     .8
                                                                                     Elasticity (trimmed) = -1.444 (0.092)
                                                                                    Elasticity (untrimmed) = -1.261 (0.074)


                                     .6




                                     .4




                                     .2



                                          -.75       -.5         -.25          0           .25               .5               .75
                                                                AKM Firm effect (hourly wages)


Note:                                The gure illustrates the split-sample approach using a control function. Residuals are
 calculated from a regression of own-sample rm eects on the complement-sample rm eects,
 and used as a control in a regression of separations on own-sample rm eects. The plotted
 points show the binned scatter points of this latter regression (i.e., depicting the partial cor-
 relation). The vertical axis is separations divided by mean separations such that the slope of
 the line represents the elasticity. The blue points represent quantiles of the trimmed sample,
 which excludes the top and bottom 2.5 percent of the rm eects distribution. The red points
 represent quantiles of the excluded sample only, which we consider outliers. The trendline is a
 cubic polynomial tted to the trimmed sample.




                                                                          43
     Figure 3:             Binned scatterplots of separation and rm-component of wages
                                                     (a) Change in log own wage on change in log rm wage (rst stage)


                                                     .2




                                                     .1
                    Difference in log wage




                                                      0




                                                     -.1                                                    Elasticity = 0.176 (0.004)




                                                     -.2
                                                           -1                 -.5                       0                                .5
                                                                             Difference in log firm average wage



                   (b) Probability of separation on change in own wage (with control function)


                                                     1.2


                                                                                                 Elasticity = -2.100 (0.059)
                    Separations (relative to mean)




                                                       1




                                                      .8




                                                      .6




                                                      .4
                                                           -.2       -.1                  0                  .1                     .2
                                                                           Difference in firm component of log wage



Notes :   Panel (a) shows the rst stage relationship between       ln(wagei,t+1 ) and ln(w        ¯i,I (i),t ), where
ln(w
   ¯i,I (i),t )   is the change in average rm wage for individual   i at E-E separation date t - 1 compared
to the intermediate rm at date t, and ln(wagei,t+1 ) is ln(wagei,t+1 ) - ln(wagei,t-1 ). Panel (b) shows
the relationship between separations and ln(wagei,t+1 ), instrumenting by ln(w       ¯i,I (i),t ) using a control
function, i.e., controlling for the residuals from a regression of ln(wagei,t+1 ) on ln(w  ¯i,I (i),t ). Separation
indicates the probability of separation from the intermediate rm.                                                 All specications include xed eects
L(Historyi,t,d )   corresponding to interacted event and calendar time by origin rm by worker tenure at ori-
gin rm (8 bins) by initial wage at the origin rm (8 bins), and are clustered at the level of origin rm by
time. The sample consists of the rst 16 quarters after initial separation from the origin rm. See text for
sample construction.


                                                                                         44
        Event study of workers' wages and separation behavior following move-
Figure 4:
ment to a higher wage rm
                                           (a) Dierence in own wage against dierence in log rm average wage


                                            .2




                                           .15
                  Difference in log wage




                                            .1




                                           .05




                                                0


                                                    -10         -5                0                     5                 10   15
                                                                     Quarters since transition to Intermediate firm



                                                    (b) Retention rate against dierence in log rm average wage


                                            1

                                           .9

                                           .8

                                           .7
                  Fraction retained




                                           .6

                                           .5

                                           .4

                                           .3

                                           .2

                                           .1

                                            0
                                                    0                 4                       8                         12          16
                                                                     Quarters since transition to Intermediate firm

                                                                          Sample mean             +1 change in log firm wage




Notes :   Panel (a) plots the rst stage regression                                    
                                                                           ln(wagei,t+k ) = k ln(w
                                                                                         coecients from¯i,I (i),t ) +
L(Historyi,t,d ) × 1t+k + i,t+k ,                                           k  [-9, 16], where ln(w
                                                             separately for each event-time period     ¯i,I (i),t ) is
the change in average rm wage for individual i at E-E separation date t - 1 compared to the intermediate
rm at date t, and ln(wagei,t+k ) is ln(wagei,t+k ) - ln(wagei,t-1 ). Panel (b) reports coecients from the
reduced form specication Ri,t+k = t ln(w   ¯i,I (i),t ) + L(Historyi,t,d ) × 1t+k + i,t+k , where Ri,t+k denotes
retention at the intermediate rm, separately for each event-time period k  [1, 16]. All specications include
xed eects L(Historyi,t,d ) × 1t+k corresponding to interacted event and calendar time by origin rm by
worker tenure at origin rm (8 bins) by initial wage at the origin rm (8 bins), and are clustered at the level
of origin rm by time. Change in own wage is censored at the 1% tails. See text for sample construction.


                                                                                         45
Table 1:    Separations and recruits elasticities to rm component of wage using
AKM
                                                   Wage                       Firm FE

                                          (1)           (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)
            All separations             -0.282         -0.51     -0.622   -1.342    -1.448
                                        (0.005)    (0.01)       (0.015)   (0.085)   (0.095)
            E-E separations             -0.317     -0.533        -0.753   -1.677    -1.811
                                        (0.007)    (0.013)      (0.023)   (0.127)   (0.141)
            E-N separations             -0.291     -0.422        -0.578   -1.209    -1.303
                                        (0.005)    (0.01)       (0.014)   (0.075)   (0.085)
            E-E recruits                 0.266         0.127     0.067     0.413    0.438
                                        (0.022)    (0.031)      (0.017)   (0.059)   (0.064)
            Pct. EE-recruits             0.47          0.47      0.464     0.464    0.465


            Labor Supply Elasticity      0.355         0.879     1.345     2.69     2.912
                                        (0.024)    (0.037)      (0.039)   (0.199)   (0.221)


            Obs (millions)               7.348         7.348     69.072   69.072    68.553
            Log hourly wage                             Y          Y         Y        Y
            Hazard spec.                   Y            Y
            Firm FE                                                          Y        Y
            Split-sample                                                              Y
            F-stat                                                                   9792

 Note:     The unit of observation for the hazard specications is an employment spell, and for the
   linear specications is each worker-quarter record.          The column 1 regressor is log quarterly
   wage. Elasticities are reported in each cell for the linear specications, by dividing the regres-
   sion coecient by the corresponding sample mean of the outcome. Pct. E-E recruits indicates
   the average proportion of hires from employment. The rst stage F-stat is given for the row 1
   regression. Firm xed eects are censored at the 2.5 percent tails of the rm FE distribution.
   Standard errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                  46
         Alternative specications for separations and recruit elasticities to rm
   Table 2:
   component of wage using AKM
                               (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)
All separations               -0.878    -0.936    -0.776    -0.809     -1.262    -1.228    -1.336    -1.406
                             (0.066)   (0.071)   (0.033)    (0.039)   (0.075)   (0.065)   (0.055)    (0.063)
E-E separations               -0.866    -0.913    -0.946    -0.987     -1.607    -1.535    -1.545    -1.553
                             (0.057)   (0.061)   (0.053)    (0.065)   (0.115)   (0.109)    (0.08)    (0.102)
N-E separations               -0.709    -0.752    -0.857    -0.739     -1.115    -1.161    -1.191    -1.293
                             (0.054)   (0.058)   (0.033)    (0.034)   (0.066)   (0.053)    (0.05)    (0.048)
E-E recruits                  0.783     0.832     0.493      0.349     0.354     0.442     0.323      0.338
                             (0.112)   (0.121)   (0.042)    (0.045)   (0.071)   (0.064)   (0.064)    (0.075)
Pct. EE-recruits              0.464     0.465      0.43      0.467     0.463     0.465     0.466      0.465


Labor Supply Elasticity       0.865     0.908     1.348      1.493     2.597     2.429     2.578      2.629
                             (0.143)   (0.154)   (0.089)    (0.107)   (0.186)   (0.174)   (0.136)    (0.169)


Obs (millions)                7.348     7.304     16.45     77.767    70.609     51.92     41.796    51.629
Firm FE                         Y         Y         Y          Y         Y         Y         Y          Y
Split-Sample                              Y         Y          Y         Y         Y         Y          Y
F-stat                                             4586     12043      8637       9820     11015      9266


Hazard spec.                    Y         Y
Annual earnings                                     Y
Quarterly earnings                                             Y
No trimming                                                              Y


Controls
Tenure trend                                                                       Y
Indus.×County FE                                                                             Y
Indus.×Tenure trends                                                                                    Y

     Note:    The rst stage F-stat is given for the row 1 regression. The unit of observation for hazard
         specications is an employment spell, and for the linear specications, it is each job-quarter
         record. Column 2 uses the split sample in a control function for the hazard specication. An-
         nual earnings indicates the annualized panel (one observation per worker-year), from which the
         AKM rm FEs (using log annual earnings) and separations variables are estimated. Quarterly
         earnings indicates AKM rm FEs estimated with quarterly earnings. Elasticities are reported
         in each cell for the linear specications, by dividing the regression coecient by the correspond-
         ing sample mean of the outcome. Tenure refers to the number of quarters since the job started,
         is coded as a continuous variable and includes control terms up to a quadratic power of tenure.
         Industry is dened at the 1-digit level. Firm xed eects are censored at the 2.5 percent tails of
         the rm FE distribution, except where `No trimming' is indicated. Standard errors are shown
         in parentheses are clustered at the rm level.




                                                     47
             Falsication test: Do match residuals predict future AKM rm quality
      Table 3:
      of movers?
                                   Future Firm FE                                Positive change in Firm FE

                          (1)          (2)      (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)       (7)          (8)
Match eect               0.058      0.058     0.060         -0.003       0.156        0.158     0.167     0.060
                        (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.004)        (0.000)     (0.007)      (0.006)   (0.009)   (0.001)
Firm eect                0.513      0.430     0.504          0.444       -1.045       -1.202    -1.037   -1.174
                        (0.011)    (0.011)   (0.011)        (0.011)     (0.029)      (0.031)   (0.029)   (0.030)


Obs                     1625209   1497149    1393070        1386540     1625209      1497149   1393070   1386540


Controls
Industry   ×   county                  Y                                                Y
Tenure                                          Y                                                 Y
Industry   ×   tenure                                         Y                                                Y

       Note:    The match eect is calculated as the average residual from the AKM by worker-rm match.
           The sample is restricted to E-E separation quarters.       The outcomes refer respectively to the
           AKM rm wage eect at the new rm (columns 1-4), and an indicator for a positive change
           compared to the previous rm (columns 5-8). Industry has 8 categories, and tenure indicates a
           fourth degree polynomial.




                                                       48
                  Table 4:   Separations elasticities based on matched event study
                          (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)            (6)      (7)       (8)          (9)
First stage              0.122     0.148     0.148         0.176      0.173       0.070        0.165     0.171     0.173
                        (0.006)   (0.001)   (0.003)       (0.004)     (0.003)    (0.009)      (0.007)   (0.006)   (0.006)
IV estimates
Separations              -0.761    -2.431    -2.475       -2.100      -2.014      -1.293      -2.084     -2.085    -2.163
                        (0.051)   (0.033)   (0.059)       (0.054)     (0.040)    (0.513)      (0.096)   (0.096)   (0.080)
E-E Separations          -1.352    -4.000    -4.341       -4.031      -3.606      -1.754      -4.326     -4.379    -4.201
                        (0.096)   (0.079)   (0.144)       (0.154)     (0.108)    (1.549)      (0.304)   (0.314)   (0.234)
E-N Separations          -0.958    -3.519    -3.600       -3.312      -2.987      -1.230      -3.551     -3.620    -3.441
                        (0.079)   (0.060)   (0.108)       (0.115)     (0.079)    (0.918)      (0.218)   (0.227)   (0.174)


Obs                      8.281     7.380     3.078         3.068      4.172       3.068        1.513     1.511     1.868
Movers                  852341    805633    347418        346261      474817     346140       160606    160443    194976
Fstat (IV)                282      7053       1844         1397        2847            46       522       582          542
Coarsened controls                                                      Y


Interacted controls
Time                       Y         Y         Y             Y          Y              Y         Y         Y           Y
× Firm                               Y         Y             Y          Y              Y         Y         Y           Y
×wage0 × tenure                                              Y          Y              Y         Y         Y           Y
× 3 qtr wage lags                                                                                          Y


Other controls
O-I Firm-pair FE                                                                       Y
AKM Worker FE                                                                                                          Y


Sample restricted based on
Column 4                                       Y
Column 8                                                                                         Y

         Note:   See text for sample construction. The full instrumental variables specication is provided
           in equations (12) and (13) in the main text. The outcomes          sI
                                                                               i,t+k   indicate separation, E-E sep-
           aration and E-N separation such that      s   is missing for all periods after a single re-separation
           (and E-N re-separating workers are missing for the E-E separation outcome; similarly for the
           E-N separation outcome). Each of these regressions includes xed eects as indicated, where
           `×' indicates that xed eects are interacted.      W age0   indicates the wage at hire, and 3 qtr wage
           lags indicates 3 quarters of pre-separation wages (Origin rm). Fixed eects are divided into 8
           equal bins, except where coarsened which indicates that 4 bins are used instead. O-I Firm-pair
           FE indicate xed eects for every Origin-Intermediate rm pair. AKM Worker FE indicates a
           continuous control for the AKM worker xed eect from the previous time period. The sam-
           ple is restricted to the post-t period. Where indicated, the sample is additionally restricted for
           comparability to the estimable sample for the corresponding set of xed eects. Change in own
           wage is trimmed at the 1% tails. All regressions are clustered at the level of origin rm by ini-
           tial separation quarter. Only elasticities are reported by dividing regression coecients by the
           average relevant sample re-separation rate.


                                                           49
Table 5:Alternative specications for separations elasticities based on matched
event study
                               (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)         (7)
  First stage                0.176      0.171       0.177                        0.324       0.162
                             (0.004)   (0.004)     (0.004)                       (0.004)    (0.024)
  IV estimates
  Separations                -2.100     -1.961     -1.992    -2.027    -0.272    -1.536      -2.322
                             (0.054)   (0.057)     (0.054)   (0.072)   (0.012)   (0.037)    (0.527)
  E-E Separations            -4.031     -3.771     -3.803    -3.996    -0.445    -3.083      -4.100
                             (0.154)   (0.161)     (0.153)   (0.210)   (0.026)   (0.115)    (1.068)
  E-N Separations            -3.312     -3.131     -3.149    -3.178    -0.385    -2.411      -2.960
                             (0.115)   (0.122)     (0.116)   (0.152)   (0.026)   (0.079)    (0.877)


  Obs (millions)             3.068      2.999       2.984     3.069     3.073    3.082       0.112
  Movers                     346261    340000      338562    346714    347193    346684      11044
  Fstat (IV)                  1397       1279       1345       196                4447         32
  Quarterly Earnings                                                               Y
  Mass layos                                                                                   Y


  Instrument
  Firm wage                    Y          Y             Y                          Y           Y
  BLM rm cluster                                                Y
  OLS                                                                    Y


  Controls
  Firm value                              Y
  Firm amenities value                                  Y

 Note:     Main spec. FE correspond to table 4 column 4 and are rm by event and calendar time by
   tenure bin by initial wage at hire, all for the origin rm, and where tenure and hire wage are
   divided into 8 bins. Firm value,    V EE   is estimated based on the procedure described in Sorkin
   (2018) over the full sample of observations in the worker-quarter panel, and for the separa-
   tions regression in column 2 above has elasticity -0.222 (SE=0.033). The rm amenities value
   is calculated as the dierence between the AKM rm eect and rm value,            V EE ,   and the sep-
   arations elasticity with respect to the amenities value in column 3 is -0.291 (SE=0.038). BLM
   rm decile is estimated based on the procedure described in Bonhomme, Lamadon and Man-
   resa (2019), and is used as an alternative instrument in place of the rm wage. OLS indicates
   that the rm wage instrument is not used, i.e., separations are regressed directly on the change
   in log own wage at initial transition. Quarterly earnings indicates the main specication with
   quarterly earnings instead of hourly wage, for both the rm and own wage changes. Mass lay-
   os correspond to the quarter of initial transition from the Origin rm, and are dened in the
   full panel (before restrictions based on rm size and short spells) following the WARN Act def-
   inition: a rm with at least 100 full time workers has at least either (a) 500 fewer workers in
   the following 4 quarters, or (b) 1/3 fewer workers in the following 4 quarters. Standard errors
   shown in parentheses are clustered at the level of Origin rm by initial separation quarter.




                                                   50
   Table 6:   Heterogeneity in separation elasticities based on matched event study
                                           First stage        Separations      E-E separations     Movers
Panel A: Industry of destination rm
Manufacturing                            0.178    (0.01)    -2.287   (0.298)   -4.136    (0.804)    36919
Wholesale, trade & transport             0.188   (0.008)    -1.394   (0.159)   -3.391    (0.487)    63158
Prof., business & nancial services       0.117    (0.01)    -3.91    (0.267)   -7.974    (0.856)    71620
Education and Health                     0.154   (0.006)    -2.148   (0.158)   -3.777    (0.503)    58072
Art, Accommodation & Food                0.238   (0.021)    -1.201   (0.255)   -2.301    (0.786)    22999


Panel B: Geographic zone of destination rm
Portland metro                           0.159   (0.005)    -2.237   (0.132)   -4.584    (0.397)    92123
Non-Portland metro                       0.182   (0.007)    -1.969   (0.142)   -3.648    (0.472)    51957


Panel C: HHI (employment)
0-500                                    0.172   (0.007)    -1.757   (0.154)   -3.645     (0.5)     46675
500-1500                                 0.163   (0.011)    -1.668   (0.277)   -2.701    (0.956)    30460
1500+                                    0.159   (0.007)    -2.241   (0.231)   -4.066    (0.732)    48489


Panel D: HHI (payroll)
0-500                                    0.182   (0.008)    -1.712   (0.157)   -3.597    (0.51)     44997
500-1500                                  0.16    (0.01)    -1.437   (0.311)   -3.594    (1.183)    29222
1500+                                    0.158   (0.007)    -2.372   (0.206)   -4.086    (0.624)    50986


Panel E: Period of initial separation
2003-2006                                 0.17   (0.004)    -2.353   (0.108)   -4.489    (0.277)    91712
2007-2009                                0.171   (0.013)    -2.044   (0.154)   -4.194    (0.406)    69886
2010-2012                                0.178    (0.01)    -2.481   (0.127)   -4.687    (0.306)    79758


Panel F: Quartile of pre-separation wage
Quartile 1                               0.194   (0.004)    -1.46    (0.054)   -2.337    (0.133)    86475
Quartile 2                               0.198   (0.009)    -1.979    (0.1)    -4.088    (0.294)    68597
Quartile 3                               0.168   (0.013)    -2.451   (0.176)   -5.438    (0.571)    66691
Quartile 4                               0.127   (0.006)    -2.282    (0.2)    -3.966    (0.502)    81470


Panel G: Time horizon
4-quarter out                            0.176   (0.004)    -2.01    (0.051)   -3.082    (0.116)    346261
8-quarter out                            0.176   (0.004)    -2.262   (0.057)   -3.547    (0.132)    346261
12-quarter out                           0.176   (0.004)    -2.149   (0.054)   -3.746    (0.141)    346261

    Note:    Industry is dened at the 1-digit level. Agriculture, mining, utility and construction,
        and other industries have been excluded due to low number of movers. Professional, business
        and nancial services includes the Information industry. Period of separation indicates the year
        of initial separation: the worker is tracked over the following 4 years. Portland metro indicates
        the Portland metro commuting zone. HHI indicates the annual commuting zone by industry
        (4-digit) Herndahl-Hirschman Index using employment and payroll respectively. Time hori-
        zon censors the sample at dierent maximum quarters, and presents the average elasticity over
        that period. Standard errors shown in parentheses are clustered at the level of Origin rm by
                                                     51
        initial separation quarter.
A     Additional Tables and Figures


    Table A1:   Relationship between AKM Wage components and separations
                                    (1)              (2)                        (3)

                                   Firm      Firm      Worker        Firm     Worker    Match
     All separations              -1.342    -0.739         -0.641   -0.746     -0.636   -3.279
                                  (0.085)   (0.078)    (0.016)      (0.078)   (0.016)   (0.04)
     E-E separations              -1.677    -1.005         -0.762   -1.019     -0.753   -4.867
                                  (0.127)   (0.118)    (0.023)      (0.117)   (0.023)   (0.069)
     E-N separations              -1.209    -0.605         -0.595   -0.613     -0.59    -3.103
                                  (0.075)   (0.07)     (0.014)      (0.07)    (0.014)   (0.053)
     E-E recruits                  0.413    0.423          -0.058   0.421      -0.056   0.238
                                  (0.059)   (0.05)     (0.013)      (0.05)    (0.013)   (0.009)
     Pct. EE-recruits              0.464    0.482          0.482    0.482      0.482    0.482
     Labor Supply Elasticity       2.69      1.38          1.496    1.407      1.479    8.582
                                  (0.199)   (0.185)    (0.038)      (0.184)   (0.038)   (0.106)


     Obs (millions)               69.072          68.598                      68.598


     Regressors
     Firm FE                            Y     Y              Y        Y          Y        Y
     Worker FE                                Y              Y        Y          Y        Y
     Match FE                                                         Y          Y        Y

Note:   Each supercolumn row indicates a single regression. Specication 1 is reproduced for com-
    parison as the linear specication using the AKM rm xed eect.              Specication 2 adds the
    AKM worker xed eect as a regressor.       Specication 3 adds the match eect, which is cal-
    culated as the average residual per worker-rm match, where the residual is the hourly wage
    minus the AKM rm and worker xed eects. Fixed eects are trimmed at their 2.5% tails 
    see text for sample construction.




                                               52
  Table A2:   Supplementary estimates for AKM rm wage and separations
                                                     (1)      (2)       (3)
                     All separations            -1.342       -1.19    -2.059
                                                (0.085)     (0.076)   (0.095)
                     E-E separations            -1.677       -1.53    -2.565
                                                (0.127)     (0.116)   (0.136)
                     E-N separations            -1.209      -1.016    -1.843
                                                (0.075)     (0.064)   (0.096)
                     E-E recruits                   0.413   0.353     0.351
                                                (0.059)     (0.053)   (0.064)
                     Pct. EE-recruits               0.464   0.482     0.464


                     Labor Supply Elasticity        2.69    2.441     4.392
                                                (0.199)     (0.183)   (0.216)


                     Obs (millions)             69.072      68.598    69.072
                     BLM                                                Y
                     F-stat                                            270


                     Firm FE from
                     Main sample                     Y                  Y
                     CCK                                      Y

Note:   Specication 1 reproduces the AKM linear specication for comparison. Specication 2
 uses the rm eects estimated using code from Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016). Specication
 3 uses the BLM rm deciles as instruments, based on the procedure described in Bonhomme,
 Lamadon and Manresa (2019). Fixed eects are trimmed at their 2.5% tails  see text for sam-
 ple construction.




                                               53
Figure A1: Changes in hourly wages and incidence of job separations for quartile-
to-quartile transitions

                               8.5
     Mean log wage of movers




                                 8




                               7.5




                                 7
                                     -2                      -1                            0                   1
                                                                     Event year

                                                        1 to 1      1 to 2        1 to 3       1 to 4
                                                        4 to 1      4 to 2        4 to 3       4 to 4



 Note:                         The legend indicates origin quartile to destination quartile, where quartiles are dened
   along the distribution of the average rm wage, using only workers who stay at the rm over
   the period. The change in wage is shown for movers, who are dened as workers who make a
   job-to-job transition at any point over the period and are observed for at least 9 consecutive
   quarters at the same rm before and after. The quarter of separation and the following quar-
   ter are omitted since these represent quarters that were partially worked, and are particularly
   susceptible to measurement error in wages.                          This exercise is repeated for each 6-year period
   (2000-2005, 2006-2011 and 2012-2017), the mover wage proles are stacked, and the averages
   of the event quarter by quartile-transition categories are plotted. The thickness of the lines is
   proportional to the number of job-to-job separations between the relevant quartiles over the
   full panel 2000-2017 (not restricting by tenure). Low quartile rms have much higher job-to-job
   separation rates as indicated by the thickness of the linesthan the high quartile rms. More-
   over, the ows are not symmetric: more workers move from low to high wage quartiles (red
   solid lines) than vice versa (blue dashed lines), which is consistent with high quartile rms be-
   ing higher rent jobs. The asymmetric ows across quartiles capture the separations elasticity;
   increases in wages have more separations than decreases in wages. This gure shows simulta-
   neously the lack of wage changes prior to a move (at pre-move trends), the eects rms have
   on wages (the magnitude of an individual wage change after a move) and that the volume of
   ows between rms are correlated with those eects (the thickness of the lines). Together this
   suggests that rm wage policies may be identiable from switchers, even as they inuence the
   direction and volume of switching.




                                                                    54
Figure A2:                                        Symmetry plot of log wage changes for quartile-to-quartile transitions

                                                       0
     Mean log wage change for downword movers




                                                                            Q3 and Q4
                                                      -.1              Q2 and Q3

                                                                               Q1 and Q2

                                                      -.2                                   Q2 and Q4


                                                                                                Q1 and Q3
                                                      -.3



                                                      -.4                                                              Q1 and Q4



                                                      -.5
                                                            0          .1                  .2                 .3            .4      .5
                                                                            Mean log wage change for upward movers

                                                                       Quartile transition log wage changes        45 degree line



 Note:                                          The gure shows the quartile to quartile log wage changes corresponding to the quartile
   transition event study above.                                            Upward mover indicates that the worker moved from a lower
   quartile to a higher quartile; downward mover indicates the worker moved to a higher quartile.
   For example, the point labelled `Q1 and Q4' shows the average log wage change for movers
   from quartile 1 to quartile 4 on the horizontal axis, and for movers from quartile 4 to quartile
   1 on the vertical axis. The dotted line shows the 45 degree (negative) slope from the origin:
   symmetric downward and upward log wage changes would lie on this line.




                                                                                           55
                                                 Figure A3:     Job-to-job separations and rm wage eects

                                          2.5
    E-E separations (relative to mean)




                                           2

                                                                                            Elasticity (trimmed) = -1.806 (0.138)
                                                                                           Elasticity (untrimmed) = -1.604 (0.114)

                                          1.5




                                           1




                                           .5




                                           0
                                                -.75          -.5      -.25          0            .25               .5               .75
                                                                       AKM Firm effect (hourly wages)


Note:                                    The gure illustrates the split sample approach using a control function. Residuals are
 calculated from a regression of own-sample rm eects on the complement-sample rm eects,
 and used as a control in a regression of E-E separations on own-sample rm eects. The plotted
 points show the binned scatter points of this latter regression (i.e. depicting the partial correla-
 tion). The vertical axis is E-E separations divided by mean E-E separations such that the slope
 of the line represents the elasticity. The blue points represent quantiles of the trimmed sample,
 which excludes the top and bottom 2.5 percent of the rm eects distribution. The red points
 represent quantiles of the excluded sample only, which we consider outliers. The trendline is a
 cubic polynomial tted to the trimmed sample.




                                                                                56
                                                Figure A4:   Job-to-job hires and rm wage eects


                                   1.2



                                   1.1
     E-E hire (relative to mean)




                                    1



                                    .9



                                                                                             Elasticity (trimmed) = 0.437 (.064)
                                    .8                                                     Elasticity (untrimmed) = 0.353 (0.070)



                                    .7


                                         -.75          -.5       -.25          0           .25               .5              .75
                                                                 AKM Firm effect (hourly wages)


Note: The gure illustrates the split sample approach using a control function. The plotted points

  show the E-E hires against own-sample AKM rm eects, while controlling for the residuals
  from a regression of own-sample rm eects on the complement-sample rm eects. The sam-
  ple is restricted to observations corresponding to hires. The vertical axis is E-E hires divided
  by mean E-E hires such that the slope of the line represents the elasticity. The blue points rep-
  resent quantiles of the trimmed sample, which excludes the top and bottom 2.5 percent of the
  rm eects distribution. The red points represent quantiles of the excluded sample only, which
  we consider outliers. The trendline is a cubic polynomial tted to the trimmed sample.




                                                                          57
                                             Figure A5:   Labor supply elasticity and rm wage eects

                                       1
    Log weighted moves (firm level)




                                      .5




                                       0                                            Elasticity (trimmed) = 2.988 (0.305)
                                                                                   Elasticity (untrimmed) = 2.767 (0.325)




                                      -.5


                                            -.75      -.5        -.25          0          .25              .5               .75
                                                                 AKM Firm effect (hourly wages)


Note:                            The gure illustrates the split sample approach using a control function, for the labor sup-
  ply elasticity estimated at the rm (not worker) level. The plotted points show the weighted
  average of log rm E-E separations, log rm E-N separations and log rm E-E hires against
  the AKM rm wage eects. The residuals from a regression of own-sample rm eects on the
  complement-sample rm eects are controlled for. The slope of the line represents the labor
  supply elasticity, where the reported coecient corresponds to the tted bins. The sample is
  restricted to the trimmed sample, which excludes the top and bottom 2.5 percent of the rm
  eects distribution. The trendline is a cubic polynomial tted to the trimmed sample. Points
  are plotted at the rm level and weighted by rm size.




                                                                          58
                                                        Figure A6:     Firm separations versus recruits

                                               .2
    Recruits (as a proportion of firm size)




                                              .15




                                               .1




                                              .05




                                               0
                                                    0           .1                  .2                    .3           .4           .5
                                                                      Separations (as a proportion of firm size)

                                                          Bins (weighted by firm size)        Potential outliers   45 degree line



Note:                                   The data is plotted at the rm level, with quarterly separations and recruits calculated as
  a proportion of rm size by rm for each 6 year period. Points are plotted at the rm level and
  weighted by rm size. Firms are classied as outliers in this gure if they are in the top or bot-
  tom 5% tails of the rm separations distribution. The 45 degree line from the origin indicates
  equal separations and recruits. The dashed vertical lines indicate the interquartile range (p25
  and p75 of the separations rate).




                                                                                         59
                                                      Figure A7:   Job-to-job re-separations and wages

                                          1.5                                              Elasticity = -3.404 (0.108)
    E-E separations (relative to mean)




                                           1




                                           .5

                                                -.2            -.1                  0                  .1                .2
                                                                     Difference in firm component of log wage


Note:                                    The plotted points are restricted to the rst 16 quarters after initial separation from the
  origin rm. The vertical axis indicates the probability of E-E separation from the intermedi-
  ate rm, divided by the average E-E separations. The gure shows the instrumental variables
  relationship between E-E separations and change in log own wage, using a control function,
  i.e. controlling for the residuals from a regression of change in log own wage on change in log
  rm wage. The specication includes xed eects for interacted calendar time by origin rm
  by worker tenure at origin rm (8 bins) by initial wage at the origin rm (8 bins), and are
  clustered at the level of origin rm by calendar time. See text for sample construction.




                                                                                   60
B       Data

This is supplementary material to the data description in the main text. Our data sample


covers the period 2000-2017.        Oregon experienced recessions in 2001-2002 and 2008-2009


along with the rest of the country: the 2008 recession features prominently with a sharp


rise in the unemployment rate and an ensuing decline in the labor force participation rate


(see gure B1). We explain in detail the construction of the main sample, present summary


statistics, and plot the inequality trends in Oregon using our administrative hourly wage


data.


    The primary variables in the data by quarterly record are the calendar quarter date, the


worker identier unique to each worker, the rm identier (where each rm identier may


be associated with multiple establishments within Oregon), number of hours worked in the


quarter, the total earnings paid to the worker for the quarter. We also observe the industry

                                                                                                         14
of the worker (recorded as a NAICS code), and the location (recorded as the FIPS code)                        ,


though these are only used for heterogeneity estimates and controls for some robustness


checks.




B.1       Sample Construction


The data were cleaned in the following order, with corresponding summary statistics shown


in table 1. We attempt to follow the literature using matched employer-employee data as


exemplied by Card, Heining, and Kline (2013), Lachowska et al. (2020), Lamadon, Mogstad,


and Setzler (2019), Song et al. (2018), and Sorkin (2018).



    1. We begin with records which are uniquely identied by worker-rm-quarter from 2000

                                        15
        quarter 1 to 2017 quarter 4.         136 million such observations exist, corresponding to

  14 The county of many workers is missing for a large proportion of the records; additionally due to data
limitations restricting the link between specic establishments and workers, the Portland metro zone esti-
mates allocate workers to a zone if at least 90 percent of the employees of their rm are working in a single
zone.
  15 Although we have access to 1998 and 1999, we discard these years because the wage distributions in
these years are implausibly dierent from the rest of the panel (or corresponding years from other data



                                                    61
                           Figure B1:        Oregon employment, 2000-2017

       .8




       .6




       .4




       .2




          0
              2000        2003               2006              2009      2012              2015   2018
                                                               Year

                                      Labor force participation rate   Unemployment rate



  Note:       Data from the monthly CPS for Oregon, for the years 2000-2017 using individual popula-
    tion weights.



      317,000 dierent rms, and 5.3 million workers.



   2. We dene an employment spell as a group of consecutive quarters for the same worker

                                 16
      and rm identiers.               Note that the separations variable, which is important for our


      main analysis, is dened at this point: separation is equal to one at the end of any


      employment spell, and Employment to Employment (E-E) separation is equal to 1 if


      separation is 1 and the worker is employed at another rm in the current or following


      quarter. Similarly, hire is equal to one at the start of any spell, and E-E hire is equal


      to 1 if hire is 1 and the worker is employed at another rm in the current or previous


      quarter. Employment to Non-Employment (N-E) moves are the complement to E-E


      moves: N-E separations are separations that are not E-E separations, and E-E hires are



sources). This likely reect problems associated with the rst years of data collection.
  16 A rm identier may correspond to several distinct branches within the same rm.



                                                             62
  hires that are not E-E hires. We set wages to missing at the beginning and end of any


  spell, so as to keep comparability of full-quarter wages and avoid severe measurement


  error in hours due to partial quarters.



3. We drop entire employment spells with



   (a) Less than 100 hours per quarter on average over the employment spell, which is


       equivalent to less than 8 hours per week. This helps to exclude extremely irregular


       part time work, and is similar to one of the few other studies that observe hourly


       wages: Lachowska et al. (2020) drop workers who workers fewer than 400 hours


       in the year. The number of observations decrease from 136 to 120 million.


   (b) Hourly wage less than $2 (in 2017 dollars) in any quarter over the employment


       spell, because it is dicult to imagine a reason this may apply to a regular worker


       aside from measurement error  this only drops 1 million observations.            This


       restriction is similar to Lachowska et al. (2020) who drop workers with hourly


       wages below $2 (2005 dollars). Card, Heining, and Kline (2013), Lachowska et al.


       (2020), and Sorkin (2018) drop workers with annual earnings below about $3,000,


       which for a 40-hour workweek corresponds to $1.50 per hour (both well below


       the federal minimum wage). Song et al. (2018) restricts to workers earning the


       equivalent of minimum wage for 40 hours per week over 13 weeks, and Lamadon,


       Mogstad, and Setzler (2019) restrict to workers earnings $15,000 per year.


   (c) Fewer than 3 quarters in length, which drops an additional 9 million observations.


       This ensures that there is at least one full quarter observation (aside from hiring


       and separation quarters), giving at least one reliable hourly wage per worker-rm


       match, which is essential for our analysis. In a similar vein, Sorkin (2018) restricts


       to at least 2 quarters.



4. We then convert to a worker panel. For any worker-quarter, we keep the observation


  which belongs to the spell with the highest ave earnings  this corresponds to a dom-


                                            63
      inant employer and keeps spells intact.     Note that a separation is still counted if a


      worker's spell was cut o. Lamadon, Mogstad, and Setzler (2019), Card, Heining, and


      Kline (2013), Song et al. (2018), and Sorkin (2018) share this restriction of selecting


      the highest earning observation for a worker-quarter. We further exclude workers with


      more than 9 dierent employers in any year, following Lachowska et al. (2020).



  5. By 6-year panel (2000-2005, 2006-2011 and 2012-2017), we drop rms with fewer than


      20 workers in any year or rms classied as public administration. Song et al. (2018)


      restrict to rms with at least 20 employees per year, and Sorkin (2018) chooses a


      threshold of 15 workers per year.   Our large sample restriction is motivated by the


      estimation of the AKM rm eects, which requires a sucient number of observations


      per rm.



Quarterly and hourly wages are each winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles to reduce


noise from outliers. A limitation shared by most papers with matched employer-employee


data is that we cannot distinguish between E-E and E-N moves for workers that move out of


state. We also do not observe any non-wage worker characteristics: for example, we do not


observe age, so cannot restrict to workers aged 20-60 as in comparable studies (e.g. Card,


Heining, and Kline, 2013; Song et al., 2018).     We do observe rm industry and location


(county level), which we use for heterogeneity in the analysis.




B.2    Summary Statistics of Data


Broadly, our main sample is a quarterly worker-level panel restricted to large private sector


rms in Oregon over 2000-2017 (see table B1). In total, we have 87.6 million observations,


consisting of 3.4 million workers and 55,000 rms. Compared to the full universe of obser-


vations, our main sample has about two-thirds of all workers, and less than one-fth of the


rms (mainly due to the rm size restriction). Average annual worker earnings and weekly


hours are substantially higher, again mainly due to the rm size restriction together with the




                                             64
wage-size correlation. The exclusion of short employment spells decreases the separations


rate by about half, as well as the number of rms per worker. In our main sample, the mean

                                                                                                    17
separation rate is 8% per quarter, with about half of hires directly from other rms.


   The AKM analysis is implemented on the connected set of rms, which for this quarterly


panel only exclude a few thousand observations. The full panel is divided into 6-year periods,


with an AKM regression run on each 6 year panel and its constituent split samples.                       We


observe more than one rm for 40% of worker within each 6-year panel, which facilitates the


AKM estimation o movers in the sample. The sample statistics are broadly similar across


the panels, with a slight increase in real earnings over time. Employment-Employment hires


are lowest in the middle panel, which includes the 2008 recession.


   As explained in the main text, the main worker-quarter panel is used to extract a matched


event study panel.     All Employment-Employment separations in the main worker-quarter


panel are identied, an event-window around each E-E separation is isolated (9 pre-separation


and 17 post-separation), and all such event-windows are stacked. The rm before the E-E


separation is the Origin rm, the rm after the E-E separation is the Intermediate rm, and


the rm after that (to which the worker `re-separates') is the Final rm.


   We additionally restrict to workers who were at the Origin rm for at least 4 quarters


(whereas in the main worker-quarter panel, spells of 3 quarters are admitted), such that there


are at least 2 full quarters of wage observations. This facilitates the main specication which


conditions on the initial and end wages at Origin (end wage enters through the transition


wage dierence with the Intermediate rm). To reduce the impact of outliers, we winsorize


the 1% top and bottom tails of the change in own log wage at transition between Origin and


Intermediate rms. While the main worker-quarter panel is from 2000 to 2017, note that


the 8-quarter pre-transition and 16-quarter post-transition windows imply that the period


of admissible transitions between Origin and Intermediate is actually from 2002 to 2013.


   Sample statistics for this matched event study panel are presented in table B2. The full

  17 The quarterly separation rate is 17% before sample restrictions, which is similar to the separation rate
of 0.15 reported by Webber (2015) using the LEHD.



                                                    65
                    Table B1:    Sample statistics for Oregon 2000-2017
                  Obs       Workers     Firms     Earnings   Hours     No. rms      Separations   E-E hire
                 (total,     (total,    (total)   (mean,     (mean,    per worker     (mean,       (mean,
                millions)   millions)             annual)    weekly)    (mean)      quarterly)    quarterly)
Period: 2000-2017
All               136         5.3       316,910    27,169     27.49       5.71        16.6%         31.4%
Hours<100         120         4.7       302,541    29,636     30.54       4.13        12.1%         33.1%
wage>2            119         4.7       301,997    29,719     30.55       4.13        12.1%         33.1%
Spell>2           110         3.7       249,034    32,057     31.53       2.95         7.6%         35.2%
Priv. large       87.6        3.4       54,663     44,103     32.44       2.53         7.7%         46.9%
Connected         87.6        3.4       54,580     44,101     32.44       2.53         7.7%         46.9%


Period: 2000-2005
All               27.5        2.1       31,429     42,147     32.66       1.60         8.1%         48.5%
Split 1           13.7        1.0       31,410     42,136     32.66       1.60         8.1%         48.5%
Split 2           13.8        1.0       31,407     42,157     32.66       1.60         8.1%         48.5%


Period: 2006-2011
All               29.1        2.1       31,788     44,975     32.33       1.55         7.5%         45.2%
Split 1           14.5        1.0       31,772     44,968     32.33       1.55         7.5%         45.1%
Split 2           14.6        1.0       31,772     44,982     32.33       1.55         7.5%         45.2%


Period: 2012-2017
All               30.9        2.2       32,913     45,023     32.35       1.58         7.6%         46.9%
Split 1           15.5        1.1       32,898     44,993     32.35       1.58         7.6%         46.9%
Split 2           15.5        1.1       32,892     45,053     32.35       1.58         7.6%         46.9%

Note:     The rst three columns indicate totals (observations and workers are in millions) and other
  columns indicate means. No. of rms refers to the average number of rms a worker is at
  over the full corresponding period (either 6-year panel or full 18 year panel). Separations and
  E-E hire (proportion of hires from employment) are given in percentage terms. Earnings are in
  real dollars adjusted to 2017 using the Portland CPI. The top rows show the consecutive ex-
  clusion of employment spells based on hours (less than 100 hours per quarter on average), then
  wage (spell with any quarter less than $2 wage), then spell length (less than 3 quarters). Priv.
  large indicates rms with more than 20 workers and not in public administration. All summary
  statistics for the 6-year panels refer to the corresponding 6-year panel connected set with the
  full set of sample restrictions.




                                                  66
sample has nearly 900,000 initial E-E separations, each with an associated event-window,


corresponding to just under 700,000 workers and 30,000 Origin rms.         There are 175,000


unique Origin rm by calendar quarter `events', with an average of 245 workers each. These


workers move out to more intermediate rms (about 40,000). Earnings are roughly similar to


the main worker-quarter panel, and hours are slightly higher. Although we use a 16 quarter


post window, just over a third of the initial E-E separations end up re-separating to a nal


rm. These workers have lower average earnings. Note that tenure in table B2 is censored


16 quarters post event.


   The main estimation specication includes xed eects for Origin rm by calendar quar-


ter by worker tenure at Origin (8 categories) by wage at hire at Origin (8 categories). The


estimable sample is substantially smaller, as it requires sucient observations in every in-


teracted xed eects cell (see panel B). About 40% of the initial E-E separations survive,


corresponding to 4,000 Origin rms and 21,000 Origin rm quarter events.           Over 10,000


Intermediate rms are in this main estimation sample. As for the full sample, about a third


of these initial E-E separations end up re-separating to a nal rm.




B.3    Inequality Trends


During the 2000-2017 period, the variance in log hourly wages was mostly stable (gure B2).


This pattern is similar when we consider hourly or quarterly earnings, and when we consider


CPS data or the full universe of workers in our sample. Our main estimation sample (full


quarter observations at large rms, as described in the data section) shows a slight increase


in log variance. Figure B2 shows that the level of the variance is similar using CPS survey


data or the full universe of our records, about 1.5 for log quarterly earnings and 0.5 for log


hourly wage. The level of variance for our main sample is much smaller for log quarterly


earnings, as expected from the restrictions on part time work (low hours and short spells),


and slightly smaller for log hourly wages.


   The overall variance of log wages masks considerable heterogeneity in trends by wage



                                             67
                                   Figure B2:   Oregon wage variance, CPS versus UI data

                             2

                           1.75

                            1.5
    Variance of log wage




                           1.25

                             1

                            .75

                             .5

                            .25

                             0
                                  2000                    2005                            2010                  2015
                                                                              Year

                                         CPS, hourly             OR full sample, hourly          OR main sample, hourly
                                         CPS, quarterly          OR full sample, quarterly       OR main sample, quarterly



Note:                      OR indicates our Oregon unemployment insurance data, and CPS indicates CPS-ORG
 data for Oregon weighted by the population weight that is provided. The CPS and OR full
 samples include all workers (any rm size), while the OR main sample is used for our main
 analysis and is described in our data section in text. For CPS, the quarterly wage variable is
 total income from salary and wages for each survey respondent over the year divided by 4, and
 hourly wages is further divided by a variable for the usual number of hours worked in a week
 (multiplied by 13). Wages are deated to base year 2017 using Portland CPI.




                                                                         68
             Table B2:   Sample statistics for matched event study panel
                      Obs     Workers    Firms      Events      Workers     Earnings   Hours      Tenure
                    (total)    (total)   (total)    (total)     per event   (mean,     (mean,     (mean,
                                                                 (mean)     annual)    weekly)   censored)
 Panel A: Full sample
 Origin rm          872228    663279     27869      173257        245        42852      33.67       6.1
 Intermediate rm    872228    663279     38522                               44331      35.04       8.6
 Final rm           313019    204549     23319                               39944      35.04       5.0


 Panel B: Main estimation sample
 Origin rm          346261    259415      4011          20771     527        43871      34.25       6.0
 Intermediate rm    346261    259306     10215                               45574      35.45       8.8
 Final rm           117765     75964      7674                               39581      34.93       5.0

 Note:   All employment-employment separations in the main worker-quarter panel are identied,
   an event-window isolated (8 pre-separation and 16 post-separation), and stacked. The rst four
   columns indicate totals and other columns indicate means. `Events' refers to the total number
   of origin rm-quarters within which workers are compared. Earnings are annualized from quar-
   terly earnings tenure for the origin rm is censored at 8 quarters; and for both the intermediate
   and nal rm are censored at 16 quarters after initial separation. Main estimation sample indi-
   cates the estimable sample for the main specication, which includes rm by calendar quarter
   by tenure (8 categories) by wage at hire (8 categories), all for the origin rm.



percentile, as shown in Figure B3 (using the full universe of observations).             During this


period, the largest growth in hourly wages occurred at the top (e.g., 95th percentile and


90th percentiles), while the real wage fell on net at the middle (50th percentile). However,


during the same time wages rose at the bottom (5th and 10th percentiles), in part likely


due to Oregon's minimum wage policies. Overall, hourly wage inequality grew in the upper


half of the distribution, mirroring other states (e.g. Lachowska et al., 2020), even while


inequality fell in the bottom half. The patterns are qualitatively similar when we consider


quarterly earnings instead; however, the 90-50 gap in earnings grew somewhat more than


the equivalent gap in hourly wages over this period.




                                                   69
                                                              Figure B3:          Oregon wage percentile trends
                                                                                          (a) Hourly wages


                                                 15
             Value of log wage (vs 2000, x100)




                                                 10



                                                  5



                                                  0



                                                  -5



                                                 -10
                                                       2000                      2005                     2010                     2015                     2020
                                                                                                         Year

                                                                5th percentile             10th percentile       25th percentile          50th percentile
                                                                75th percentile            90th percentile       95th percentile




                                                                                        (b) Quarterly earnings


                                                 15
             Value of log earn (vs 2000, x100)




                                                 10


                                                  5


                                                  0


                                                  -5


                                                 -10


                                                 -15
                                                       2000                      2005                     2010                     2015                     2020
                                                                                                         Year

                                                                5th percentile             10th percentile       25th percentile          50th percentile
                                                                75th percentile            90th percentile       95th percentile




Note:   Earnings are in real Dollars adjusted to 2017 using the Portland CPI. The sample corre-
  sponds to the main worker-quarter panel (after restrictions).




                                                                                                     70
C     AKM


C.1       Procedure


We restrict to the largest connected set using the `igraph' package in R, after which we


use the Stata-based high dimensional xed eects estimator provided by Sergio Correia to


regress wages on rm, worker and calendar-quarter xed eects.          This applies to each of


the xed eects samples separately:     for example, the rm xed eects for the rst split


sample of 2000-2005 are found by restricting the main worker panel to the rst split sample


in 2000-2005, nding the largest connected set of rms, and then estimating the AKM.


    We check the estimates rm xed eects using the procedure from Card, Cardoso, and


Kline (2016), which is downloadable online. The correlation for the rm eects is 0.91, and


for the worker eects is 0.99. The wage variance decompositions are also very similar (see


below).


    The AKM estimates by stacked 6-year sample are persistent. Figure C1 presents a plot


of current versus next period rm hourly wage eects, with a resulting trimmed slope of 0.9


and R-squared of 0.7. The persistence across years of rm wage policies is consistent with


the ndings in Lachowska et al. (2020).




C.2       Decomposition


Table C1 provides the AKM decomposition in hourly wage and quarterly earnings inequality,


for 6 year blocks between 2000-2017, as well as for the full panel. For both log quarterly


earnings and log hourly wages, there is a slight increase in the overall variance between the


2000-2005 and 2012-2017 periods (0.37 to 0.41 for wages, and 0.59 to 0.64 for earnings). In


the full panel, rm eects explain around 19% (14%) of the variance of quarterly earnings


(hourly wages), and worker eects explain around 48% (55%) of the variance. There is also


assortative matching of workers and rms, with the covariance term explaining around 14%


(18%) of the variance. Consistent with other work, we see a clear increase in the covariance



                                             71
                                    Figure C1:   Persistence of AKM rm hourly wage eects

                              .5




                                          Slope (trimmed) = 0.899 (0.017)
    AKM Firm effect in t+1




                                            R-squared (trimmed)= 0.711




                               0




                              -.5
                                    -1                  -.5                       0               .5           1
                                                                        AKM Firm effect

                                                   Trimmed sample           Excluded sample   45 degree line



Note:                        AKM rm wage eects are estimated for each 6 year period (2000-2005, 2006-2011 and
 2012-2017) using hourly wages. For each rm, the AKM rm eect is plotted against its rm
 eect in the next 6-year period, and binned. The red indicates censored rm eects, which rep-
 resent the 2.5% top and bottom tails of the rm eects distribution. Points are plotted at the
 rm level and weighted by rm size.




                                                                            72
term for both wages and earnings over this period consistent with greater sorting. At the


same time, there is a slight increase in the rm component of quarterly earnings variance,


but a small decrease in the case of hourly wages. The R-squared is 0.8 to 0.9 for all AKM


regressions, and is higher for hourly wages compared to quarterly earnings. It is also not


much lower than the R-squared on a comparable match eects model (xed eects for every


job, instead of additive xed eects for workers and rms as imposed by AKM), which for the


2012-2017 period using hourly wages is 0.91 (0.9 for AKM). This implies that the variation


in log wages explained by match eects is small.


   Comparable studies nd similar AKM decompositions. Using annual earnings data for


the US over the years 2000-2008, Sorkin (2018) nds that rm eects explain 14% of the


log variance, worker eects explain 51%, and the covariance term explains 10%. Lamadon,


Mogstad, and Setzler (2019) and Song et al. (2018) nd a lower AKM rm eects share


of 9% using annual earnings for a similar period. Lachowska et al. (2020) nd using data


from Washington over 2002-2014 for their annual log earnings AKM decomposition (plug-in


version) that rm eects explain 19%, worker eects 54%, and the covariance term 17%;


similarly to us, they also nd that the share explained by rm eects decreases (to 11%)


when using hourly wages instead of quarterly earnings.


   Our preferred AKM specication relies on split-sample estimation. Table C2 provides the


decomposition for each split sample using hourly wages, which is very similar across the two


split samples and compared to the full sample decomposition above. Panel C shows some


cross-sample statistics:   the percentage covariance between own-sample and complement-


sample xed eects is lower than the direct rm eects variance in Table C1, and the


percentage explained by the covariance between own sample worker eects and complement


sample rm eects is higher than the comparable covariance in table C1.


   Finally, we show that the AKM decomposition is very similar using code from Card,


Cardoso, and Kline (2016) (table C3). As in table C1, for the last period the share explained


by rm eects is lowest and the covariance between worker and rm eects is highest. The




                                             73
                                Table C1:   AKM decomposition
                                            2000-2005     2006-2011   2012-2017   2000-2017
   Panel A: Earnings
   Var(Y)                                      0.592         0.63       0.639       0.621
   % Var(Firm FE)                              15%           15%        16%         19%
   % Var(Worker FE)                            58%           58%        56%         48%
   % Var(Residual)                             15%           15%        14%         21%
   % 2×Cov(Firm FE, Worker FE)                 11%           12%        14%         14%
   % 2×Cov(Y, Firm FE)                         42%           43%        46%         52%
   Obs (millions)                              22.60        25.20       25.70       73.40
              2
   Adjusted R                                  0.836        0.844       0.852        0.79


   Panel B: Wage
   Var(Y)                                      0.37         0.395       0.409       0.392
   % Var(Firm FE)                              12%           11%        10%         14%
   % Var(Worker FE)                            62%           63%        63%         55%
   % Var(Residual)                             13%           11%        10%         17%
   % 2×Cov(Firm FE, Worker FE)                 14%           16%        17%         18%
   % 2×Cov(Y, Firm FE)                         37%           37%        38%         45%
   Obs (millions)                              22.60        25.20       25.70       73.40
              2
   Adjusted R                                  0.863        0.888        0.9        0.844

Note:   All subsets use the relevant connected set, where the main sample is restricted to private
  rms larger than 20 workers (full sample description in text). Firm xed eects are censored at
  the 2.5 percent upper and lower tails of the rm distribution. For reference, the full jobs model
  adjusted   R2   for 2000-2017 is 0.88, and for 2012-2017 is 0.91.




                                                 74
                  Table C2:   AKM decomposition for split samples
                                                        2000-2005    2006-2011   2012-2017
   Panel A: Sample 1
   Var(Y)                                                  0.37        0.395        0.409
   % Var(Firm FE)                                          12%          12%         11%
   % Var(Worker FE)                                        63%          64%         64%
   % Var(Residual)                                         13%          11%         10%
   % 2 Cov(Firm FE, Worker FE)                             13%          14%         16%
   % 2 Cov(Y, Firm FE)                                     37%          37%         38%
   Obs (millions)                                         11.259       12.552      12.823
    2
   R                                                       0.864       0.888         0.9


   Panel B: Sample 2
   Var(Y)                                                  0.37        0.395        0.409
   % Var(Firm FE)                                          12%          12%         11%
   % Var(Worker FE)                                        63%          64%         64%
   % Var(Residual)                                         13%          11%         10%
   % 2 Cov(Firm FE, Worker FE)                             13%          14%         16%
   % 2 Cov(Y, Firm FE)                                     37%          37%         37%
   Obs (millions)                                         11.254       12.557      12.813
    2
   R                                                       0.864       0.889         0.9


   Panel C: Complement sample
   Var(Y)                                                  0.37        0.395        0.409
   % Cov(F irmF Eown ,     F irmF Ecomplement )            11%          10%          9%
   % 2 Cov(W orkerF Eown ,     F irmF Ecomplement )        16%          17%         19%
   Obs (millions)                                         22.227       24.808       25.33

Note:   All subsets use the relevant connected set, where the main sample is restricted to private
  rms larger than 20 workers (full sample description in text). The main sample is randomly
  split into two samples, stratifying by whether the worker moved rms and clustering by worker.
  Firm xed eects are estimated using log hourly wages, and censored at the 2.5 percent up-
  per and lower tails of the rm distribution.       Panel C shows the share of log wage variation
  explained by the covariance between the rm eects from a worker's own sample and the rm
  eects estimated using the alternate split-sample estimate for each worker's rm (comparable
  to the share explained by the variance of the rm eects); and the covariance between each
  individual's worker eect and the alternate split-sample rm eect estimate.




                                               75
                  Table C3:   AKM decomposition using alternative code
                                                 2000-2005    2006-2011   2012-2017
            Var(Y)                                   0.369      0.394       0.409
            % Var(Firm FE)                            12%       12%         11%
            % Var(Worker FE)                          63%       64%         64%
            % Var(Residual)                           13%       11%         10%
            % 2 Cov(Firm FE, Worker FE)               13%       13%         16%
            % 2 Cov(Y, Firm FE)                       37%       37%         38%
            Obs (millions)                           22.397    25.037      25.562
                       2
            Adjusted R                               0.863      0.896       0.900

 Note:   AKM rm eects are estimated using Matlab code from Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2015),
    for log hourly wages in the main worker-quarter panel (full sample description in text).   All
    subsets use the relevant connected set.



separations elasticity using these rm eects is also similar (if slightly lower), presented in


table A2.




C.3      Limited Mobility Bias


A prominent threat to the AKM estimation of rm eects is limited mobility bias (Andrews


et al., 2008).    We replicate the comparisons in Lachowska et al. (2020) for our data to


show that limited mobility bias likely becomes less severe with a longer panel and better


measurement of wages (table C4).


   Our panel has two advantages in addressing limited mobility bias. Firstly, a longer panel


allows for more movers between rms, which is the source of identication for the AKM rm


eects.   The quarterly frequency, as compared to the annual data of many other studies,


picks up more movers within the same time period. Secondly, insofar as rm pay policies


correspond to     hourly   wages, annual earnings as used by many studies are a noisy measure


of the rm eect. We observe hours, which allows us to estimate the rm eects on hourly


wages directly.


   These advantages of the panel contribute to better measurement of the AKM components.


The rst two columns show 2-year panels, and should be compared to the second 2 columns


which show 6-year panels. The share of variance explained by the rm eects decreases for



                                                76
the longer panel where more movers are observed, most noticeably for the annual earnings

                                          18
measure where we expect more noise.            A similar pattern is observed for the share of variance


explained across the panels: within each column, the share explained by rm eects decreases


with better wage measures.        On the other hand, the covariance between rm and worker


eects rises dramatically as the panel length increases and the earnings measure improves.


   Lower variance of rm eects and higher covariance between worker and rm eects


are the two predictions of reductions in limited mobility bias, which both come through


clearly for our data. Overall, comparing column 2 panel A (short panel, annual earnings) to


column 4 panel C (longer panel, hourly wage), the share of log variance explained by rm


eects decreases from 20% to 10%. The share explained by sorting, i.e. the covariance term,


increases from 2% (suggesting very little sorting) to 17% (suggesting substantial sorting).


Both features echo the ndings of Bonhomme et al. (2020) and Lachowska et al. (2020).




  18 The last column shows the full panel, where the share of variance explained increases, likely due to
actual increases in the variance, for example since more rms are included.



                                                    77
                Table C4:    AKM variance decomposition by panel length
                                            2-Year Panels             6-Year Panels         Full panel

                                        2002-2003      2013-2014   2000-2005   2012-2017    2000-2017
 Panel A: Annual earnings
 Var(Y)                                   0.528          0.584       0.56           0.603      0.596
 % Var(Firm FE)                            23%           20%         17%            18%        21%
 % Var(Worker FE)                          80%           75%         62%            59%        49%
 % 2×Cov(Firm FE, Worker FE)               -6%            2%         13%            16%        15%
 Obs (millions)                            1.81          2.02        6.61           7.51       21.80


 Panel B: Quarterly earnings
 Var(Y)                                   0.588          0.639       0.592          0.639      0.621
 % Var(Firm FE)                            18%           16%         15%            16%        19%
 % Var(Worker FE)                          70%           66%         58%            56%        48%
 % 2×Cov(Firm FE, Worker FE)                1%            7%         11%            14%        14%
 Obs (millions)                            7.46          8.48        22.40          25.60      73.40


 Panel C: Hourly wage
 Var(Y)                                   0.366          0.41        0.37           0.409      0.392
 % Var(Firm FE)                            13%           10%         12%            10%        14%
 % Var(Worker FE)                          70%           72%         62%            63%        55%
 % 2×Cov(Firm FE, Worker FE)                8%           12%         14%            17%        18%
 Obs (millions)                            7.46          8.48        22.40          25.60      73.40

  Note:    Earnings are quarterly total earnings; wages are quarterly hourly wages. All subsets use
    the relevant connected subset of the main panel (sample description in text).




   Finally, we replicate the mobility bias gure presented in Lamadon, Mogstad, and Setzler


(2019), while adding our improved measures of the rm eects for comparison. Figure C2


shows that as the share of movers retained increases, the share of log variance explained


by the variance in rm eects decreases substantially for the annualized earnings panel (by


about 8 percentage points)  as expected when limited mobility bias is reduced. However, as


argued above, the reduction in share explained is lower using quarterly earnings (6 percentage


points), or hourly wage (4 percentage points).          Moreover, the bias when using our split


sample measure (predicting own-sample rm eect by complement-sample rm eect) is


in the    opposite   direction: the share of variance explained increases with share of movers


retained.




                                                  78
                     Figure C2:                          Mobility bias by varying share of movers
                                              .25



                                               .2




                         Share Var(Firm FE)
                                              .15



                                               .1



                                              .05



                                               0
                                                    0               20              40             60              80                  100
                                                                           Movers retained (% of all movers)

                                                        Annual, earnings   Quarterly, earnings   Quarterly, wage   Quarterly, split sample



Notes :   The sample is restricted to the period 2013 to 2017 for comparability to other studies. The gure
shows the proportion of wage variance accounted for by the estimated wage premia, where the horizontal axis
indicates a subset of the data that randomly retains the corresponding share of movers. All subsets use the
relevant connected set of rms. Firm xed eects are censored at the 2.5 percent tails of the rm distribution.
The blue line indicates an annualized panel using total earnings, the purple indicates the quarterly panel
using total earnings, and the green indicates the quarterly panel using hourly wages. The red indicates the
quarterly panel using hourly wages, where the split sample approach is used such that each rm's wage eect
is the predicted value from a regression of own-sample rm eect on the complement sample rm eect.




                                                                                         79
