                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE:
               EVIDENCE FROM CHINA'S LOAN-LEVEL DATA

                                         Kaiji Chen
                                        Haoyu Gao
                                     Patrick C. Higgins
                                     Daniel F. Waggoner
                                          Tao Zha

                                     Working Paper 27763
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27763


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




We thank Markus Brunnermeier, Lawrence Christiano, Will Cong, Marty Eichenbaum, Zhiguo
He, Eric Leeper, Zheng Liu, Sergio Rebelo, Mark Spiegel, Robert Townsend, Shang-Jin Wei,
Wei Xiong, and Xiaoyun Yu, as well as seminar participants at 2019 AFR Summer Institute in
Economics and Finance, Third IMF-Atlanta Fed China Workshop, China International
Conference in Macroeconomics, International Monetary Fund, Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
Second HKUST-Jian Joint-Conference in Macroeconomics, ECB-Tsinghua Conference on
China, 2019 International Conference on "Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Frictions,"
Chinese University of Hong Kong, University of Virginia, and Princeton University for helpful
discussions and comments. Haoyu Gao acknowledges the research support from the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC 71702207 and 71850008). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kaiji Chen, Haoyu Gao, Patrick C. Higgins, Daniel F. Waggoner, and Tao Zha. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Stimulus Amidst the Infrastructure Investment Spree: Evidence from China's Loan-Level
Data
Kaiji Chen, Haoyu Gao, Patrick C. Higgins, Daniel F. Waggoner, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 27763
August 2020
JEL No. C13,C3,E02,E5

                                        ABSTRACT

We study the impacts of the 2009 monetary stimulus and its interaction with infrastructure
spending on credit allocation. We develop a two-stage estimation approach and apply it to
China's loan-level data that covers all sectors in the economy. We find that except for the
manufacturing sector, monetary stimulus itself did not favor SOEs over non-SOEs in credit
access. Infrastructure investment driven by non-monetary factors, however, enhanced the
monetary transmission to bank credit allocated to LGFVs in infrastructure and at the same time
weakened the impacts of monetary stimulus on bank credit to non-SOEs in sectors other than
infrastructure.

Kaiji Chen                                    Daniel F. Waggoner
Emory University                              Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
1602 Fishburne Drive                          1000 Peachtree Street N.E.
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240                        Atlanta, Georgia 30309-4470
and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta           Daniel.F.Waggoner@atl.frb.org
kaiji.chen@emory.edu
                                              Tao Zha
Haoyu Gao                                     Department of Economics
Renmin University of China                    Emory University
Beijing, China                                Rich Memorial Building
gaohaoyu@ruc.edu.cn                           1602 Fishburne Drive
                                              Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
Patrick C. Higgins                            and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta               and also NBER
1000 Peachtree Street, N.E.                   tzha@emory.edu
Atlanta, GA 30309-4470
patrick.higgins@atl.frb.org
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                              1

                                         I. Introduction

   During economic crises such as the 2008 global financial crisis, central banks around the
world (Federal Reserve System, European Central Bank, Bank of Japan, and People's Bank
of China) initiated massive monetary stimulus by providing ample money supply in an at-
tempt to bolster bank loans to businesses and rescue the sagging economy.1 At the same
time, policymakers sought to expand public investment, especially on infrastructure, to boost
domestic demands. How monetary stimulus, by interacting with expansionary public invest-
ment, translates into credit allocation to firms and businesses has been one of the central
issues both in the macro-finance literature and for policymakers. Empirical evidence on this
issue, however, has been scant for both developed and emerging-market economies.
   This paper addresses this issue from the perspective of China, the second largest economy
in the world. During the 2008 global financial crisis, growth of China's real gross domestic
product (GDP) plummeted from 13.6% in 2007Q2 to 6.4% in 2009Q1 (top chart of Fig-
ure 1). In an attempt to stem the sharp fall of aggregate output the People's Bank of China
(PBC) pursued extraordinarily expansionary monetary policy and increased M2 supply by
4.2 trillion RMB in 2009Q1 alone and by a total of 11.5 trillion RMB during the 2009Q1-Q3
period. Accordingly, the growth rate of total bank loans jumped to more than 25% during
the same period (bottom chart of Figure 1). Meanwhile, the State Council announced in
November 2008 a fiscal expansion plan throughout the country. As Xiong (2019) argues, lo-
cal governments' infrastructure investment plays a prominent role in understanding China's
economic growth. In particular, the government prioritized infrastructure investment as an
eective way to stimulate the overall economy after the 2008 global financial crisis. As shown
in Figure 2, infrastructure investment growth increased to more than 30% during 2009, in
contrast to more moderate growth of investment in other sectors. Such a monetary-fiscal
policy mix makes China an ideal case study to help gain a general perspective of how mon-
etary stimulus and its interaction with public investment driven by non-monetary shocks,
such as fiscal shocks, aect the banking system and the real economy.
   In this paper, we focus on a specific twofold question. How did the 2009 monetary stimulus
alone translate into credit allocations between dierent types of firms? How did infrastruc-
ture investment aect the monetary transmission mechanism? We construct a proprietary
micro dataset of new loans issued by the 17 largest Chinese banks to individual firms over
all sectors in the entire economy.2 Our dataset allows us to provide an empirical analysis
beyond the manufacturing sector and to show that other major sectors such as infrastructure
and real estate played a crucial role in the monetary transmission to the credit market.
   The main empirical challenge we face is to identify monetary stimulus from other aggregate
shocks that drive the fluctuation of infrastructure investment. Although fiscal policy plays
1
 Monetary policy, as well as fiscal policy, has been also expansionary since the outbreak of Covid-19.
2For  every one RMB loan allocated to the economy, 0.8 RMB is from these 17 largest banks. Thus, loans
originated from these commercial banks constitute a vast majority of bank loans in the Chinese economy.
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                 2

an important role in public or infrastructure investment (Leeper, Walker, and Yang, 2010), a
large fiscal expansion is often joined by a "tsunami of bank credit expansion" (Brunnermeier,
Sockin, and Xiong, 2017; Leeper, 2019). A failure to distinguish the eects of monetary
stimulus from those of infrastructure investment driven by non-monetary factors, such as
fiscal policy changes, would result in biased estimates of the eects of monetary stimulus
itself and its interaction with infrastructure investment.
   To correct for this endogeneity bias, we develop a two-stage empirical framework. In the
first stage, we develop a dynamic macro model to disentangle exogenous monetary policy
changes from other aggregate shocks in a system of equations. This multi-variable macro
model enables one to purge the portion of infrastructure investment fluctuation driven by
exogenous monetary policy changes and extract a series of infrastructure investment driven
only by shocks orthogonal to monetary policy shocks. In the second stage, we apply a
dynamic panel model to our unique loan-level data and estimate the impacts of monetary
stimulus and its interaction with infrastructure investment on newly issued loans. We show
that without the first stage estimation, the estimated interaction eect of monetary policy
shocks with infrastructure investment would be severely biased downward. To our knowledge,
this is a new methodological contribution to the macro-finance literature.
   We begin our empirical analysis by following the existing literature and applying our
dynamic panel model to the manufacturing sector. We find that bank credit in response to the
2009 monetary stimulus was disproportionately allocated to state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
in the manufacturing sector.3 The infrastructure investment spree spurred by non-monetary
shocks such as fiscal shocks reduced the monetary eects on bank credit to manufacturing
non-SOEs, but not to manufacturing SOEs. Both of these findings are consistent with the
results in the existing literature.4 For the economy as a whole, however, we find that (a)
monetary stimulus by itself did not generate favorable credit access enjoyed by SOEs over
non-SOEs and (b) when interacting with infrastructure investment, it had opposite eects
on SOEs and non-SOEs--a positive eect on SOE loans but a negative eect on non-SOE
loans. These opposite eects, both economically and statistically significant, did not exist
in the manufacturing sector.
   To understand why the monetary transmission mechanism within the manufacturing sector
diers from that outside of manufacturing, we extend our analysis to other major sectors
of the economy. These other sectors are infrastructure, real estate, and the rest of the
economy. We ask whether the 2009 monetary stimulus itself spawned preferential bank
3For  the Chinese economy, it is essential to study how credit and capital are allocated to state-owned
enterprises (SOEs) versus non-SOEs as the literature has documented that SOEs are less e cient than non-
SOEs (see, for example, Hsieh and Klenow (2009), Cong, Gao, Ponticelli, and Yang (2019), and Huang,
Pagano, and Panizza (Forthcoming)).
4Cong, Gao, Ponticelli, and Yang (2019) find that SOEs in the manufacturing sector enjoyed preferential
credit access over non-SOEs during the stimulus period. Huang, Pagano, and Panizza (Forthcoming) find
that local government debt crowded out private investment, but not investment by state-owned firms, in the
manufacturing sector.
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                  3

loans to SOEs in sectors other than manufacturing and whether infrastructure investment
driven by non-monetary shocks amplified or dampened the monetary transmission to credit
allocation to SOEs versus non-SOEs. In contrast to the manufacturing sector, we find that
the 2009 monetary stimulus did not favor SOEs over non-SOEs in loan allocations to the
non-manufacturing sector. Unlike manufacturing firms, most non-SOEs in infrastructure
and real estate were capital intensive and thus enjoyed implicit government guarantees of
their bank loans and, by the same token, bank credit to non-SOEs in the rest of the economy
was mainly in capital intensive sectors such as wholesale and retail trades.
   On the other hand, while weakening the monetary transmission to bank credit allocated
to non-SOEs in sectors other than infrastructure, infrastructure investment enhanced this
transmission to SOE loans within the infrastructure sector. We find that significantly positive
interaction eects of monetary stimulus on bank credit to SOEs in the infrastructure sector
were entirely driven by local government financing vehicles (LGFVs), since bank loans to
LGFVs enjoyed explicit local government guarantees.5 With the total loan volume made by
commercial banks severely constrained by the PBC's regulations, it is not surprising that
an increase of infrastructure spending dampened the expansionary monetary eect on bank
credit to non-SOEs in sectors other than infrastructure.
   How important was this credit channel for monetary policy to stimulate capital invest-
ment? In the last part of the paper, we address this question in two steps. We first estimate
the elasticity of investment to bank credit by merging the publicly available China Stock
Market & Accounting Research (CSMAR) database, which has business investment infor-
mation, and our proprietary banking database, which has firm-quarter loan information.
We then provide a back-of-envelope calculation of the response of investment to the 2009
monetary stimulus by taking into account both the estimated elasticity of investment to
bank credit and the estimated elasticity of bank credit to monetary stimulus. We find that
for the economy as a whole, the 2009 monetary stimulus itself generated higher investment
by non-SOEs, while infrastructure spending amplified the monetary eect on investment by
SOEs but dampened that eect on investment by non-SOEs. In sum, the total response of
SOE investment to the 2009 monetary stimulus was larger than that of non-SOE investment.
The infrastructure spending spree, therefore, was the key for understanding the eect of the
2009 monetary stimulus on reallocation of both credit and investment from non-SOEs to
SOEs in the economy as a whole.
   Our paper is related to the emerging empirical literature on China's post-2008 economic
stimulus plan. Cong, Gao, Ponticelli, and Yang (2019) study the eect of an increase in bank
credit supply on credit reallocation between SOEs and non-SOEs, while Huang, Pagano,
and Panizza (Forthcoming) explore the impact of credit expansion by local governments on

5LGFVs   are special SOEs that were heavily used by local governments to finance infrastructure investment
during the stimulus period (Bai, Hsieh, and Song, 2016). Chen, He, and Liu (2020) attribute a rising shadow
banking to a decrease in local government borrowing in 2012-2015.
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                              4

business investment. Both papers focus on the manufacturing sector exclusively. Our paper
makes several contributions to this literature. First, our paper is the first to disentangle
monetary stimulus from infrastructure investment driven by non-monetary shocks such as
fiscal shocks (the two major components of the 2009 economic stimulus package), and studies
the impacts of their interaction on credit allocation. The existing studies identify local credit
shocks without identifying macroeconomic policies underlying the increase of credit supply.
Our new framework helps shed light not only on the impact of monetary stimulus itself, but
also on how it interacts with the infrastructure spending spree in aecting credit and capital
reallocation.
   Second, we exploit the micro loan data beyond the manufacturing sector. Cong, Gao,
Ponticelli, and Yang (2019) use this loan-level data to study the impact of the 2009 economic
stimulus on credit reallocation between SOEs and non-SOEs within the manufacturing sector.
But bank lending to the manufacturing sector accounted for only 23% of all newly originated
bank loans in 2008 and thus an analysis confined to manufacturing provides an incomplete
picture of the whole economy. By extending the sample to the entire economy, we establish
the evidence that except for manufacturing firms, the 2009 monetary stimulus itself did
not favor SOEs in credit access over non-SOEs and that infrastructure investment played a
central role in the monetary transmission to credit reallocation from non-SOEs to SOEs.
   Third, this eect of monetary stimulus interacting with infrastructure investment is new
to the existing literature. Because infrastructure spending potentially has a positive spillover
to other sectors of the economy (Ru, 2018) and at the same time loans originated by com-
mercial banks are constrained by the PBC regulations, there is no a priori knowledge of how
infrastructure investment would aect the monetary transmission mechanism. Our empiri-
cal findings suggest that as long as implicit or explicit government guarantees of commercial
loans to infrastructure projects exist, infrastructure investment financed by commercial banks
will undermine the eectiveness of monetary policy in channeling loans to private firms.
   In addition to the literature discussed above, our paper also relates to two other strands
of literature. One studies the impacts of unconventional monetary policy on bank lend-
ing through the credit channel.6 By "unconventional" we mean monetary policy stimulus
through direct money supply instead of interest rates. Most of these previous studies exam-
ine the impacts of the Federal Reserve's large scale asset purchases (LSAPs) on the financial
market or the credit market during and after the 2008 financial crisis, with a finding that in-
creases of bank credit in response to massive monetary stimulus were disproportionate across
dierent types of firms or loans. The other strand studies the eectiveness of infrastructure
investment in the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act with mixed findings.7
6See, for example, Foley-Fisher, Ramcharan, and Yu (2016), Kandrac and Schlusche (2017), Rodnyansky
and Darmouni (2017), Acharya, Eisert, Eufinger, and Hirsch (2019), Cloyne, Ferreira, and Surico (2020),
and Chakraborty, Goldstein, and MacKinlay (2020).
7See, among others, Wilson (2012), Feyrer and Sacerdote (2012), Leduc and Wilson (2013), Conley and
Dupor (2013), Leduc and Wilson (2017), Ramey (2019), and Garin (2019).
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                        5

   Our paper complements these strands of literature but places a special emphasis on how
infrastructure investment driven by non-monetary factors can influence the transmission of
monetary policy on credit allocation and investment, a perspective largely overlooked by
the existing literature. Our paper sheds light on the heterogeneous monetary impacts that
were driven by two factors: (a) the interaction between monetary policy and infrastructure
investment and (b) the explicit or implicit government guarantees enjoyed by certain type
of firms. Both factors influenced the transmission of monetary stimulus to credit allocations
across firms of dierent ownership structures and across sectors.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides necessary institutional
facts that are highly relevant to our empirical studies. Section III describes the datasets
used for our estimation and provides relevant summary statistics. Section IV proposes a
new two-state dynamic empirical framework comprised of both macro and micro models. We
document the impact of monetary stimulus on credit allocation and investment in Section V
and Section VI. Section VII oers some concluding remarks.

                             II. Institutional Background

II.1. Monetary and fiscal policies prior to 2009. Prior to 1994, China's monetary policy
was under inordinate influence of its fiscal authority. Fiscal deficits were primarily financed
by the central bank. At the end of 1993, however, the Chinese government announced
its decision to decouple monetary policy from fiscal policy completely. On December 25,
1993, the State Council issued the well-known No. 19 notice "Decision of the State Council
on Reform of the Financial System." This notice stated the twofold goal of the financial
reform. At the macro level, the central bank was to establish a regulatory system that
was independent of control by the fiscal authority and allowed the monetary authority to
implement its policy away from the influence of the fiscal authority. At the micro level,
a financial system was established to separate commercial banks' lending business from
direct lending from the government through its own policy banks. This separation allowed
commercial banks to make loans based on their own profitability. And the People's Bank
of China Law enacted in 1995 explicitly forbade the PBC from lending directly to local
governments, non-banking firms, or individuals, and from providing loan guarantees to these
entities. To strengthen separation of monetary policy from fiscal policy, the PBC was not
allowed to purchase government bonds issued by the Ministry of Finance or to finance local
government debts. Prior to 2009, moreover, local governments were restrained from tapping
loans from commercial banks to finance infrastructure investment.
   China's monetary policy has been quantity-based until recently. That is, the PBC targeted
growth of M2 supply, not any interest rate as does monetary policy in the U.S. or European
countries. In 1993, the PBC announced various indices of monetary supply to the public. In
1996, it began a transition to using the money supply as an instrument for monetary policy
at the national level. In 1998, the PBC announced that M2 growth was the sole policy target.
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                 6

In May of that year, open market operations were initiated to carry out meeting this target.
From then to 2017, China adhered to this quantity-based monetary policy framework both in
its public announcements and in practice. Other policy tools, including reserve requirements,
lending and deposit rates, and window guidance, were all designed to support the targeted
growth of M2.

II.2. China's stimulus package in 2009. In response to the 2008 global financial crisis,
China implemented a series of stimulus policies to support the government's 4 trillion RMB
investment plan. Although the media focused its attention to the initial 4 trillion figure
itself, actual stimulus measures comprised a combination of the fiscal initiative to stimulate
investment and a regime switch of monetary policy to massive liquidity injections into the
banking system.8
   The investment plan announced by Premier Wen Jiabao on 5 November 2008 was to fund
a number of investment projects with 4 trillion RMB (the equivalent of 586 billlion USD).
The plan targeted seven key areas of investment and the most important area was infras-
tructure. Investment in infrastructure was funded by 1.87 trillion RMB, which accounted
for 46.8% of all investment funding in the stimulus package.9 The infrastructure spending
included 1.5 trillion RMB for transport and power infrastructure such as railways, roads,
airports, water conservation, and urban power grids, and 0.37 trillion RMB for rural village
infrastructure. In the 2009 Report on the Work of Government (RWG), infrastructure in-
vestment was given a priority for the purpose of boosting domestic demand and sustaining
GDP growth.10 By contrast, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act passed in Janu-
ary 2009 authorized only 70 billion out of the 800 billion USD stimulus package to financing
investment in infrastructure and transportation (Boehm, Forthcoming).
   Infrastructure projects played a shovel-ready role in speedy implementation of the gov-
ernment's fiscal stimulus plan. According to the announcement by the Ministry of Finance,
44.4% of the central government's planned 908 billion RMB public investment for 2009 was
already completed by April 1, most of which was allocated to infrastructure. Although the
original stimulus plan was to allocate all funding over 27 months from the fourth quarter of
2008 through 2010, a majority of infrastructure funding was spent by the end of 2009. As
can be seen from Figure 2, the year-over-year growth rate of real infrastructure investment
in the first three quarters of 2009 reached as high as 36%. Most infrastructure investment
was initiated by local governments; in 2009, the SOE share of infrastructure investment was
about 90%.

8The other stimulus measures included tax cuts and SOE bailouts (Wong, 2011).
9The remaining investment funding included 1 trillion RMB for earthquake reconstruction, 0.40 trillion RMB
for aordable housing, 0.15 trillion RMB for health and education, and 0.58 trillion RMB for environment
protection and technological innovations.
10For the details of the State Council's 2009 RWG, see http://www.gov.cn/test/2009-03/16/
content_1260221_2.htm.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                       7

   Although the real estate sector was not part of the post-2008 investment plan, the central
government changed various policies in favor of real estate at the end of 2008 and in 2009.
In October 2008, for example, the government reduced the minimum mortgage interest rate
to 70% of the benchmark interest rate and the down payment ratio for a second home to
30% of the purchase price. According to the State Council's No. 27 notice issued in May
2009, the minimum ratio of capital to assets for real estate developers was reduced to 20%.
   Another key component of the stimulus package was monetary stimulus. The State Coun-
cil's 2009 RWG planned an extraordinary increase in M2 to provide ample liquidity to the
banking system. As a result, monetary policy switched to an unprecedentedly accommoda-
tive regime with year-over-year growth of M2 reaching over 25% by the end of 2009 (Figure 1).
To prepare for achieving such high growth rates of M2 in 2009, the PBC reduced the required
reserve ratio four times during the final four months of 2008, from 17.5% to 13.5% for small
and medium-sized banks and from 17.5% to 15.5% for large banks, until January 2010.
   In December 2008, the State Council issued a decree that called on commercial banks to
increase lending to key nonfinancial sectors such as infrastructure and encouraged commer-
cial banks to provide credit support for "sound enterprises that faced temporary financial
di culties."11 To implement the post-2008 4 trillion investment plan, the State Council
eliminated all credit quotas previously imposed on commercial banks and encouraged the
supply of bank loans to key government projects. With the banking system saturated with
M2 liquidity in 2009, the PBC and the China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC) in
March 2009 jointly issued a notice that called on commercial banks to provide credit sup-
port for qualified large-scale central government investment projects by adjusting their loan
compositions.12
   Commercial banks responded to this notice swiftly. For instance, the Industrial and Com-
mercial Bank of China, one of the five largest state banks in China, stated in its 2009 Annual
Report: "The bank accelerated adjustment of its credit policies and promoted production
innovations by increasing credit support to major customers in infrastructure areas and the
disbursement of loans to medium-term to long-term quality projects that are in line with
the orientation of the state policy of boosting domestic demand." As a result, newly issued
bank loans reached 9.6 trillion RMB in 2009, of which 7.1 trillion RMB was allocated to the
public sector.

II.3. Funding sources of the investment plan--the role of LGFVs. The central gov-
ernment was committed to funding 29.5% of the 4 trillion RMB investment plan (1.18 trillion
RMB). Over 80% of this financial commitment from the central government was planned for
the year 2009. According to the 2009 RGW, the central government budget deficit of 750

11
   For o cial details, see http://www.csrc.gov.cn/pub/shenzhen/xxfw/tzzsyd/ssgs/zh/
zhxx/201409/t20140918_260555.htm.
12
   See http://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2009/content_1336375.htm.
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                     8

billion RMB in 2009, 570 billion RMB more than the 2008 budget, was to be financed by
issuing government bonds.
   The remaining 2.82 trillion RMB in the investment plan was to be funded by local govern-
ment budgets, corporate bonds, private funds, and bank loans. This financing arrangement
was in contrast to the stimulus program in the U.S., which was funded largely through fed-
eral government debt. Under the 1994 Budget Law (i.e. the "Old Budget Law" in eect
until January 1, 2015), however, a local government in China was prohibited from borrowing
from commercial banks or issuing municipal bonds. To meet the funding needs of local gov-
ernments for implementing the investment plan, the central government issued additional
government bonds in the amount of 200 billion RMB for local governments that participated
in the investment plan. The total central government deficit was planned to be 3% of GDP
(950 billion RMB).
   In addition to the central government's direct funding, local governments created LGFVs
as a financing platform to raise money for financing infrastructure projects. The creation
of LGFVs for these financing purposes was o cially endorsed by the central government.
According to the joint No. 92 notice issued on March 18, 2009 by the PBC and CBRC, "Local
governments are encouraged to attract and incentivize banking and financial institutions to
increase their lending to the central government's investment projects. This can be done
through various means, including ... establishment of qualified government investment and
financing platforms."
   LGFVs are SOEs of which local governments are major shareholders. LGFVs borrowed
from banks with local governments' explicit guarantees of debt repayments, and future rev-
enues from local governments' land sales were used as collateral for bank loans. According
to Gao, Ru, and Tang (2018), more than 90% of new debts issued by LGFVs during the
post-2008 stimulus period were financed directly by bank loans.13
   In the face of soaring LGFV debt and loan guarantees provided by local governments, the
State Council tightened the regulation on LGFV borrowings on June 10, 2010.14 According
to the State Council's 10 June 2010 notice, public-welfare projects were no longer allowed to
borrow through LGFVs and must rely solely on the funds from the government budget to
repay their debts; commercial banks must cease lending to LGFVs that did not have stable
cash inflows; and local governments could no longer provide loan guarantees to LGFVs. This
tightened regulation was reinforced by a decree issued jointly by the Ministry of Finance,
National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), PBC, and CBRC in August 2010.15
   In December 2010, the National Audit O ce (NAO) conducted a comprehensive survey
on local government debt and LGFVs.16 According to this survey, outstanding bank loans

13The   other two financing sources for LGFVs were bond issuance and shadow bank loans.
14See  http://www.gov.cn/zwgk/2010-06/13/content_1627195.htm.
15
   See http://www.gov.cn/zwgk/2010-08/19/content_1683624.htm.
16
   Another NAO survey was conducted in June 2013.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                        9

guaranteed explicitly and implicitly by local governments were 8.47 trillion RMB, 79.01% of
total local government debt in 2010. The outstanding LGFV debt was 4.91 trillion RMB,
46.38% of total local government debt in 2010. There are three categories of local government
debts: the debt that local governments are obliged to pay, the debt guaranteed by local
governments, and the debt to which local governments may be liable only in certain bailout
situations. In 2010, the total LGFV debt that local governments explicitly guaranteed or
were obliged to pay was 3.14 trillion RMB, 79.5% of the total LGFV debt. By the end of 2010,
the outstanding local government debt used for municipal constructions and transportations
reached 5.92 trillion RMB, 91.23% of which were explicitly guaranteed or promised to pay
by local governments.

                   III. Data description and summary statistics

  In this section, we describe the loan-level and the firm-level databases that are used for
our empirical work and provide summary statistics for both macro and micro data.

III.1. Data description. Our proprietary loan-level databases covers all newly issued bank
loans to borrowers with an annual credit line over 50 million RMB (approximately 8 mil-
lion USD) from January 2007 to June 2013. The coverage is comprehensive across sectors
throughout the economy. It consists of over 7 million individual loan contracts granted by
the 17 largest Chinese banks to more than 160,000 unique firms with a specific identifier (i.e.
the 9-digit corporate organization code). The borrowers are located in all 31 provinces and
autonomous regions and over 90 two-digit industries according to the Economic Industrial
Classification Code. We sum up all individual loans for a particular firm in a given quarter
to create a firm-quarter dataset from 2007Q1 to 2013Q2.
   The loan variable used throughout the paper is the amount of newly issued loans with
maturity greater than three years in each firm-quarter. Most of these loans have a maturity
greater than five years for investment purposes. Our micro data on newly issued loans with
maturity greater than three years is comparable to the aggregate time series of bank loans for
fixed asset investment (FAI), which can be obtained from CEIC (a database for financial and
economic indicators). There are, however, two main dierences between the CEIC aggregate
time series and the aggregate series constructed from our loan-level dataset. One dierence
is that our micro data excludes bank loans with a size of less than 50 million RMB while
the CEIC macro data includes all investment loans. In this respect, the aggregated loans to
infrastructure from our micro data source are less than those from the CEIC's macro data
source. In 2010, for example, infrastructure loans as a percent of GDP is 4.59% from our
data source and 4.75% from the CEIC's data source. On the other hand, loans for FAI from
the CEIC's aggregate data source are calculated as an increase of outstanding loans from
the outstanding balance in the previous year, while our micro data source provides newly
issued bank loans. Since some existing loans may be retired at any given time, the loans
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                          10

aggregated with the bottom-up calculation from our micro data source can be larger than
those from the CEIC's aggregate data source. In 2009, for instance, infrastructure loans as a
percent of GDP is 6.21% from our data source and only 4.73% from the CEIC's data source.
   Quarterly data on capital expenditure is obtained from the Chinese Stock and Market
Accounting Research (CSMAR). This database includes all listed firms on both Shanghai
and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges and contains information about bank and firm identifiers.
In the investment regression studied in Section VI, we merge our newly issued loan data
with the CSMAR firm-level investment data, and the sample period of the merged data is
from 2007Q1 to 2013Q2 to be consistent with the bank loan regression studied in the rest of
the paper. For the lagged variables in our investment regression, we use the CSMAR data
prior to 2007Q1. When selecting a sample for our regressions, we remove an observation if
the dependent variable or any of the regressors is missing, or if the denominator in a ratio
variable we construct is zero.
   For both loan-level and firm-level data, we categorize sampled firms into two groups:
SOEs and non-SOEs. We define a firm's ownership type according to its o cial registration
status.17 To obtain information of a firm's registration type, we first merge our data with
the firm-level panel data from the Chinese Industry Census (CIC) between 1998 and 2013.
The CIC database includes all SOEs and non-SOEs with gross sales exceeding five million
RMB (the cuto standard was increased to 20 million RMB in 2011) in the industrial sector
(i.e. manufacturing, mining, and utilities). We use firms' registration information from the
CIC database to identify the registration type of a firm belonging to the industrial sector.
   Although the CIC database has comprehensive coverage of China's industrial firms, it
does not cover firms outside the industrial sector. To obtain the registration information
of non-industrial sectors, we supplement our data with the information provided by the
National Enterprise Credit Information Publicity System (NECIPS), another national eco-
nomic census conducted in 2008. For each firm in our database, we manually search for
the firm's registration type on the NECIPS website. The NECIPS information enables us
to determine whether an unlisted firm is an SOE or not. For listed firms, in addition to
the merged information, we also use the ultimate controller information. Taken together, a
listed firm is an SOE if the firm's ultimate controller is the central government or a local
government, or if the firm's registration type equals "110" (i.e. state-controlled enterprises)
or "151" (i.e. solely state-owned enterprises). Within the category of SOEs, we categorize
bank loans further into two subgroups: loans to LGFVs and those to non-LGFVs. Since our
database includes the o cial list of LGFVs, we manually cross-check each firm's business
type or its scope within the NECIPS, and identify LGFVs whose firm names match their
9-digit corporate organization code.

17
  See also Brandt, Van Biesebroeck, and Zhang (2012), Yu (2015), Ma, Qiao, and Xu (2015), Wang and
Wang (2015), Bai, Lu, and Tian (2016), Berkowitz, Ma, and Nishioka (2017), and Wu (2018) for using
information of a firm's registration type to define SOE.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                         11

III.2. Summary statistics. The top panel of Figure 3 displays the ratio of aggregated
newly issued bank loans to GDP. This ratio was, on average, 5.65% during 2007-2008. During
the 2009 monetary stimulus, it increased sharply to 17.24% in 2009Q2 before it declined
afterwards. The increase of newly issued loans was concentrated in the first three quarters
of 2009, a period identified by Chen, Ren, and Zha (2018) as monetary stimulus. The
bottom panel of Figure 3 displays a net increase in the ratio of newly issued bank loans to
GDP for both the aggregate economy and the infrastructure sector relative to their 2007Q1-
2008Q4 average levels. For the aggregate economy, the net quarterly increase of newly issued
loans from the 2007Q1-2008Q4 average level was on average 9.07% (3.76%) of GDP during
2009Q1-Q3 (2009Q4-2010Q4), with a peak value of almost 12% of GDP in 2009Q2. Thus,
the net increase of total newly issued loans during 2009Q1-2010Q4 was 4.97 trillion RMB,
consistent with the Chinese government's original 4 trillion RMB investment plan. The net
quarterly increase of newly originated bank loans for infrastructure had a similar pattern
during the stimulus period, peaking at 6% of GDP in 2009Q2 relative to the 2007Q1-2008Q4
average level. From 2009Q1 to 2010Q4, the net increase of bank loans to infrastructure from
the 2007Q1-2008Q4 average level was 2.28 trillion RMB or 45.9% (2.28/4.97) of the total
net increase of bank loans to the entire economy, consistent with the share of infrastructure
investment in the 4 trillion RMB investment plan.
   Most of the literature on China focuses exclusively on the manufacturing sector. Since
the infrastructure sector drew far more investment and bank loans than any other sector
during the stimulus, it is necessary to conduct a detailed empirical analysis for the economy
beyond the manufacturing sector. We characterize the entire Chinese economy by its four
key sectors: manufacturing, infrastructure, real estate, and the rest of the economy. The
rest of the economy includes wholesale and retail trades, health care, public administration,
education, and environmental management. Table 1 provides a mapping between our four
major sectors and NBS's one-digit sectors.
   Figure 4 displays the share of newly issued bank loans in each of these four sectors. Clearly,
loans to the infrastructure sector were the largest among all bank loans during the stimulus
period, contributing to between 40% and 50% of all newly issued loans for most years in
2007-2013. Only 20% 27% of total loans were allocated to manufacturing, 10% 20% to
real estate, and the remaining 12% 21% to the rest of the economy.
   Figure 5 displays a net increase of newly issued bank loans (as a percent of GDP) to all
firms and to LGFVs from the 2007-2008 average level for each of the four major sectors.
Infrastructure, together with the rest of the economy (i.e., excluding manufacturing and
real estate), accounted for about 70% of the net increase in newly issued bank loans. By
contrast, manufacturing accounted for 18% of the net increase in newly issued bank loans
and real estate only 12%. The total volume for LGFV loans in 2009 was around 1.58 trillion
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                             12

RMB.18 The increase of LGFV loans, however, was unevenly distributed across the four
major sectors. The largest increase in LGFV loans occurred in the infrastructure sector,
which reflected the government's intended purpose of creating LGFVs.
   Table 2 provides summary statistics for our firm-quarter loan sample (see Appendix A for
detailed definitions of variables). Both the mean and median of newly issued bank loans in
the entire economy were considerably higher than those in manufacturing. The mean and
median of assets for an average economy-wide firm, however, were lower than those for an
average manufacturing firm, revealing that an average economy-wide firm is more leveraged
than an average manufacturing firm. For instance, the average loan size was 143.71 million
RMB for an average economy-wide firm with 3,438.37 million RMB assets, in comparison
to 121.68 million RMB for an average manufacturing firm with 3821.78 million RMB assets.
The guaranteed loan ratio for an average economy-wide firm was lower than an average
manufacturing firm. In particular, the median guaranteed loan ratio for an economy-wide
firm was only 2.90%, compared to 39.40% for a manufacturing firm.
   A comparison of summary statistics shows significant heterogeneity across the four major
sectors. The median value of a guaranteed fraction of loans for manufacturing firms was
over 39%, while the median value was close to zero for firms in other sectors. A loan
guarantee by a third party was typically used by a borrower with poor credit to obtain a
particular loan from a bank. Thus, a high fraction of loans guaranteed by third parties
suggests that manufacturing firms had more financing di culties than firms in other sectors.
The infrastructure sector had on average the largest loan size (196.94 million RMB), a value
significantly higher than that in other sectors. The average loan size (i.e., the loan size per
firm-quarter) in the manufacturing sector (121.68 million RMB) was slightly higher than that
in the real estate sector (116.96 million RMB), but the opposite was true for the median loan
size (60 milion RMB versus 80 million RMB), indicating that the loan distribution in the real
estate sector had a right tail fatter than that in the manufacturing sector. On average, the
infrastructure sector had the largest total assets, the highest leverage ratio, and the highest
non-performing loan ratio.
   The credit spree in the infrastructure sector influences how bank credit was allocated to
non-SOEs not just in manufacturing but also in other parts of the economy. Table 3 compares
the summary statistics of non-SOEs between the infrastructure sector and the other major
sectors. The average size of newly originated loans to non-SOEs was the largest in the
infrastructure sector, with 138.83 million RMB per firm-quarter, followed by the real estate
sector. Since non-SOEs in infrastructure and real estate are more capital intensive than those
in other sectors, these summary statistics indicate that bank loans were more likely to be
allocated to capital-intensive non-SOEs than labor-intensive ones. For total assets, leverage,
non-performing loans, and the loans-to-assets ratio, non-SOEs in the infrastructure sector
18According to our data, when short-term loans were included, the total volume of LGFV loans was 3.17
trillion RMB in 2019.
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                            13

had the highest values and the dierences between non-SOEs in infrastructure and other
sectors was statistically significant at the 0.01 level.
   Non-SOEs in sectors other than infrastructure exhibited several distinct facts. Non-SOEs
in real estate had the largest median sizes of both bank loans and total assets, but the
smallest mean size of total assets. Thus, the distribution of non-SOEs' assets in real estate
had a fat right tail. By contrast, the median loan size for non-SOEs in manufacturing is
the smallest in all four major sectors, consistent with the fact that nearly half of bank loans
received by manufacturing non-SOEs were guaranteed by third parties. Clearly, non-SOEs
in manufacturing tended to have poorer credit than those in other sectors.


                  IV. The two-stage dynamic empirical framework

   In this section, we develop a two-stage empirical framework to assess the impacts of mon-
etary stimulus on loan allocation between SOEs and non-SOEs and the role of infrastructure
spending in the monetary transmission mechanism. Our framework establishes the nexus
between a dynamic panel model and a dynamic macro model. We show that this linkage
is essential for estimating the eects of aggregate policy shocks on credit allocation at the
firm level. The dynamic panel model in the second stage requires proper controls for aggre-
gate shocks other than monetary policy changes, which are extracted by the dynamic macro
model in the first stage. We discuss first the dynamic panel model, which constitutes the
core of our empirical framework, and then the dynamic macro model in the first stage.

IV.1. The dynamic panel model in the second stage. We begin with key right-hand
variables in the dynamic panel model. We denote exogenous monetary policy changes by
"m,t , whose construction is discussed in Section IV.2. The quarterly growth of infrastructure
investment, denoted by ginfra,t , is equal to

                                 ginfra,t = log iinfra,t   log iinfra,t 1 ,                       (1)

where iinfra,t represents investment in the infrastructure sector. An individual firm's loan
amount, bi,j,t , is aected by both infrastructure investment growth ginfra,t and the monetary
policy shock "m,t . Because "m,t simultaneously aects ginfra,t , we need to separate the eects
of monetary policy changes on infrastructure investment from the eects of other aggregate
shocks in the first stage of our analysis. This separation allows one to assess how the inter-
action between infrastructure investment and monetary stimulus influences individual loans
bi,j,t . In Section IV.2, we provide an analysis of the first stage of our empirical framework
and show how to use a structural macro model to decompose log iinfra,t into

                                log iinfra,t = log im              o
                                                    infra,t + log iinfra,t ,                      (2)

where log im
           infra,t is the series of infrastructure investment driven only by exogenous monetary
policy changes and log io   infra,t is the log series of infrastructure investment driven by all other
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                                                 14

aggregate shocks such as fiscal shocks. Combining equations (1) and (2), we decompose a
quarterly change of infrastructure investment into two components:
                                                               m           o
                                                   ginfra,t = ginfra ,t + ginfra,t ,                                                   (3)
        m                                                o
where ginfra ,t is aected by monetary stimulus only and ginfra,t is aected by aggregate shocks
other than monetary policy changes.
  With these decompositions obtained in the first stage, we estimate the following quarterly
dynamic panel regression for the j th type of firm:
                                          `
                                          X                                              
   bi,j,t = c   i,j      j
                      +  bi,j,t   1   +         dj
                                                 k "m,t   k   + bj  o
                                                                 k ginfra,t k "m,t   k      + cj 0   o
                                                                                                     t   + cj 0
                                                                                                            z zi,j,t   1   + i,j,t ,   (4)
                                          k=0

                                                                     i,j,t                     L
where j 2 {SOEs, non-SOEs, all firms} is a firm type, bi,j,t = Ni,j,t      1
                                                                             denotes the borrowings
                                      th
of an individual firm i within the j type of firms at time t, measured as newly issued bank
loans (Li,j,t ) in period t to be divided by the firm's total nominal assets (Ni,j,t 1 ) in period
t 1,19 o  t denotes a vector of aggregate control variables that are driven by aggregate factors
other than monetary policy changes,20 ` is the lag length, the coe cient ci,j represents the
firm-fixed eect for sector j , the vector zi,j,t controls for an array of firm specific character-
istics such as the size and leverage of a firm, and the random residual i,j,t is iid distributed.
The firm-fixed eects control for the unobserved time-invariant firm heterogeneity (e.g. lo-
cation and industry), which allows one to explore the time variation of bank loans within the
same firm. The estimate of dj    k measures the main eect of monetary stimulus and bk mea-
                                                                                             j

sures the interaction eect of monetary policy with infrastructure investment that is driven
by non-monetary aggregate shocks such as fiscal policy shocks. Thus, the interaction eect
takes into account a possible spillover of infrastructure investment on the transmission of
monetary stimulus to credit allocation among dierent types of firms, while the main eect
is purged from such spillover and captures the eect of monetary policy alone. Since a firm
can borrow from multiple banks, our firm-level estimation allows one to obtain the eect of
monetary stimulus on a firm's total credit.


IV.2. The macro model in the first stage. As stressed in the macro-finance literature
(Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 1999; Morais, luis Peydro, Roldan-Pena, and Ruiz-
ortega, 2019; Brunnermeier, Palia, Sastry, and Sims, 2019, for example), identification of
exogenous monetary policy changes is a first-order issue when assessing the impacts of mon-
etary policy on the real economy in general and the banking system in particular. To obtain
exogenous monetary policy changes, we use Chen, Ren, and Zha (2018)'s regime-switching


19We seasonally adjust both new borrowings and assets for each individual firm in the sample. See Appen-
dix A for a detailed description.
20We discuss the construction of o in Section IV.2.
                                  t
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                  15

monetary policy equation specified as21

            gm,t =   0   +   m gm,t 1   +    ( t 1   ) +   y,t   gy,t   1
                                                                             
                                                                            gy,t   1   +    m,t m,t ,   (5)

where m,t is a serially independent random shock with the standard normal distribution,
gm,t = log Mt is quarterly growth of M2 denoted by Mt , t = log Pt is quarterly inflation
measured by the consumer price index (CPI) and denoted by Pt ,   is the average inflation
rate targeted by the government,22 gy,t = log yt is quarterly growth of real GDP denoted
                          
by yt , and gy,t = log yt    is targeted GDP quarterly growth. The time-varying coe cients
take the form of
               8                                      8
               <                    
                      if gy,t 1 gy,t 1 0              <                  
                                                              if gy,t 1 gy,t    0
                  y,a                                    m,a                 1
         y,t =                               ,  m,t =                              .
               : y,b if gy,t 1 g        <0            : m,b if gy,t 1 g        <0
                                        y,t 1                                              y,t 1

The subscript "a" stands for "above the target" and "b" for "below the target." During the
global financial crisis, growth of China's GDP plummeted from 13.6% in 2007Q2 to 6.4% in
2009Q1 (top chart of Figure 1). As discussed in the introduction, the Chinese government
announced a 4-trillion RMB investment plan to combat the sharp fall of aggregate output
and this plan was supported through monetary stimulus, which turned out to be larger than
the original plan. M2 increased by 4.2 trillion RMB in 2009Q1 alone and by a total of 11.5
trillion RMB during the 2009Q1-Q3 period. These three crucial quarters of massive monetary
injections are identified by Chen, Ren, and Zha (2018) as a regime-switching period of the
monetary policy rule, and the exogenous 2009 monetary stimulus is measured by a sum of
policy shocks and the magnitude of a switch of monetary policy to being extraordinarily
expansionary. Even though monetary policy is endogenous, the estimated magnitude of its
change is exogenous. As reported in Chen, Ren, and Zha (2018), the estimated coe cients,
 m = 0.391,  =        0.397, y,a = 0.183, y,b = 1.299, m,a = 0.005, and m,b = 0.010, are all
statistically significant at the 0.01 level. From these estimates, one can construct a measure
of total exogenous monetary policy changes, which is composed of three components:

                                    "m,t = "Norm   PolCh
                                            m,t + "m,t   + "Extra
                                                            m,t ,                                       (6)

where "Norm
        m,t  = m,a m,t , "Extra
                          m,t   = ( m,b                    PolCh
                                           m,a )m,t , and "m,t   is calculated as the dierence
between actual quarterly M2 growth and counterfactual quarterly M2 growth assuming that
monetary policy, represented by the response coe cient y,t , had not changed. The magni-
tude of the policy change "PolCh
                           m,t   during the 2009Q1-2009Q3 stimulus period does not depend
21For many advanced countries, interest rates are the main instrument used by monetary policy. A common
misperception is that this is also true in China. As discussed in Section II.1 and shown in Chen, Ren,
and Zha (2018), the PBC implemented the targeted M2 growth rates on a quarterly basis; no other policy
variable employed by the PBC, not even market interest rates, was used as the main instrument or target
of monetary policy. In fact, because China was an emerging-market economy during our sample period, the
exclusive instrument of its quantity-based monetary policy was M2 growth, which was explicitly specified
and targeted by the central government.
22As in Chen, Ren, and Zha (2018),   is set at 0.875% (i.e., an annualized quarterly rate of 3.5%).
            MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                    16

on any economic variable (i.e., exogenous) because the coe cient y,t is not a function of
any endogenous variable. Monetary stimulus during 2009Q1-Q3 is therefore measured by

                                          "Stim   PolCh
                                           m,t = "m,t   + "Extra
                                                           m,t .                                           (7)

By construction, "Extra
                  m,t   = 0 and "PolCh
                                 m,t   = 0 for the period prior to 2009Q1.
  To obtain quarterly growth of infrastructure investment driven by aggregate shocks other
than monetary policy changes, we estimate the following unrestricted system of simultaneous
equations
                                         X4             4
                                                        X
               A0 xt + bm,0 log Mt = c +     Ak x t k +   bm,k log Mt k + t ,           (8)
                                                 k=1               k=1
where c is a 3  1 vector of constant terms, bm,k is a 3  1 coe cient vector, Ak is a 3  3
coe cient matrix, and             h                         i0
                             xt = log yt log Pt log iinfra,t .
The vector of other aggregate shocks represented by t is normally distributed with mean
zero and identity covariance matrix; these shocks are orthogonal to exogenous monetary
policy changes.23
   The unrestricted subsystem represented by (8) contains an equation in which M2 responds
not only to contemporaneous variables such as infrastructure investment but also to all lagged
variables. Such an equation, however, shall not be mistakenly regarded as a description of
monetary policy. In our multiple-variable system, it represents how demand for M2 adjusts
to other variables. As shown in Appendix B, the system composed of (5) and (8) jointly
determines the dynamics of log Mt and xt and monetary policy represented by equation (5)
is identified within this system of equations.24 Moreover, macroeconomic variables xt can be
uniquely decomposed into two parts:

                                               xt = xm    o
                                                     t + xt ,                                              (9)

where xm                                                o
       t is driven only by monetary policy changes and xt are driven by all non-monetary
aggregate shocks such as fiscal stimulus.25 We calculate aggregate output excluding the
component of infrastructure investment such that
                                            m        m
                                      log y
                                          ~t  = log yt       log im
                                                                  infra,t ;
                                             o        o
                                       log y
                                           ~t  = log yt     log io
                                                                 infra,t .

                                                                    o
From these decompositions, we calculate quarterly growth rates of y
                                                                  ~t  and Pto and denote
         o                                                                            o
them by gy
         ~,t (output growth not aected by growth of infrastructure investment) and t .


23All our empirical results are robust to including in the vector xt other aggregate variables such as interest
rates and reserves in the banking system.
24For a detailed analysis of other macroeconomic dynamics, see the unpublished working paper by Chen,
Higgins, Waggoner, and Zha (2017).
25For technical details of computing this decomposition, see Appendix B.
             MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                               17

                                     o
From (2), (3), and (9), we obtain ginfra ,t . These variables, denoted by the vector
                         h                                                         i0
                     o       o      o        o         o                 o
                     t     g ~,t 1
                             y      t 1    g infra,t g infra,t 1 · · · g infra,t `    ,

are used as aggregate controls for the eects of non-monetary aggregate shocks in the second-
stage estimation.26

IV.3. Separating monetary impacts from non-monetary eects. Figure 6 shows
that changes in monetary policy played the conspicuous role in implementing the gov-
ernment's stimulus plan, in particular for infrastructure investment. The counterfactual
paths in the figure are computed by feeding in the three exogenous shocks "Stim          m,t for t =
2009Q1, 2009Q2, 2009Q3, identified by the first-stage macro model as described in Sec-
tion IV.2. It is evident from Figure 6 that the eects of this three-quarter monetary stimulus
lasted for almost two years before they became negligible by the beginning of 2011. A com-
parison of the top chart of Figure 1, Figure 2, and Figure 6 reveals that the monetary
stimulus explained 66% of the increase in GDP growth and 54% of the increase in infrastruc-
ture investment from 2008Q4 to 2009Q4. The rest of increases in GDP and infrastructure
investment were driven by non-monetary factors. Since loan demands move with the general
economic condition, they increase with GDP growth driven by these non-monetary factors.
                                                                                            o
We control for this indirect demand eect through GDP growth by including gy                 ~,t 1 as a
control variable in panel regression (4) for bank loans.
                    o
   The variable ginfra   ,t k also enters our panel regression as it captures the infrastructure
                                                                        o
investment spree spurred by non-monetary shocks. Obtaining ginfra         ,t k in the first stage is
                                                     j
necessary for obtaining the unbiased estimate of bk , the coe cient for the interaction between
 o
ginfra ,t k and "m,t k , in the second stage. If one simply uses the observed variable ginfra,t k
                  o                                           m              m
as a proxy for ginfra ,t k for estimation of model (4), both ginfra,t k and ginfra,t "m,t k will enter
the regression residual and thus make the residual correlated with interaction terms. To see
                                                                                               o
this crucial point, consider a special case in which ` = 0. Substituting ginfra,t for ginfra      ,t in
regression (4), we have

             bi,j,t = ci,j + i,j bi,j,t   1   + dj         j
                                                 0 "m,t + b0 ginfra,t "m,t + c
                                                                               j0
                                                                                    t   + cj 0
                                                                                           z zi,j,t   1   +~i,j,t ,   (10)

where ~i,j,t = i,j,t      bj  m
                           0 ginfra,t "m,t cj 0 m
                                                t , the aggregate control vector t is
                                h                                                       i0
                           t      g ~,t 1
                                    y       t 1  g infra,t g infra,t 1 · · · g infra,t ` ,

         m                                                                                         m
and      t is the corresponding vector influenced only by monetary policy shocks (i.e., t =
          o                     j m
 t        t ). The presence of b0 ginfra,t "m,t in ~i,j,t creates an attenuation bias of the estimated
                j                                                                                j
coe     cient b0 toward zero. The presence of cj 0 m      t creates additional downward bias if b0 and
cj 0 have the same sign. In general, since both regressors "m,t and ginf,t "m,t are correlated with
26The  standard lag length for quarterly dynamic models covers one entire year. Because we include the
contemporaneous monetary stimulus at k = 0, we set ` = 3 so that the eective lag length is four quarters.
This lag length is more than su cient as most estimated coe cients for ` 2 are statistically insignificant.
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                18

the error term  ~i,j,t , the estimates of dj      j
                                           0 and b0 are biased--a typical endogeneity problem. To
                                               o
resolve this problem, we first obtain "m,t , ginfra ,t , and the aggregate control variables contained
    o
in t prior to the estimation of model (4). We then use these non-monetary aggregates in
the second-stage panel regression.




IV.4. Computing firm-level dynamic responses to monetary stimulus. Following
the standard practice in the literature on dynamic panel regressions, we take the position
that all coe cients in model (4) are time-invariant. What diers from the existing literature,
however, is that we allow for a regime-switching coe cient in the monetary policy equation
represented by (5) to capture monetary stimulus initiated by a regime shift of monetary
policy. We first estimate model (4) and denote the estimated coe cients and firm-specific
idiosyncratic shock by c              ^j , ^
                           ^i,j , j , d     j
                                               ^j , c
                                                    ^j                                        ^j , and ^
                                                              ^i,j,t . With the estimates j , d        bj
                                        k bk , c      z , and                                   k       k,
we then compute the dynamic responses of a firm's bank credit by feeding three consecutive
shocks "Stim          Stim               Stim
          m,2009Q1 , "m,2009Q2 , and "m,2009Q3 as the values of "m,t , "m,t+1 , and "m,t+2 into the
following equation
                                               `
                                               X                                              
                                 j
                        bj,t =  bj,t   1   +         dj
                                                      k "m,t   k   + bj  o
                                                                      k ginfra,t k "m,t   k          (11)
                                               k=0
                                                      o         o               o             o
with "m,t+k = 0 for k > 2, "m,t k = 0 for k > 0, ginfra   ,t = ginfra,2009Q1 , ginfra,t+1 = ginfra,2009Q2 ,
       o           o
and ginfra ,t+2 = ginfra,2009Q3 . When computing and reporting the dynamic responses of bj,t , we
set t = 1, t + 1 = 2, etc., where t = 1 corresponds to 2009Q1. In this computation, bj,t does
not depend on i and we set bj,t 1 = 0 because the dynamic responses are the same regardless
of the values of bj,t 1 in our linear projections. The firm-level dynamic responses to monetary
stimulus during the 2009Q1-Q3 period are expressed as percentage changes of newly issued
loans over the firm's assets. These responses are decomposed into two components. The
first component is the main eect of monetary stimulus that is computed by setting bj               k = 0.
The main eect captures the impact of monetary stimulus on credit allocation absent the
infrastructure spree spurred by other non-monetary factors such as fiscal shocks. The second
component is the eect of the interaction between monetary stimulus and infrastructure
investment. This component is obtained by setting dj        k = 0. The total eect of monetary
stimulus is a simple sum of these two components.
   To generate 90% probability (credible) intervals for dynamic responses, we take the Bayesian
approach. Appendix C describes the technical details of how to generate posterior distribu-
tions of regression coe cients. Given each random draw of coe cients j , d          ^j , ^j
                                                                                      k bk , we compute
1500 random paths of dynamic responses and tabulate the 90% probability interval of each
dynamic response. Both the estimates and the 90% probability intervals of the firm's loan
responses to monetary stimulus are reported and discussed in the following section.
             MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                    19

           V. The Impacts of Monetary Stimulus on Credit allocation

   In this section, we provide empirical evidence on the dynamic impact of the 2009 monetary
stimulus on credit allocation. We focus on two key questions. How important was mone-
tary stimulus in credit reallocation between SOEs and non-SOEs? How did infrastructure
investment influence the transmission of monetary stimulus to credit allocation? We begin
by establishing the evidence that the impact of monetary stimulus on credit allocation in the
manufacturing sector was qualitatively and quantitatively dierent from that in the entire
economy. To understand this dierence, we analyze the impacts of monetary stimulus on
credit allocation in other major sectors of the economy. We then quantify the role of LGFVs
in the spillover of the infrastructure investment spree to the transmission of monetary policy.
We conclude the section by quantifying the importance of the two-stage empirical framework
in our estimated results.


V.1. How representative the findings for manufacturing are? The existing literature
estimates the stimulus eects on credit allocation to SOEs versus non-SOEs by first focusing
exclusively on the manufacturing sector and then extrapolating the evidence to the entire
economy. A first-order question, therefore, is whether this extrapolation approach is empir-
ically supported. In this section, we first report the impacts of monetary stimulus on credit
allocation within the manufacturing sector and then compare these results to those for the
entire economy.


V.1.1. Manufacturing. Table 4 reports our estimated results for the manufacturing sector.
Since our dynamic panel regression allows monetary policy to have lagged (dynamic) eects,
both contemporaneous and lagged estimates are reported. Column (1) reports the results
for all firms.27 The main eects of a monetary policy shock are statistically significant
at the 1% level not only contemporaneously but also in lagged periods. The interaction
between monetary policy and infrastructure investment has statistically significant eects in
the second and third periods. A negative value indicates that an increase in infrastructure
investment weakens the transmission of monetary policy to credit allocation to an average
manufacturing firm.
   Toward the bottom of each column in the table, we report the cumulative eect as the
sum of the estimated coe cients across periods. In column (1), the cumulative main and
interaction eects are both statistically significant but with opposite signs. The estimated
elasticity of bank credit to a monetary policy shock implies that a one percent increase in
quarterly M2 growth translates into a 0.758 percentage-point increase in bank lending to an


27Although  the persistence coe cient j is statistically significant in most of our estimation, we do not report
its estimate because the magnitude is very small with its half life less than one quarter.
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                               20

average firm (as a share of its assets) over the first four quarters. An increase in infrastructure
investment during the same period, however, dampens the monetary eect.28
   Columns (2) and (3) report estimated elasticities of loans (allocated to SOEs and non-
SOEs) to an increase in quarterly M2 growth. Because the number of non-SOEs dwarfed
the number of SOEs in the manufacturing sector (i.e., nearly 90% of firms that have access
to bank credit are non-SOEs), the eects of a monetary policy shock on bank lending to
an average manufacturing firm are largely driven by the eects on loans to non-SOEs. The
estimated coe cient for an average non-SOE is significantly positive for the main eect in all
periods, and significantly negative for the interaction eect in the second and third periods
(column (3)). Thus, as revealed by the estimated cumulative eects, an increase of infras-
tructure investment driven by non-monetary shocks attenuates the monetary transmission
to bank lending to non-SOEs.
   The monetary eect on bank loans to SOEs, as shown in column (2), diers from those
to non-SOEs. The main eect of monetary stimulus is positive at the 0.01 significance level
both contemporaneously and with a lag, with a magnitude much larger than the eect on
non-SOEs. Accordingly, the cumulative main eect of monetary stimulus on SOEs (1.177) is
significantly larger than that on non-SOEs (0.716), implying that monetary stimulus alone
would have favored SOEs in credit allocation. Moreover, the eect of infrastructure in-
vestment on the monetary transmission to SOE loans is statistically insignificant for SOEs,
indicating that the infrastructure investment spree has essentially no influence on the mon-
etary impact on bank loans to SOEs.
   Figure 7 displays the loan responses to the 2009 monetary stimulus for an average manu-
facturing firm. The top left panel displays the total monetary eect and its two components
(the main and interaction eects); the top right and bottom panels plot the 90% proba-
bility interval of each dynamic response. A positive response corresponds to an increase of
a firm's bank credit (as a share of its assets) relative to the 2007-2008 average level. The
negative eect of interaction dampens the main monetary eect, making the total eect less
than the main eect (top left panel). The total monetary impact on bank lending to an
average manufacturing firm was hump-shaped, peaking at 1.41 percentage points in 2009Q2
(top right panel). The main impact of monetary stimulus on bank credit peaked in the
third quarter (2009Q3), with an average increase of 1.31 percentage points over the first
three quarters (bottom left panel). Although our identified monetary stimulus lasted for
only three quarters, the dynamic response of newly issued bank loans lasted for at least six
quarters due to the the lagged eect of monetary policy. Infrastructure spending, however,
reduced the monetary impacts on bank credit to an average manufacturing firm by an aver-
age 0.15 percentage point over the first three quarters (bottom right panel), implying that


28
                               P                              P
  Although the magnitude of      k bk is greater than that of   k dk , how much infrastructure investment
                                                                                       o
attenuates the transmission of monetary policy is measured by multiplying each bk by ginf ra,k .
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                         21

the infrastructure investment spree during this period reduced the transmission of monetary
stimulus to bank credit by 12% (0.15/1.31).
   Figure 8 displays the dynamic impacts of monetary stimulus on credit reallocation between
the two types of firms (left column) and credit allocation to non-SOEs relative to that to
SOEs (right column). The estimated monetary eects on bank credit to non-SOEs were
quantitatively similar to those on all firms (comparing Figure 7 and the right column of
Figure 8), because most manufacturing firms were non-SOEs. But SOEs received, on average,
more bank loans than non-SOEs in response to the 2009 monetary stimulus, with an average
increase of about 2.36 percentage points in bank credit to SOEs over the first three quarters,
almost twice the average increase for non-SOEs (1.19 percentage points). Our results confirm
the estimates reported in column (1) of Table D.1 in Appendix D, which show much smaller
responses of bank loans to non-SOEs than to SOEs in 2009Q1-Q3. This finding is consistent
with Cong, Gao, Ponticelli, and Yang (2019)'s main result that the impact of credit supply
on firm borrowings was larger for state-owned firms than private firms during the stimulus
period. The top right panel of Figure 8 clearly shows that SOEs enjoyed preferential bank
credit during the monetary stimulus period. Implicit government guarantees of bank loans
allocated to SOEs were the main reason for such a preferential outcome.
   Although the dierence in interaction eects on the two ownership types of firms was
statistically insignificant (middle right panel of Figure 8), growth in infrastructure investment
significantly weakened the monetary eect on bank credit to non-SOEs in the third and
fourth quarters, while having no statistically significant eect on credit to SOEs (middle left
panel). The asymmetric eect on SOEs versus non-SOEs is consistent with Huang, Pagano,
and Panizza (Forthcoming)'s finding that an increase in local government debt, most of
which was channeled to infrastructure investment, crowded out private investment in the
manufacturing sector.
   After summing the main and interaction eects, the total eect drove an even more signif-
icant wedge between bank credits to SOEs and non-SOEs in the first two quarters (2009Q1
and 2009Q2), with an average increase of 1.96 percentage points for SOEs but only 1.01
percentage points for non-SOEs (bottom left panel of Figure 8). The wedge peaked at 1.2
percentage points in the second quarter (2009Q2) with an average of 0.94 percentage point
over the first four quarters (bottom right panel of the figure and column (3) of Table D.1
in Appendix D). A comparison of the top and bottom right panels of the figure reveals
that the interaction eect contributed to widening the gap between bank loans to SOEs and
non-SOEs.
   Summary. We obtain two main findings for the manufacturing sector: (1) monetary
stimulus alone led to preferential credit to SOEs over non-SOEs; and (2) while the dierence
in bank loans to SOEs and non-SOEs was largely driven by monetary stimulus alone, the
dampening eect of infrastructure spending on the monetary transmission to bank credit
allocated to non-SOEs widened this dierence further.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                         22

V.1.2. Comparing manufacturing and the whole economy. An important question is whether
our findings for the manufacturing sector hold for the economy as a whole. We estimate panel
regression (4) for firms in the entire economy and compare the estimated results with those
for manufacturing firms.
   A comparison of column (1) of Table 4 and column (1) of Table 5 reveals that the eects
of a monetary policy shock on an average firm in the whole economy are very dierent from
those on an average firm in the manufacturing sector. The estimated coe cients for the
contemporaneous and lagged main eects are all significantly larger. As a result, the cumu-
lative main eect for the whole economy is 1.337, 75% larger than that in the manufacturing
sector (0.758). Using the manufacturing sector as a representative sample, therefore, may
seriously underestimate the elasticity of bank credit to monetary stimulation alone. On the
other hand, for an average firm in the entire economy, only the two-period lagged interaction
eect (the estimate of b2 ) is significantly negative, resulting in a smaller and less significant
cumulative interaction eect than its manufacturing counterpart (1.882 vs. 2.301).
   Credit reallocation between the two types of firms in the entire economy is also dierent
from the manufacturing sector in several dimensions (columns (2) and (3) of Table 5). First,
the estimated main eects for non-SOEs are larger than those for SOEs contemporaneously
and with lags, resulting in a larger cumulative main eect for non-SOEs (1.374 vs. 1.256).
This finding is opposite of the finding for the manufacturing sector, where the elasticity of
non-SOE bank credit to monetary stimulus is significantly lower than that of SOEs (0.716
vs. 1.177).
   Second, the interaction eect on credit reallocation between the two types of firms diers
from that in the manufacturing sector: the estimated coe cients for SOEs are significantly
positive both contemporaneously and with a one-period lag in the whole economy so that
the cumulative interaction eect is 4.774, which is significant at the 0.01 level (column (2)
of Table 5). That is, for an average SOE in the entire economy, infrastructure spending
significantly increases the elasticity of SOE bank credit to monetary stimulus, in contrast to
insignificant interaction eects in the manufacturing sector (column (2) of Table 4).
   Third, driven largely by a significantly negative interaction eect with a three-period
lag, the cumulative interaction eect on non-SOEs in the entire economy is significantly
negative at the 0.01 significance level, with a magnitude almost twice its counterpart in the
manufacturing sector (-4.070 vs -2.181, column (3) of Tables 5 and 4). This finding implies
that the negative eect of infrastructure investment on the monetary transmission to bank
credit allocated to non-SOEs is much larger in the non-manufacturing economy than in the
manufacturing sector.
   Figure 9 displays the dynamic responses of bank loans and its two response channels for
an average firm in the entire economy. The top left panel shows that infrastructure spending
driven by non-monetary shocks, though small in magnitude, weakened the monetary trans-
mission to an increase in bank loans, making the total response of bank loans smaller than
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                 23

that main response, especially in the third quarter (2009Q3). The total response of bank
loans peaked in the second quarter (2009Q2) and increased by an average of 2.27 percentage
points during the first three quarters (top right panel), in contrast to an average of 1.16
percentage points in the manufacturing sector. An increase of bank credit in response to
monetary policy changes alone was higher, with an average of 2.43 percentage points (bottom
left panel). That is, growth in infrastructure spending weakened the response to monetary
stimulus of bank loans by an average of 0.16 percentage point during the first three quarters
(2009Q1-2009Q3).
   Figure 10 plots the dynamic responses of bank loans for the two types of firms in the en-
tire economy. Monetary stimulus alone generated an increase in bank credit to non-SOEs at
least as strong as SOEs (top left panel), and there was no statistically significant dierence
between SOE and non-SOE responses (top right panel).29 The eect of infrastructure spend-
ing interacting with monetary policy on bank credit to SOEs was positive for the first four
quarters (2009Q1-2009Q4), while the eect was negative for non-SOEs (middle left panel).
The resulting dierence between bank loans to SOEs and non-SOEs was highly significant
statistically in the first four quarters (middle right panel), in contrast to the weaker result
for the manufacturing sector (middle row of Figure 8). Taking into account the interaction
between monetary stimulus and infrastructure investment driven by non-monetary shocks,
the total eect of monetary stimulus on bank credit to SOEs was higher than non-SOEs,
with an average increase of 2.71 versus 2.13 percentage points in the first three quarters
(bottom row of Figure 10).
   Summary. While monetary stimulus increased bank credit to SOEs more than non-SOEs
in the economy as a whole, we find that the specific channel for monetary stimulus to
drive such a result is fundamentally dierent from that in the manufacturing sector. First,
monetary stimulus alone would have given SOEs an easier credit access than non-SOEs in
the manufacturing sector, but there was no such a preferential dierence between SOEs and
non-SOEs in the entire economy. Second, infrastructure investment had opposite eects on
the monetary transmission to bank credit allocations to SOEs and non-SOEs in the whole
economy: positive impacts on SOE loans but negative impacts on non-SOE loans. These
opposite eects, both economically and statistically significant for the entire economy, were
absent in the manufacturing sector.

V.2. Credit allocation and sectoral heterogeneity. To understand why the monetary
transmission mechanism for credit reallocation between SOEs and non-SOEs in the entire
economy diered from that in the manufacturing sector, we provide a detailed analysis of
other sectors in the economy. We focus on two relevant questions. Did the 2009 monetary
stimulus itself lead to preferential bank credit to SOEs in sectors other than manufacturing?

29See  also column (1) of Table D.2 in Appendix D, as well as columns (2) and (3) for the later discussions
in this paragraph.
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                    24

And did the infrastructure investment spree spurred by non-monetary aggregate shocks
amplify or dampen the monetary transmission to bank credit allocated to SOEs versus
non-SOEs?

V.2.1. Infrastructure. We begin with the estimation results for the infrastructure sector
(Table 6). For an average infrastructure firm, the estimated main eect of monetary policy
changes is positive at the 0.01 significance level contemporaneously and with lags, and the
estimated interaction eect is also positive at the 0.01 significance level on impact and
with one lag (column (1) of the table). The significantly positive cumulative interaction
eect (5.483) is in sharp contrast to the significantly negative interaction eect ( 2.301) in
the manufacturing sector. The estimated cumulative main eect suggests that a one percent
increase in quarterly M2 growth alone should increase newly issued bank credit to an average
infrastructure firm (as a share of its assets) by 1.376 percentage points.
   Unlike manufacturing, monetary policy changes alone do not lead to preferential credit to
SOEs over non-SOEs in the infrastructure sector (columns (2) and (3) of Table 6). Except on
impact, the estimated main eects of a monetary policy shock on bank credit to non-SOEs
are even larger than SOEs, as shown by a larger cumulative main eect for non-SOEs (1.396
versus 1.369).
   The estimated interaction eects on bank credit to SOEs are positive at the 0.01 signif-
icance level both on impact and with a lag, in contrast to the insignificant eects in the
manufacturing sector. And the estimated interaction eects on bank credit to SOEs are
almost twice those on SOE loans in the entire economy, implying that infrastructure in-
vestment has a much stronger spillover to the monetary transmission to SOE loans in the
infrastructure sector than in other parts of the economy. The interaction eects on bank
credit to non-SOEs in the infrastructure sector, however, are mixed, with significantly posi-
tive eects on impact and with one lag and significantly negative eects with two lags. The
resulting cumulative interaction eect is statistically insignificant (column (3) of Table 6).30
   Figure 11 displays the loan responses to the 2009 monetary stimulus for an average infras-
tructure firm. The positive interaction eect of monetary stimulus made the total increase
of bank credit higher than the loan response to monetary stimulus alone for the first three
quarters 2009Q1-Q3 (top left panel). Newly issued bank credit allocated to an average in-
frastructure firm (as a share of its assets) peaked at 4.19 percentage points in the second
quarter (2009Q2), with an average of 3.09 percentage points during the first three quarters
2009Q1-Q3 (top right panel) as compared to bank credit allocated to an average manufactur-
ing firm in 2009Q1-Q3 (1.16 percentage points). During this period, moreover, infrastructure
30Our  finding that there is no negative spillover of infrastructure investment to non-SOE loans is consistent
with Huang, Pagano, and Panizza (Forthcoming), who argue that private investment in industries more
exposed to public infrastructure projects is less likely to be crowded out by local government debts than
private investment in non-infrastructure projects. Consequently, by participating in infrastructure projects
sponsored and supported by the central and local governments, bank credit allocated to non-SOEs in the
infrastructure sector is less likely to crowded out by infrastructure spending.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                        25

investment amplified the eect of monetary stimulus on bank credit to infrastructure firms
by 37% with an average increase of 0.83 percentage point from the interaction channel and
an average increase of 2.26 percentage points from the main channel (bottom row of charts
in Figure 11).
   Dynamic responses to monetary stimulus of credit reallocation between SOEs and non-
SOEs in the infrastructure sector are displayed in Figure 12. The eects of monetary stim-
ulus alone on bank credit to SOEs and non-SOEs were very similar in the first four quarters
(2009Q1-Q4), with an average of 2.27 versus 2.38 percentage points (top left panel). Un-
like the manufacturing sector, monetary stimulus alone did not favor credit to SOEs over
non-SOEs in infrastructure (top right panel of Figure 12 and column (1) of Table D.3 in
Appendix D). Infrastructure spending had a strong positive impact on the monetary trans-
mission to SOE loans, but its impact on non-SOE loans was mixed: positive in the first
two quarters and then negative in the fourth and fifth quarter (middle row of Figure 12 and
column (2) of Table D.3 in Appendix D). The resulting total eect of monetary stimulus on
bank credit to non-SOEs was as strong as that on SOE loans (bottom row of Figure 12 and
column (3) of Table D.3 in Appendix D).
   Summary. The eect of monetary policy on credit reallocation between SOEs and non-
SOEs in the infrastructure sector diers sharply from that in the manufacturing sector.
Unlike the manufacturing sector, the 2009 monetary stimulus alone did not lead to prefer-
ential bank credit to SOEs in the infrastructure sector. Infrastructure spending significantly
amplified the eect of this monetary stimulus on bank credit to SOEs (and to non-SOEs
to a lesser extent) in the infrastructure sector, whereas it had no significant impact on the
monetary transmission to SOE loans in the manufacturing sector.


V.2.2. Real estate. For an average real estate firm, the estimated eect of a monetary policy
shock on bank credit is significantly positive both contemporaneously and with lags (column
(1) of Table 7). The cumulative eect implies that a one percent increase in quarterly M2
growth translated into an increase of 2.899 percentage points in bank loans, a magnitude
almost four times the cumulative eect on credit to an average manufacturing firm (0.758).
Another striking result is the significantly negative interaction eect on bank credit (column
(1) of the table), with the resulting cumulative eect that is statistically significant at the
0.01 level.
  The most striking result is the impact of a monetary policy shock on credit reallocation
between SOEs and non-SOEs in real estate (columns (2) and (3) of Table 7). The estimated
eect of monetary policy alone on non-SOE loans is significantly stronger than the eect
on SOE loans both contemporaneously and with lags, with the cumulative eect more than
three times as large (3.105 versus 0.839). Thus, the elasticity of bank credit allocated to non-
SOEs to a monetary policy shock alone (the non-SOE elasticity) is significantly higher than
the SOE elasticity, a reversal of the result found for the manufacturing sector. This reversal
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                  26

is consistent with the fact that non-SOEs in real estate enjoy implicit loan guarantees from
local governments because of their strategic importance in the local economy.31
   Despite a significantly large eect of monetary policy changes on credit allocated to non-
SOEs, infrastructure investment hampers this monetary transmission with negative interac-
tion eects estimated at the 0.01 significance level contemporaneously and with two lags.
The resulting cumulative interaction eect on non-SOE loans is significantly negative in
magnitude (-25.99), while there is no cumulative interaction eect on SOE loans. The fact
that infrastructure spending significantly dampens the monetary transmission to bank credit
allocated to non-SOEs in real estate drives the result of a negative interaction eect on credit
allocated to non-SOEs in the entire economy.
   Figure 13 displays the dynamic responses of an average real estate firm to the 2009 mone-
tary stimulus. Since the interaction eect was negative for the first three quarters (2009Q1-
Q3), the total increase in bank loans was less than the monetary eect alone (top left panel).
The total increase peaked at 3.33 percentage points in the third quarter (2009Q3) with an
average of 2.75 percentage points in the first three quarters 2009Q1-Q3 (top left panel). The
increase of bank credit to monetary stimulus alone was on average 5.44 percentage points
in 2009Q1-Q3, but infrastructure spending driven by non-monetary shocks significantly re-
duced this monetary eect by 50% (2.69/5.44) with an average decline of 2.69 percentage
points in 2009Q1-Q3 (bottom row of charts).
   The monetary eect on credit reallocation between SOEs and non-SOEs in the real estate
sector is displayed in Figure 14. The 2009 monetary stimulus alone generated significantly
more bank credit allocated to non-SOEs than to SOEs (top row of charts) with an average
increase of 5.79 percentage points in non-SOE loans versus 1.94 percentage points in SOE
loans in 2009Q1-Q3 (top row of charts).32 Infrastructure spending, on the other hand, sig-
nificantly reduced the monetary eect on bank credit to non-SOEs by 50% with an average
decline of 2.88 percentage points in 2009Q1-Q3, whereas it had no statistically significant
eect on the monetary transmission to SOE loans except for the third quarter (middle left
panel).33 Despite this significant dampening eect of infrastructure investment on the mon-
etary transmission to bank loans, however, a one percent increase in M2 growth translated
into an increase of 3.05 percentage points in total loans to non-SOEs during 2009 (the first
four quarters), in comparison to only an increase of 0.85 percentage point in SOE loans.34


31A  vast majority of real estate firms are non-SOEs. In our sample, we have 13570 non-SOE observations
versus 1380 SOE observations.
32The change of bank credit to non-SOEs, relative to SOE loans, peaked at 4.61 percentage points in 2009Q2.
See the top right panel of Figure 14 and column (1) of Table D.4 in Appendix D.
33The interaction eect on non-SOE loans, relative to SOE loans, was significantly negative with an average
dierence of 2 percentage points (middle right panel of Figure 14 and column (2) of Table D.4 in Appendix D).
34Relative to SOE loans, the total monetary eects on non-SOE loans peaked in the fourth quarter at 3.23
percentage points and were significantly positive throughout the first six quarters from 2009Q1 to 2010Q2
(bottom right panel of Figure 14 and column (3) of Table D.4).
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                         27

   Summary. The dynamic impacts of monetary stimulus on credit allocation in the real
estate sector have two aspects that are distinct from the manufacturing sector. First, the
magnitude of the main monetary eect on bank credit to non-SOEs is considerably larger
than that to SOEs. This finding implies that the 2009 monetary stimulus alone provided
credit access more favorable to non-SOEs than SOEs, a reversal of the finding for man-
ufacturing firms. Second, an increase of infrastructure investment severely weakened the
monetary transmission to bank credit allocation to non-SOEs during 2009Q1-2009Q3, but
had no significant eect on SOE loans. Contrary to the finding for the manufacturing sec-
tor, this dierence between bank loans to non-SOEs and SOEs was large in magnitude and
significant statistically.


V.2.3. The rest of the economy. For an average firm in the rest of the economy, we estimate
the main monetary eects on bank credit to be significantly positive contemporaneously
and with all lags and the interaction eects to be significantly negative contemporaneously
and with the first two lags (column (1) of Table 8). According to the estimated cumulative
eect, a one percent increase in quarterly M2 growth leads to an increase of bank loans by
1.645 percentage points, a magnitude in between the infrastructure sector (1.376) and the
real estate sector (3.105). Notwithstanding this positive transmission of monetary policy
changes, the interaction eect is estimated to be statistically negative at the 0.1 significance
level, indicating that infrastructure investment weakens the monetary transmission to bank
credit in the rest of the economy. Columns (2) and (3) of Table 8 report how credit is allocated
between SOEs and non-SOEs and show that expansionary monetary policy itself does not
lead to an easier access to bank credit by SOEs than by non-SOEs. On the contrary, the
estimated main eects of monetary policy changes on non-SOE loans are larger than those
on SOE loans on impact and with two lags. As a result, the cumulative main eect on
non-SOE loans is larger than that on SOE loans (2.024 vs. 1.244). These positive monetary
impacts on bank credit to non-SOEs, however, are eclipsed by an increase of infrastructure
investment driven by non-monetary shocks. The interaction eects on non-SOE loans are
estimated to be significantly negative at the 0.01 level on impact and with two lags, and
the estimated cumulative eect is negative (-11.332) also at the 0.01 significance level, in
contrast to the statistically insignificant cumulative eect on SOE loans.
   The negative interaction eects on non-SOEs in the rest of the economy are similar to the
finding for real estate. An increase of infrastructure spending in 2009 significantly reduced the
monetary impact on bank credit to an average firm in this sector (top left and bottom right
panels of Figure 15). As a result, the total eect of the 2009 monetary stimulus was weaker
than the eect of monetary stimulus itself (an average of 2.61 versus 3.14 percentage points
during the first three quarters from 2009Q1 to 2009Q3, almost one fifth smaller (2.60/3.14)
according to top right and bottom left panels). This dampening eect was entirely driven by
the interaction eect on non-SOE loans, with an average of 1.38 negative percentage points
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                        28

in 2009Q1-Q3 and a reduction of the main eect by almost 35% (1.38/3.99, first two rows of
Figure 16 and Table D.5 in Appendix D). By contrast, the interaction eects of monetary
stimulus with infrastructure investment on bank credit to SOEs were positive but with a
much smaller magnitude. Taking into account these opposite interaction eects on bank
credit to non-SOEs versus SOEs, the 2009 monetary stimulus had similar eects on bank
credit to both non-SOEs and SOEs (an increase of 2.62 and 2.61 percentage points during the
first four quarters (2009Q1-Q4)), despite much stronger eects of monetary stimulus alone
on bank credit to non-SOEs than SOEs (comparing the top and bottom rows of Figure 16,
as well as columns (2) and (3) of Table D.5 in Appendix D).
   Summary. Similar to our findings for other non-manufacturing sectors, the 2009 monetary
stimulus alone did not lead to favorable access to bank credit by SOEs over non-SOEs in the
rest of the economy. As in the real estate sector, moreover, the infrastructure investment
spree spurred by non-monetary shocks in 2009 significantly dampened the monetary trans-
mission to bank credit allocation to non-SOEs so that there was no statistically significant
dierence between the total eects of monetary stimulus on bank credit to SOEs and to
non-SOEs.

V.3. Understanding the empirical results. To understand the empirical findings ob-
tained in the previous sections, we first analyze why monetary stimulus alone did not lead
to credit allocation in favor of SOEs over non-SOEs in the non-manufacturing sector. We
then estimate and compare the impacts of monetary stimulus for two subgroups of SOEs
within each major sector: LGFVs and non-LGFVs. This comparison helps us to understand
why infrastructure spending dampened the strong impact of monetary policy on credit to
non-SOEs. In a final subsection, we highlight the quantitative importance of our two-stage
empirical framework by comparing our benchmark empirical results with those obtained
without the first-stage estimation.

V.3.1. Preferential credit to capital intensive firms. Since the late 1990s, the Chinese govern-
ment has viewed most of capital intensive industries strategically and nationally important,
and supported them with preferential credit. In particular, the government's "Grasp the
large and let go the small" program for manufacturing industries was designed to retain
capital intensive SOEs but encourage small labor-intensive SOEs to be privatized. The gov-
ernment also granted capital intensive firms implicit guarantees for their bank loans. The
fact that many non-SOEs were more labor intensive than SOEs in the manufacturing sector
explains why bank credit allocated to this sector favored SOEs over non-SOEs in response to
the 2009 monetary stimulus itself (i.e., without interaction with infrastructure investment).
   Except for the manufacturing sector, however, there was no evidence that the 2009 mon-
etary stimulus itself generated favorable access to bank credit by SOEs over non-SOEs. In
fact, the dynamic responses of non-SOE loans to monetary stimulus alone were at least as
strong as those of SOE loans in the entire economy, contrary to the empirical finding for
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                 29

the manufacturing sector only. To understand this important dierence, we provide relevant
institutional facts. Infrastructure and real estate have always been the government's two
strategic sectors since the late 1990s, and most firms in these sectors are capital intensive.
In the rest of the economy, moreover, about 60% of bank lending to non-SOEs was allocated
to wholesale and retail trades (Table 9), which were capital intensive sectors (Chang, Chen,
Waggoner, and Zha, 2016), and this large loan share remained stable over time. Bank lending
to SOEs in the rest of the economy, on the other hand, was dispersed among subsectors--only
16.87% of SOE lending was allocated to wholesale and retail trades while a large share of
SOE lending was allocated instead to labor-intensive services (Table 9). Most non-SOEs in
wholesale and retail trades were capital intensive and large firms that generated more sales,
provided more tax revenues, and boosted more output of the local economy than did firms
in labor intensive sectors. They were therefore favored by local governments with special
deals and exemptions. These institutional facts support our empirical finding that the 2009
monetary stimulus itself did not lead to credit allocation in favor of SOEs over non-SOEs in
infrastructure, real estate, and the rest of the non-manufacturing economy.

V.3.2. A role of LGFVs in the monetary transmission. The strong impact of monetary policy
itself on credit to non-SOEs, however, is eclipsed by the infrastructure investment spree
spurred by non-monetary factors. In this subsection, we show that bank credit channeled
to LGFVs is the driving force in our finding that an increase of infrastructure investment
amplifies the monetary transmission to bank credit allocation to SOEs.
   We re-estimate regression (4) for two subgroups of SOEs within each major sector: LGFVs
and non-LGFVs. The dierence in estimated interaction eects between LGFVs and non-
LGFVs is striking.35 On impact, the estimated interaction eect for LGFVs in the infras-
tructure sector is positive at the 0.01 significance level, but statistically insignificant for
non-LGFVs (columns (1) and (2) of Table 10). Overall, the cumulative interaction eect
is estimated to be positive at the 0.01 significance level for LGFV loans (10.887) but sta-
tistically insignificant for non-LGFV loans. Thus, the positive interaction eect on bank
credit to SOEs in the infrastructure sector (column (2) of Table 6) is entirely driven by
LGFVs. Because LGFVs enjoy explicit guarantees of their loans from local governments
as discussed in Section II.3, infrastructure investment and bank loans allocated to LGFVs
increase together by reinforcing each other.
   For the entire economy, we also find the reinforcing eect of infrastructure investment
on the monetary transmission to LGFV loans (columns (3) and (4) of Table 10).36 The
cumulative interaction eect is estimated to be positive at the 0.01 significance level (8.591).

35The  estimated interaction eects on bank credit to non-SOEs remain the same because LGFVs are part
of SOEs.
36We find no statistically significant interaction eects on LGFV loans in sectors other than infrastructure
(Table D.6 in in Appendix D).
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                        30

By contrast, the cumulative interaction eect on credit to non-LGFV loans is statistically
insignificant, even though the non-cumulative eect is significantly positive with one lag.
   The reinforcing eect of LGFVs on the monetary transmission to bank credit to the infras-
tructure sector at large was arguably well intended by the government. As Xiong (2019)'s
model implies, LGFV debt enabled local governments to promote otherwise underinvestment
in infrastructure. Since LGFV loans were exclusively guaranteed by local governments, bank
credit was disproportionately allocated to the infrastructure sector. The total loan volume
made by any commercial bank, on the other hand, was severely constrained by the PBC's
regulation that the total amount of loans could not exceed 75% of total deposits. It is not
surprising, therefore, that an increase of infrastructure spending dampens the expansionary
monetary eect on bank credit to non-SOEs in sectors other than infrastructure. This result
accords with Huang, Pagano, and Panizza (Forthcoming)'s finding. Our finding that infras-
tructure spending financed by bank loans to LGFVs crowded out the expansionary monetary
eect on bank credit to non-SOEs in sectors other than infrastructure is consistent with the
PBC's regulatory contraint on the total loan volume an individual commercial bank was able
to make.

V.3.3. Two-stage regressions. In Section IV.3, we argue that if we do not separate monetary
and non-monetary eects on growth of infrastructure investment in the first stage, the esti-
mated interaction eect will be biased. We now assess the magnitude of this endogeneity bias
in the infrastructure sector. If we omit the first stage, we can directly estimate second-stage
                               o                        o
regression (4) by replacing ginfra ,t with ginfra,t and t with t .
   One can see from Table 11 that the estimated interaction eects on bank credit to all
firms, SOEs, and non-SOEs are biased downward from those for our benchmark regression
(cf. Table 6). As a result, the cumulative interaction eects on loans to all firms or SOEs are
estimated to be statistically insignificant, contrary to the cumulative interaction eects in our
benchmark regression that are estimated to be significantly positive. Without correcting for
the endogeneity bias, therefore, we would erroneously conclude that infrastructure spending
driven by non-monetary shocks (e.g., a fiscal stimulation) would not enhance the positive
eect of monetary stimulus on bank credit to infrastructure firms.

           VI. The transmission of monetary stimulus to investment

   In the preceding sectors, we analyze the impacts of monetary stimulus and its interaction
with infrastructure investment on bank credit to all firms, SOEs, and non-SOEs. How
important is this credit channel in the transmission of monetary policy to firm investment?
In this section, we address this question in two steps. We first estimate the elasticity of
investment to bank credit, using a merged data set that incorporates investment information
in CSMAR and our loan-level information for individual firms. We then provide a back-of-
the-envelope calculation of the response of investment to monetary stimulus, taking into
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                        31

account both the elasticity of investment to bank credit and the elasticity of bank credit to
monetary stimulus.



VI.1. Elasticity of investment to bank credit. We merge our loan-level data with the
CSMAR firm-level data and estimate the response of investment to changes in bank credit
with the regression:
                      j                j
      ii,j,t = ci,j + L   log Li,j,t + I I09   10   log Li,j,t + cj 0   t 1   + cj 0
                                                                                 z zi,j,t   1   + i,j,t ,   (12)

where ii,j,t is firm i's investment (divided by the firm's total nominal assets in the previous
period), j 2 {SOEs, non-SOEs, all firms}, Li,j,t represents the outstanding credit to firm
i (approximately equal to the ratio of newly issued loans to the outstanding credit in the
previous period), and I09 10 is an indicator function that returns one when time t falls within
the years 2009-2010 and zero otherwise. The inclusion of this dummy variable allows us to
obtain the potential nonlinear eects of bank credit to firm investment during the stimulus
period and at the same time makes it comparable to the existing findings in the literature.
The coe cient ci,j represents the firm-fixed eect, the vector t 1 = [gy,t 1 , t 1 ]0 controls
for macroeconomic eects (i.e. the eects of quarterly inflation (t 1 ) and a quarterly change
of output (gy,t 1 ) in the previous period), the vector zi,j,t controls for an array of firm specific
characteristics such as the size and leverage of a firm, and the random residual i,j,t is iid
distributed.
   Since a majority of listed firms are in the manufacturing sector, it is infeasible to accu-
rately estimate the elasticity of investment to bank credit for each of the four major sectors.
We are able to compare, however, the elasticity of investment to bank credit between the
manufacturing sector and the entire economy. This comparison allows us to shed light on the
potential heterogeneity in investment sensitivity to bank loans between the manufacturing
and other major sectors in the economy. Table 12 reports the estimated results of regres-
sion (12). For an average manufacturing firm, column (1) reports the estimated elasticity
of investment to bank credit in both normal and stimulus periods. In the normal period,
it is positive at the 0.01 significance level; in the stimulus period, it is postive at the 0.1
significance level. Columns (2) and (3) reveal that investment sensitivity is heterogeneous
across two types of firms. In the normal period, the elasticity of SOE investment to bank
credit is statistically insignificant, suggesting that the financial constraints for SOEs are
largely unbinding. By contrast, the elasticity of investment to bank credit to non-SOEs is
estimated to be positive at the 0.01 significance level. According to our estimate, a one
percent increase of bank credit increases investment by non-SOEs, on average, by about 0.1
percentage point (as a share of assets). This result implies that non-SOEs, on average, are
more credit-constrained than SOEs during the normal period, which makes their investment
more sensitive to bank credit.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                      32

   In the stimulus period, however, the result of investment sensitivity to bank credit is
reversed. The estimated coe cient for SOEs is positive at the 0.05 significance level. Its
magnitude reveals that a one percent increase of bank credit would increase investment by
0.2 percentage points. Summing the estimated coe cients for both normal and stimulus
periods, one can see that during the stimulus period, a one percent increase of bank credit
would lead to a total increase of 0.22 percentage point in SOE investment (as a share of total
assets). For non-SOEs, the estimated coe cient for the interaction term between bank loans
and the stimulus period dummy is insignificant, suggesting that during the stimulus period,
an increase in bank credit would not lead to an extra increase of investment. The overall
(total) elasticity of non-SOE investment to bank credit, however, is statistically significant
at the 0.01 level, implying that during the stimulus period, a one percent increase of bank
credit would increase investment of non-SOEs by 0.176 percentage point. Taken together,
the overall elasticity of SOE investment to bank credit during the stimulus period is higher
than the non-SOE counterpart, a result opposite of the finding for the normal period. Our
estimates are consistent with the existing evidence that in response to the financial crisis,
the government allocated more credit to SOEs than non-SOEs in the manufacturing sector
and "artificially directed state-owned firms to sustain investment" (Cong, Gao, Ponticelli,
and Yang, 2019).
   Do the findings for the manufacturing sector carry over to the entire economy? This
question is particularly relevant because non-SOEs in non-manufacturing sectors such as
infrastructure may enjoy implicit government guarantees as discussed in preceding sections.
Columns (4) to (6) of Table 12 report the estimated results for the entire economy. For
an average firm in the entire economy, as shown in Column (4), the estimated investment
sensitivity to bank credit during the normal period is close to the estimate for the manufac-
turing sector (0.097 versus 0.106). The investment elasticity for the entire economy during
the stimulus period, however, diers substantially from the estimate for the manufacturing
sector (0.231 versus 0.077). Moreover, the estimate 0.231 is statistically significant at the
0.01 level while 0.077 is only significant at the 0.1 level.
   Columns (5) and (6) compare SOEs and non-SOEs for the entire economy. The estimated
elasticity of investment to bank credit for both SOEs and non-SOEs is similar in magnitude
to that in the manufacturing sector during the normal period: the investment sensitivity is
insignificant for SOEs but significant at the 0.01 level for non-SOEs so that a one percent
increase of bank credit translates into an increase of 0.103 percentage point in investment of
non-SOEs (cf. 0.114 percentage point for the manufacturing sample).
   While the estimated investment sensitivity for SOEs in the entire economy is similar to
the manufacturing counterpart during the stimulus period (0.181 versus 0.197), the estimate
for non-SOEs in the entire economy diers substantially from the manufacturing sample
(0.243 versus 0.062). Consequently, the overall investment elasticity to bank credit is 0.346
for non-SOEs, higher than that for SOEs (0.212). This finding is opposite of the result for
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                       33

the manufacturing sector and reveals that non-SOEs, on average, play a more important role
in translating bank credit into physical investment than do SOEs in the economy as a whole.



VI.2. Response of investment to monetary stimulus. This section calculates the in-
vestment response to monetary stimulus by dierent ownership types of firms. For each type
of firms, we decompose the investment response to monetary stimulus into the response to
monetary stimulus alone and the response to the eect of monetary stimulus interacting with
infrastructure investment.
   The eect of monetary stimulus on investment through the credit channel is calculated
according to
                            @ ij,t   @ bj,t    @ ij,t  Aj,t 1
                              Stim
                                    Stim                      ,                       (13)
                           @"m,t     @"m,t @ log Lj,t Lj,t 1
where j 2 {SOEs, non-SOEs, all firms}, the left-hand derivative is the average investment
response of firms of type j to monetary stimulus, @ bj,t is the average change in newly issued
                                                              @ ij,t       j   j
bank loans to firms of type j (as a share of total assets), @ log  Lj,t
                                                                        is L + I (the estimated
overall investment elasticity to bank credit to firms of type j during the stimulus period),
Aj,t 1 is the average assets of firms of type j in time t 1 (2008Q4), and Lj,t 1 is the average
outstanding amount of credit to firms of type j in time t 1 (2008Q4). The first right-hand
term in equation (13) is obtained from the numerical values corresponding to Figures 7 to 8
and the second right-hand term is reported at the "Overall investment sensitivity" row of
                       Aj,t 1
Table 12. The ratio Lj,t    1
                              is an adjustment term for obtaining the percentage increase in
investment (as a share of firm assets) in response to monetary stimulus.
   Table 13 reports the annualized percentage changes of investment in response to the
2009Q1-Q3 monetary stimulus in the manufacturing sector versus the entire economy. For
the manufacturing sector, monetary stimulus led to an increase of investment, on average,
by 2.689 percentage points for all firms on a annual basis (1.157  0.183  3.176  4). The
increase of SOE investment (8.393 = 2.018  0.223  4.664  4), however, was more than
four times the increase of non-SOE investment (1.978 = 1.071  0.176  2.624  4).
   In the entire economy, an average firm's investment increased by 8.763 (2.270  0.328 
2.947  4) percentage points on an annual basis in response to the 2009Q1-Q3 monetary
stimulus, more than triple the investment increase in the manufacturing sector (2.689). Two
factors explain this result: a larger response of bank credit to monetary stimulus (2.270
versus 1.157) and a larger elasticity of investment to bank credit (0.328 versus 0.183) than
those estimates for the manufacturing sector. The entire economy was also dierent from the
manufacturing sector for SOEs versus non-SOEs. Although the response of SOE investment
to monetary stimulus was still stronger than the response of non-SOE investment (9.217 =
2.709  0.212  4.017  4 versus 7.410 = 2.132  0.346  2.515  4), the dierence was much
reduced in comparison to the manufacturing sector. Moreover, the investment response of
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                  34

non-SOEs to monetary stimulus in the entire economy was close to four times stronger than
the response in the manufacturing sector (7.410 versus 1.978).37
   Table 14 reports the decomposition of the investment response to the 2009Q1-Q3 monetary
stimulus on an annual basis for the entire economy. For an average firm, monetary stimulus
alone increased investment by 9.393 (2.433  0.328  2.947  4) percentage points (column
(2)), while its interaction with infrastructure spending reduced the investment response by
0.630 (( 0.163)  0.328  2.947  4) percentage point (column (3)). Thus, the postive response
of investment was entirely attributable to monetary stimulus alone. Absent its interaction
with infrastructure spending, the 2009 monetary stimulus would have spawned an increase
of non-SOE investment by 8.714 (2.507  0.346  2.515  4) percentage points, larger than
an increase of SOE investment (7.630 = 2.242  0.212  4.017  4).
   The presence of infrastructure investment had opposite impacts on the monetary trans-
mission to investment of SOEs versus non-SOEs. Interacting with infrastructure spending,
the 2009 monetary stimulus brought an additional increase of SOE investment by 1.587
(0.466  0.212  4.017  4) percentage points, but reduced investment of non-SOEs by 1.304
(( 0.375)  0.346  2.515  4) percentage points (column (3)). As a result, the 2009 mon-
etary stimulus generated a total response of SOE investment larger than that of non-SOE
investment (9.217 versus 7.410 in column (1)).
   Summary. While the 2009 monetary stimulus itself generated higher investment of non-
SOEs, infrastructure spending amplified the monetary eect on investment of SOEs but
dampened this eect on investment of non-SOEs, resulting in a total response of SOE in-
vestment larger than that of non-SOE investment. The 2009 monetary stimulus caused both
credit and capital reallocations from non-SOEs to SOEs; the infrastructure investment spree,
spurred by non-monetary shocks, played a central role in these reallocations.

                                          VII. Conclusion

   We construct a firm-quarter dataset from our comprehensive loan-level data and use this
unique micro dataset to estimate the eects of monetary policy and its interaction with in-
frastructure spending on bank credit as well as investment. A two-stage estimation approach
is developed to avoid endogeneity bias of the estimated interaction eect of infrastructure
investment on the monetary transmission mechanism. Our main findings are twofold. First,
except for the manufacturing sector, monetary stimulus by itself did not favor credit access
by SOEs over non-SOEs. Second, infrastructure investment driven by non-monetary factors
such as fiscal shocks, while enhancing the monetary transmission to bank credit allocated to
LGFVs in infrastructure, significantly hampered the impacts of the 2009 monetary stimulus
on bank credit to non-SOEs in sectors other than infrastructure.
37The  response to monetary stimulus of bank credit to non-SOEs and the investment elasticity to bank credit
in the entire economy were also larger than those in the manufacturing sector (2.132 versus 1.071 and 0.346
versus 0.176).
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                         35

   In recent years, there has been a resurgence of interest in using infrastructure investment to
boost economic growth both in the U.S. and in China. How to make infrastructure spending
a priority in investment plans of local governments was discussed in a series of Chinese
government meetings in the first half of 2020. The recent RGW called for "pursuing a more
proactive and impactful fiscal policy" for financing infrastructure investment and set the tone
for loosening monetary policy through "a variety of tools ... to enable M2 money supply and
aggregate financing to grow at notably higher rates than last year." Under the PBC's current
law, credit demands by local governments for purposes of infrastructure investment must
be funded either by commercial banks' loans to local governments via LGFVs or through
issuance of local governments' special bonds. As long as implicit or explicit government
guarantees continue to exist, our empirical findings suggest that infrastructure investment
stimulated by non-monetary factors such as fiscal policy may undermine the eectiveness
of monetary policy in channeling funds from commercial banks into private firms in sectors
other than infrastructure. It is our hope that our current work provides a concrete step
toward further research on how the interaction between monetary and fiscal policies can
influence the credit channel in particular and the banking system in general.
                          Table 1. One-digit industry classifications for each of the four major sectors

            Sector                One-digit industry classification                                 NBS code
            Manufacturing         Manufacturing                                                        C
            Infrastructure        Production and supply of electricity, gas and water                  D
                                  Transportation, storage, postal service                              G
                                  Information transmission, computer services and software             I
                                  Management of water conservancy,environment and public facilities    N
            Real estate           Real estate                                                          K
            The remaining economy Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, and fishery                 A
                                  Mining                                                               B
                                  Construction                                                         E
                                  Wholesale and retail trades                                          F
                                  Hotels and catering services                                         H
                                  Leasing and business services                                        L
                                  Scientific research, technical service and geologic prospecting     M
                                  Education                                                            P
                                  Health, social security, and social welfare                          Q
                                  Culture, sports, and entertainment                                   R
                                  Public management and social organization                            S
Notes : The one-digit industries within each sector are classified according to China's National Bureau of Statistics (NBS).
                                                                                                                               MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE
                                                                                                                               36
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                     37

       Table 2. Loan size and firm-specific characteristics for all firms in the loan-
       level data
                             Mean     Median Std. dev.       P25      P75
                                          The entire economy
                Loan size  143.71      74.90     275.16     30.00    183.34
                Assets    3438.37     914.43 5974.40 335.30          3077.50
                Leverage  61.43%      59.97% 26.14% 44.42%           75.06%
                NPL        0.42%       0.00%     5.98%      0.00%     0.00%
                Guarantee 32.26%       2.90%     40.18%     0.00%    69.62%
                                             Manufacturing
                Loan size  121.68      60.00     193.19     30.00    150.00
                Assets    3821.78     970.00 6463.82 331.00          3497.68
                Leverage  61.42%      59.77% 24.05% 46.59%           72.52%
                NPL        0.28%       0.00%     4.82%      0.00%     0.00%
                Guarantee 44.65%      39.40% 41.07%         0.00%    91.41%
                                             Infrastructure
                Loan size  196.94      99.00     398.67     40.00    200.00
                Assets    4367.05     1316.57 6713.50 391.73         4602.29
                Leverage  66.14%      64.97% 26.75% 49.28%           79.77%
                NPL        0.70%       0.00%     7.71%      0.00%     0.00%
                Guarantee 29.89%       1.06%     39.26%     0.00%    61.53%
                                              Real estate
                Loan size  116.96      80.00     126.52     40.00    170.00
                Assets    1920.56     698.36 3729.43 320.85          1702.20
                Leverage  57.37%      56.12% 25.66% 40.20%           71.84%
                NPL        0.18%       0.00%     3.99%      0.00%     0.00%
                Guarantee 24.10%       0.00%     38.27%     0.00%    43.96%
                                        The rest of the economy
                Loan size  102.11      57.60     146.04     25.00    131.25
                Assets    2575.59     697.03 5010.70 291.12          1991.46
                Leverage  56.62%      54.15% 26.47% 38.40%           70.77%
                NPL        0.31%       0.00%     5.08%      0.00%     0.00%
                Guarantee 27.56%       0.00%     38.69%     0.00%    55.19%
Notes : "NPL" stands for non-performing loans as a fraction of the total loans,
"Guarantee" is a fraction of total loans guaranteed by third-parties, "Std. dev." stands for
standard deviation, P25 is the 25th percentile, and P75 is the 75th percentile. Loan size is
in million RMB. Assets are total assets in million RMB. Leverage is expressed as a ratio of
total liabilities over total assets.
Table 3. Loan size and firm-specific characteristics in the loan-level data: the relative importance of non-SOEs in infrastructure

                             Infrastructure                     Manufacturing            Infrastructure vs. manufacturing
                       Mean Median Std. dev.              Mean Median Std. dev.          Mean dierence        t-statistic
         Loan size    138.83     71.91    225.57          99.40    50.00      165.27          39.43 
                                                                                                                 18.78
         Assets       2275.08 576.64 4620.73             2112.22 533.05 4528.06              162.86               3.29
         Leverage     64.62% 63.47% 26.98%               59.33% 57.06% 24.65%                5.29%  
                                                                                                                 18.90
         NPL           0.70% 0.00%         8.02%          0.24% 0.00%         4.52%          0.46%                6.71
         Guarantee    32.73% 0.00%        42.29%         46.50% 43.50% 42.54%               -13.77% 
                                                                                                                -30.08
         Loans/assets 20.03% 10.79% 23.35%               15.96% 8.39%        20.08%          4.06%               17.35
                              Real estate                  The rest of the economy         Infrastructure vs. real estate
                       Mean Median Std. dev.              Mean Median Std. dev.          Mean dierence        t-statistic
         Loan size    108.10     74.00    114.51          96.71    60.00      121.79          30.73 
                                                                                                                 14.88
         Assets       1354.31 586.41 2730.42             1506.51 471.46 3505.21              920.77              20.88
         Leverage     56.32% 54.83% 25.45%               60.40% 58.32% 26.43%                8.30%  
                                                                                                                 27.33
         NPL           0.16% 0.00%         3.74%          0.19% 0.00%         4.08%          0.55%                7.54
         Guarantee    22.02% 0.00%        37.84%         34.66% 0.00%        42.70%         10.71%  
                                                                                                                 23.21
         Loans/assets 18.23% 12.13% 18.70%               19.39% 11.87% 21.48%                1.79%                7.34
Notes : "NPL" stands for non-performing loans as a fraction of the total loans, "Guarantee" is a fraction of total loans guaranteed
by third-parties, "Std. dev." stands for standard deviation, P25 is the 25th percentile, and P75 is the 75th percentile. Loan size is
in million RMB. Assets are total assets in millions of RMB. Leverage is expressed as a ratio of total liabilities over total assets.
The superscript *** represents the 0.01 significance level.
                                                                                                                                        MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE
                                                                                                                                        38
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                           39

       Table 4. Estimation results for dynamic panel regression (4): manufacturing

                                               All firms    SOEs        Non-SOEs
                                                   (1)        (2)           (3)
               d0 : main eect                  0.255       0.470         0.232
                                                (0.033)    (0.129)       (0.034)
               d1 : main eect                  0.240       0.506         0.211
                                                (0.035)    (0.138)       (0.036)
               d2 : main eect                  0.181         0.123       0.189
                                                (0.029)    (0.115)       (0.030)
               d3 : main eect                  0.082         0.078       0.084
                                                (0.025)    (0.097)       (0.025)
               b0 : interaction eect             -0.243     0.512         -0.303
                                                (0.354)    (1.396)       (0.361)
               b1 : interaction eect             -0.136     -1.786        0.061
                                                (0.448)    (1.758)       (0.456)
               b2 : interaction eect           -1.187       -2.066       -1.067
                                                (0.447)    (1.757)       (0.455)
               b3 : interaction eect            -0.736       1.488       -0.972
               P                                (0.387)    (1.519)       (0.394)
                   k   dk : main eect          0.758       1.177         0.716
               P                                (0.065)    (0.259)       (0.067)
                   k bk :   interaction eect      2.301       1.853        2.181
                                                (1.033)    (4.058)       (1.052)
               Number of Observations            55499       5773         49726
               Fixed eects                         Yes        Yes           Yes
               Firm-level controls                 Yes        Yes           Yes
               Aggregate controls                  Yes        Yes           Yes

Notes : This table reports the results of regressions in which the dependent variable is a
firm-quarter observation of newly issued bank credit to a firm scaled by its total nominal asset.
The right-hand variables include contemporaneous and lagged monetary policy shocks and their
interactions with the respective growth rates of infrastructure investment driven by non-monetary
factors. These variables are obtained from the first-stage estimation. The firm-level control
variables include the NPL ratio, the guarantee ratio, assets, and the leverage ratio, all lagged by
one period. The aggregate control variables include lagged GDP growth net of infrastructure
investment, lagged inflation, and contemporaneous and lagged growth rates of infrastructure
investment driven by non-monetary factors, all of which are obtained from the first-stage
estimation. Column (1) reports the estimates using the sample of all manufacturing firms;
columns (2) and (3) report the estimates based on the subsamples of manufacturing SOEs and
non-SOEs. The values in parentheses are standard errors. The superscript * represents the 0.1
significance level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                           40

    Table 5. Estimation results for dynamic panel regression (4): the entire economy

                                               All firms    SOEs        Non-SOEs
                                                   (1)        (2)            (3)
               d0 : main eect                  0.485       0.444          0.501
                                                (0.032)    (0.058)        (0.038)
               d1 : main eect                  0.493       0.478          0.501
                                                (0.034)    (0.061)        (0.041)
               d2 : main eect                  0.191       0.174          0.199
                                                (0.029)    (0.052)        (0.034)
               d3 : main eect                  0.168       0.160          0.173
                                                (0.024)    (0.043)        (0.029)
               b0 : interaction eect             -0.135    1.534          -0.688
                                                (0.346)    (0.622)        (0.413)
               b1 : interaction eect             0.097     2.483           -0.696
                                                (0.435)    (0.780)        (0.520)
               b2 : interaction eect           -1.800       -0.119       -2.341
                                                (0.437)    (0.784)        (0.522)
               b3 : interaction eect             -0.043     0.876          -0.345
               P                                (0.379)    (0.681)        (0.452)
                   k   dk : main eect          1.337       1.256          1.374
               P                                (0.064)    (0.115)        (0.076)
                   k bk :   interaction eect      1.882    4.774           4.070
                                                (1.010)    (1.812)        (1.205)
               Number of Observations           157895      40549         117346
               Fixed eects                        Yes        Yes            Yes
               Firm-level controls                Yes        Yes            Yes
               Aggregate controls                 Yes        Yes            Yes

Notes : This table reports the results of regressions in which the dependent variable is a
firm-quarter observation of newly issued bank credit to a firm scaled by its total nominal asset.
The right-hand variables include contemporaneous and lagged monetary policy shocks and their
interactions with the respective growth rates of infrastructure investment driven by non-monetary
factors. These variables are obtained from the first-stage estimation. The firm-level control
variables include the NPL ratio, the guarantee ratio, assets, and the leverage ratio, all lagged by
one period. The aggregate control variables include lagged GDP growth net of infrastructure
investment, lagged inflation, and contemporaneous and lagged growth rates of infrastructure
investment driven by non-monetary factors, all of which are obtained from the first-stage
estimation. Column (1) reports the estimates using the sample of all firms in the entire economy;
columns (2) and (3) report the estimates based on the subsamples of SOEs and non-SOEs in the
entire economy. The values in parentheses are standard errors. The superscript * represents the
0.1 significance level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                           41

       Table 6. Estimation results for dynamic panel regression (4): infrastructure

                                               All firms    SOEs        Non-SOEs
                                                   (1)        (2)           (3)
               d0 : main eect                  0.389       0.448         0.362
                                                (0.070)    (0.104)       (0.091)
               d1 : main eect                  0.493       0.461         0.515
                                                (0.074)    (0.110)       (0.096)
               d2 : main eect                  0.222       0.218         0.230
                                                (0.062)    (0.092)       (0.081)
               d3 : main eect                  0.272       0.242         0.290
                                                (0.052)    (0.077)       (0.067)
               b0 : interaction eect           3.106       3.196         3.117
                                                (0.752)    (1.111)       (0.972)
               b1 : interaction eect           4.447       4.028         4.646
                                                (0.944)    (1.394)       (1.221)
               b2 : interaction eect             -1.353     0.485        -2.206
                                                (0.951)    (1.402)       (1.231)
               b3 : interaction eect             -0.716     1.095         -1.563
               P                                (0.826)    (1.220)       (1.069)
                   k   dk : main eect          1.376       1.369         1.396
               P                                (0.139)    (0.206)       (0.179)
                   k bk :   interaction eect    5.483      8.803           3.993
                                                (2.194)    (3.239)       (2.840)
               Number of Observations            52486      16721         35765
               Fixed eects                        Yes        Yes            Yes
               Firm-level controls                Yes        Yes            Yes
               Aggregate controls                 Yes        Yes            Yes

Notes : This table reports the results of regressions in which the dependent variable is a
firm-quarter observation of newly issued bank credit to a firm scaled by its total nominal asset.
The right-hand variables include contemporaneous and lagged monetary policy shocks and their
interactions with the respective growth rates of infrastructure investment driven by non-monetary
factors. These variables are obtained from the first-stage estimation. The firm-level control
variables include the NPL ratio, the guarantee ratio, assets, and the leverage ratio, all lagged by
one period. The aggregate control variables include lagged GDP growth net of infrastructure
investment, lagged inflation, and contemporaneous and lagged growth rates of infrastructure
investment driven by non-monetary factors, all of which are obtained from the first-stage
estimation. Column (1) reports the estimates using the sample of all firms in the infrastructure
sector; columns (2) and (3) report the estimates based on the subsamples of SOEs and non-SOEs
in the infrastructure sector. The values in parentheses are standard errors. The superscript *
represents the 0.1 significance level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                           42

         Table 7. Estimation results for dynamic panel regression (4): real estate

                                              All firms      SOEs       Non-SOEs
                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)
              d0 : main eect                  1.203          0.343        1.288
                                               (0.121)      (0.201)       (0.132)
              d1 : main eect                  1.129         0.551         1.190
                                               (0.129)      (0.212)       (0.140)
              d2 : main eect                  0.287           0.029      0.313
                                               (0.108)      (0.180)       (0.118)
              d3 : main eect                  0.279          -0.085      0.314
                                               (0.090)      (0.149)       (0.097)
              b0 : interaction eect           -7.087         -1.514      -7.673
                                               (1.299)      (2.160)       (1.413)
              b1 : interaction eect           -10.74         -1.989      -11.69
                                               (1.635)      (2.722)       (1.778)
              b2 : interaction eect           -7.261        -5.515       -7.486
                                               (1.646)      (2.716)       (1.791)
              b3 : interaction eect             0.776        -0.145        0.858
              P                                (1.423)      (2.356)       (1.548)
                  k   dk : main eect          2.899         0.839         3.105
              P                                (0.241)      (0.400)       (0.262)
                  k bk :   interaction eect     24.31          9.164       25.99
                                               (3.796)      (6.299)       (4.130)
              Number of Observations            14950         1380         13570
              Fixed eects                        Yes           Yes          Yes
              Firm-level controls                Yes           Yes          Yes
              Aggregate controls                 Yes           Yes          Yes

Notes : This table reports the results of regressions in which the dependent variable is a
firm-quarter observation of newly issued bank credit to a firm scaled by its total nominal asset.
The right-hand variables include contemporaneous and lagged monetary policy shocks and their
interactions with the respective growth rates of infrastructure investment driven by non-monetary
factors. These variables are obtained from the first-stage estimation. The firm-level control
variables include the NPL ratio, the guarantee ratio, assets, and the leverage ratio, all lagged by
one period. The aggregate control variables include lagged GDP growth net of infrastructure
investment, lagged inflation, and contemporaneous and lagged growth rates of infrastructure
investment driven by non-monetary factors, all of which are obtained from the first-stage
estimation. Column (1) reports the estimates using the sample of all firms in the real estate
sector; columns (2) and (3) report the estimates based on the subsamples of SOEs and non-SOEs
in the real estate sector. The values in parentheses are standard errors. The superscript *
represents the 0.1 significance level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01.
             MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                                43

          Table 8. Estimation results for dynamic panel regression (4): the rest of the economy
                                                         All firms        SOEs        Non-SOEs
                                                             (1)           (2)            (3)
                       d0 : main eect                    0.670          0.440          0.882
                                                          (0.067)        (0.082)        (0.105)
                       d1 : main eect                    0.670          0.496          0.833
                                                          (0.071)        (0.087)        (0.111)
                       d2 : main eect                    0.180          0.176          0.187
                                                          (0.060)        (0.073)        (0.094)
                       d3 : main eect                     0.126         0.131            0.123
                                                          (0.050)        (0.060)        (0.078)
                       b0 : interaction eect             -1.583           0.600       -3.530
                                                          (0.723)        (0.879)        (1.126)
                       b1 : interaction eect              -1.643        2.645         -5.554
                                                          (0.908)        (1.100)        (1.415)
                       b2 : interaction eect             -1.799           0.411       -3.770
                                                          (0.914)        (1.108)        (1.424)
                       b3 : interaction eect               1.025          0.532          1.522
                       P                                  (0.792)        (0.961)        (1.233)
                           k   dk : main eect            1.645          1.244          2.024
                       P                                  (0.134)        (0.162)        (0.208)
                           k bk :   interaction eect        4.000         4.187        11.332
                                                          (2.109)        (2.561)        (3.283)
                       Number of Observations              34960          16675          18285
                       Fixed eects                          Yes            Yes            Yes
                       Firm-level controls                  Yes            Yes            Yes
                       Aggregate controls                   Yes            Yes            Yes
Notes : This table reports the results of regressions in which the dependent variable is a firm-quarter observation of
newly issued bank credit to a firm scaled by its total nominal assets. The right-hand variables include
contemporaneous and lagged monetary policy shocks and their interactions with the respective growth rates of
infrastructure investment driven by non-monetary factors. These variables are obtained from the first-stage
estimation. The firm-level control variables include the NPL ratio, the guarantee ratio, assets, and the leverage
ratio, all lagged by one period. The aggregate control variables include lagged GDP growth net of infrastructure
investment, lagged inflation, and contemporaneous and lagged growth rates of infrastructure investment driven by
non-monetary factors, all of which are obtained from the first-stage estimation. Column (1) reports the estimates
using the sample of all firms in the rest of the economy; column (2) and (3) report the estimates based on the
subsamples of SOEs and non-SOEs in the rest of the economy. The values in parentheses are standard errors. The
superscript * represents the 0.1 significance level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01.

                     Table 9.          Loan shares (%) in subsectors within the rest of the economy

            Subsectors                                                The sample period        Year 2009
                                                                      SOE    Non-SOE       SOE Non-SOE
            Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, and fishery      1.393    2.155       1.085     2.101
            Mining                                                    17.06    9.753       13.25     9.931
            Construction                                              15.13    12.15       15.24     12.42
            Wholesale and retail trades                               23.99    60.90       16.87     58.08
            Hotels and catering services                              0.807    2.728       0.575     3.385
            Leasing and business services                             20.09    9.599       26.65     10.61
            Other services                                            21.53    2.725       26.33     3.473
Notes : Other services include scientific research, technical service, geologic prospecting, education, health, social
security, social welfare, culture, sports, entertainment, public management, and social organization. All these
services are labor-intensive.
            MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                44

         Table 10. Estimation results for dynamic panel regression (4) for LGFVs

                                               Infrastructure             The entire economy
                                          LGFVs Non-LGFVs                LGFVs Non-LGFVs
                                             (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)
        d0 : main eect                    0.528         0.364            0.507       0.409
                                          (0.123)       (0.171)          (0.096)     (0.072)
        d1 : main eect                    0.513         0.414            0.588       0.407
                                          (0.130)       (0.182)          (0.102)     (0.077)
        d2 : main eect                    0.285           0.153          0.281        0.112
                                          (0.110)       (0.152)          (0.086)     (0.064)
        d3 : main eect                    0.273          0.210           0.206       0.140
                                          (0.091)       (0.126)          (0.071)     (0.053)
        b0 : interaction eect             5.894           0.167          5.375        -0.903
                                          (1.326)       (1.835)          (1.035)     (0.774)
        b1 : interaction eect              1.417        7.041             2.310      2.709
                                          (1.659)       (2.301)          (1.297)     (0.971)
        b2 : interaction eect              1.440         -0.695           -0.076      -0.110
                                          (1.663)       (2.320)          (1.298)     (0.978)
        b3 : interaction eect              2.136          0.010           0.981        0.748
        P                                 (1.451)       (2.014)          (1.131)     (0.848)
            k   dk : main eect            1.598         1.141            1.583       1.068
        P                                 (0.246)       (0.339)          (0.192)     (0.143)
            k bk :   interaction eect    10.887           6.522          8.591         2.444
                                          (3.855)       (5.349)          (3.011)     (2.257)
        Number of Observations              8924          7797            15755       24794
        Fixed eects                         Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes
        Firm-level controls                 Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes
        Aggregate controls                  Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes
Notes : This table reports the results of regressions for two subgroups of SOEs: LGFV and non-LGFVs.
The dependent variable is a firm-quarter observation of newly issued bank credit to a firm scaled by its
total nominal assets. The right-hand variables include contemporaneous and lagged monetary policy
shocks and their interactions with the respective growth rates of infrastructure investment driven by
non-monetary factors. These variables are obtained from the first-stage estimation. The firm-level control
variables include the NPL ratio, the guarantee ratio, assets, and the leverage ratio, all lagged by one
period. The aggregate control variables include lagged GDP growth net of infrastructure investment,
lagged inflation, and contemporaneous and lagged growth rates of infrastructure investment driven by
non-monetary factors, all of which are obtained from the first-stage estimation. Columns (1) and (2) report
the estimates using the subsamples of LGFVs and non-LGFVs in the infrastructure sector; columns (3)
and (4) report the estimates based on the subsamples of LGFVs and non-LGFVs in the entire economy.
The values in parentheses are standard errors. The superscript * represents the 0.1 significance level, **
0.05, and *** 0.01.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                           45

       Table 11. Estimation results for dynamic panel regression without the first-
       stage estimation: infrastructure

                                               All firms    SOEs        Non-SOEs
                                                   (1)        (2)            (3)
               d0 : main eect                  0.376       0.443         0.345
                                                (0.075)    (0.111)        (0.097)
               d1 : main eect                  0.510       0.471         0.535
                                                (0.084)    (0.124)        (0.109)
               d2 : main eect                  0.291       0.298         0.295
                                                (0.074)    (0.110)        (0.096)
               d3 : main eect                  0.268       0.221         0.293
                                                (0.060)    (0.089)        (0.078)
               b0 : interaction eect           2.397       2.243         2.503
                                                (0.601)    (0.887)        (0.777)
               b1 : interaction eect           2.313       2.278         2.319
                                                (0.727)    (1.073)        (0.941)
               b2 : interaction eect           -3.731      -1.869        -4.601
                                                (0.704)    (1.039)        (0.911)
               b3 : interaction eect             -1.009     0.441         -1.682
               P                                (0.656)    (0.971)        (0.849)
                   k   dk : main eect          1.446       1.433         1.469
               P                                (0.176)    (0.260)        (0.227)
                   k bk :   interaction eect     -0.031     3.093          -1.462
                                                (1.637)    (2.415)        (2.119)
               Number of Observations            52762      16790          35972
               Fixed eects                        Yes        Yes            Yes
               Firm-level controls                Yes        Yes            Yes
               Aggregate controls                 Yes        Yes            Yes

Notes : This table reports the results of regressions in which the dependent variable is a
firm-quarter observation of newly issued bank credit to a firm scaled by its total nominal assets.
The right-hand variables include contemporaneous and lagged monetary policy shocks and their
interactions with the respective growth rates of infrastructure investment without the first-stage
estimation. The firm-level control variables include the NPL ratio, the guarantee ratio, assets,
and the leverage ratio, all lagged by one period. The aggregate control variables include lagged
GDP growth net of infrastructure investment, lagged inflation, and contemporaneous and lagged
growth rates of infrastructure investment. Column (1) reports the estimates using the sample of
all firms in the infrastructure sector; columns (2) and (3) report the estimates based on the
subsamples of SOEs and non-SOEs in the infrastructure sector. The values in parentheses are
standard errors. The superscript * represents the 0.1 significance level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01.
                         Table 12. Estimated investment sensitivity to bank loans for listed firms in CSMAR

                                                   Investment   (ii,t ) in manufacturing      Investment (ii,t ) in all sectors
                                                   All firms      SOEs        Non-SOEs     All firms    SOEs           Non-SOEs
                                                      (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)              (6)
         log Li,t                                  0.106          0.026        0.114       0.097  
                                                                                                        0.031           0.103
                                                    (0.020)      (0.042)        (0.023)     (0.021)    (0.039)           (0.024)
       I09   10   log Li,t                          0.077        0.197   
                                                                                 0.062     0.231  
                                                                                                       0.181   
                                                                                                                        0.243
                                                    (0.043)      (0.087)        (0.051)     (0.044)    (0.068)           (0.053)
       Overall investment sensitivity L + I         0.183       0.223          0.176       0.328  
                                                                                                       0.212   
                                                                                                                        0.346
                                                    (0.039)      (0.079)        (0.045)     (0.039)    (0.057)           (0.047)
       Number of Observations                        12599         3750          8849        15510       4242             11268
       Fixed eects                                    Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes               Yes
       Quarterly dummy                                Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes               Yes
       Firm-level controls                            Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes               Yes
       Aggregate controls                             Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes               Yes

Notes : This table reports the results of regressions in which the dependent variable is a firm-quarter observation of a firm's
investment scaled by its total nominal assets. The right-hand variable is the quarterly growth of the firm's outstanding loan
balance. The firm-level control variables include lagged total assets and the lagged leverage ratio. The aggregate control variables
include lagged GDP growth, lagged inflation, and quarter dummies. Column (1) reports the estimates using the sample of all
listed manufacturing firms; columns (2) and (3) report the estimates based on the subsamples of listed manufacturing SOEs and
non-SOEs. Columns (4)-(6) report the estimates using the sample of all listed CSMAR firms and the subsamples of listed CSMAR
SOEs and non-SOEs. The values in parentheses are standard errors. The superscript * represents the 0.1 significance level, **
0.05, and *** 0.01.
                                                                                                                                       MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE
                                                                                                                                       46
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                              47

              Table 13. Impacts of the 2009Q1-2009Q3 monetary stimulus on investment
                                                                 Manufacturing      The entire economy
                                               Average firm         2.689                 8.763
                                               SOE                  8.393                 9.217
                                               Non-SOE              1.978                 7.410
Notes : The values, expressed in percentage points, represent increases of investment as a share of the firm's
assets.

         Table 14. Decomposition of the monetary eect on investment in the entire economy
                                                            Total eect       Main eect     Interaction eect
                                                                (1)             (2)                (3)
                                            Average firm      8.763            9.393             -0.630
                                            SOE               9.217            7.630             1.587
                                            Non-SOE           7.410            8.714             -1.304
Notes : The values, expressed in percentage points, represent increases of investment as a share of the firm's
assets.



                                       30                                                                       14
                                                  M2 (left scale)
                                                  GDP (right scale)
                Growth rate (y/y, %)




                                       25                                                                       12


                                       20                                                                       10


                                       15                                                                       8


                                       10                                                                        6
                                        2000   2002     2004          2006   2008   2010     2012    2014     2016



                                       30
                                                  M2
                                                  Bank loans
                Growth rate (y/y, %)




                                       25


                                       20


                                       15


                                       10
                                        2000   2002     2004          2006   2008   2010     2012    2014     2016

        Figure 1. The time series of annual growth rates of GDP, M2, and bank lend-
        ing. Notes : The shaded bar marks the monetary stimulus period of 2009Q1-
        Q3.
                                   MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                 48

                             40



                             30



                             20
Investment growth (yoy, %)




                             10



                               0



                             -10



                             -20



                             -30                                                               Infrastructure
                                                                                               Real estate
                                                                                               Manufacturing
                             -40
                               2007        2008     2009       2010        2011       2012       2013

                             Figure 2. Real investment in various sectors. Notes : All series are deflated
                             by the GDP deflator. The shaded bar marks the monetary stimulus period of
                             2009Q1-Q3.
  MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                   49


18
16
14
12
10
 8
 6
 4

 2007        2008        2009        2010         2011        2012        2013



12

10

 8

 6

 4

 2

 0

 -2
  2007       2008        2009        2010         2011        2012        2013

Figure 3. Newly originated bank loans as a percent of GDP. Notes : The top
chart shows all newly issued loans as a percent of GDP. The bottom chart
displays the increase of loan volumes (as a percent of GDP) from the average
level in 2007Q1-2008Q4. Each time series is aggregated up from the loan-level
data. The shaded bar marks the monetary stimulus period of 2009Q1-Q3.
     MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE              50


60




50




40




30




20




10




 0
     2007      2008      2009        2010       2011       2012       2013

Figure 4. Share of bank loans allocated to the four key sectors in 2007-2013
from the micro loan data. Notes : The wide shaded bar marks the period of
2009Q1-Q3 during which the monetary policy rule was changed to be more
stimulative.
      MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                    51


6                                                6

5                                                5

4                                                4

3                                                3

2                                                2

1                                                1

0                                                0

-1                                              -1
 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013              2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013



6                                                6

5                                                5

4                                                4

3                                                3

2                                                2

1                                                1

0                                                0

-1                                              -1
 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013              2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

    Figure 5. Newly originated bank loans to all firms and to LGFVs as a percent
    of GDP in each of the four key sectors. Notes : The time series for each sector
    is aggregated up from the firm-quarter data for that sector. Each loan value
    (as a percent of GDP) is the increase from the average loan value in 2007Q1-
    2008Q4. The shaded bar marks the monetary stimulus period of 2009Q1-Q3.
                                                 MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                    52

                                             9
                                                                                                                GDP
                                                                                                                Infrastructure
                                             8


                                             7
Impact of monetary stimulus (y/y, percent)




                                             6


                                             5


                                             4


                                             3


                                             2


                                             1


                                             0

                                             2007            2008            2009            2010            2011

                                             Figure 6. Counterfactual historical paths of year-over-year growth rates of
                                             real GDP and real infrastructure investment from the first-stage macro model.
                                             Notes : Both series are deflated by the GDP deflator. The shaded bar marks
                                             the monetary stimulus period of 2009Q1-Q3. The counterfactual path is driven
                                             by exogenous monetary changes only.
   MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                        53



  2
                                            1.5

1.5

                                             1
  1

0.5
                                            0.5
  0

-0.5                                         0
       0   2   4   6     8    10   12             0   2   4    6    8    10       12



2.5                                         0.2

  2
                                             0

1.5
                                           -0.2
  1

                                           -0.4
0.5

  0                                        -0.6
       0   2   4   6     8    10   12             0   2   4    6    8    10       12


Figure 7. Dynamic impacts of main monetary stimulus (no interaction) and
its interaction with infrastructure investment on bank loans to the average
firm. Notes : The dynamic responses are expressed as percentage changes from
the initial quarter 0 (i.e., changes from the pre-stimulus period). Dash-dotted
lines represent the corresponding .90 probability bands. Quarter 1 corresponds
to 2009Q1 and quarter 12 corresponds to 2011Q4.
   MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                        54



  5                                          1

  4
                                             0
  3

  2                                         -1

  1
                                            -2
  0

 -1                                         -3
       0   2   4   6     8    10   12             0   2   4    6    8    10       12



  1                                         1.5

0.5                                          1

  0                                         0.5

-0.5                                         0

 -1                                        -0.5

-1.5                                        -1

 -2                                        -1.5
       0   2   4   6     8    10   12             0   2   4    6    8    10       12



                                            0.5
  3

2.5                                          0

  2
                                           -0.5
1.5
                                            -1
  1

0.5                                        -1.5

  0
                                            -2
       0   2   4   6     8    10   12             0   2   4    6    8    10       12


Figure 8. Dynamic impacts of main monetary stimulus (no interaction) and
its interaction with infrastructure investment on bank loans to the average
SOE firm and the average non-SOE firm. The right column displays the non-
SOE loan response relative to the SOE loan response. Notes : The dynamic
responses are expressed as percentage changes from the initial quarter 0 (i.e.,
changes from the non-stimulus period). Dash-dotted lines and error bars rep-
resent the corresponding .90 probability bands. Quarter 1 corresponds to
2009Q1 and quarter 12 corresponds to 2011Q4.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                  55



3                                            3

                                           2.5
2
                                             2

1                                          1.5

                                             1
0
                                           0.5

-1                                           0
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4     6    8    10       12



4                                          0.4

                                           0.2
3
                                             0

2                                         -0.2

                                          -0.4
1
                                          -0.6

0                                         -0.8
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4     6    8    10       12


Figure 9. Dynamic impacts of main monetary stimulus (no interaction) and
its interaction with infrastructure investment on bank loans to the average
firm. Notes : The dynamic responses are expressed as percentage changes from
the initial quarter 0 (i.e., changes from the pre-stimulus period). Dash-dotted
lines represent the corresponding .90 probability bands. Quarter 1 corresponds
to 2009Q1 and quarter 12 corresponds to 2011Q4.
   MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                       56



  4                                          1


  3
                                           0.5

  2

                                             0
  1


  0                                        -0.5
       0   2   4   6     8   10    12             0   2   4   6     8    10      12



1.5                                          0

  1
                                           -0.5
0.5

  0
                                            -1
-0.5

 -1                                        -1.5
       0   2   4   6     8   10    12             0   2   4   6     8    10      12



  4                                        0.5


  3
                                             0

  2
                                           -0.5
  1

                                            -1
  0
       0   2   4   6     8   10    12             0   2   4   6     8    10      12


Figure 10. Dynamic impacts of main monetary stimulus (no interaction)
and its interaction with infrastructure investment on bank loans to the aver-
age SOE firm and the average non-SOE firm. The right column displays the
non-SOE loan response relative to the SOE loan response. Notes : The dy-
namic responses are expressed as percentage changes from the initial quarter 0
(i.e., changes from the non-stimulus period). Dash-dotted lines and error bars
represent the corresponding .90 probability bands. Quarter 1 corresponds to
2009Q1 and quarter 12 corresponds to 2011Q4.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                  57



5                                            5

4                                            4
3
                                             3
2
                                             2
1

0                                            1

-1                                           0
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4     6    8    10       12



4                                            2

                                           1.5
3
                                             1

2                                          0.5

                                             0
1
                                          -0.5

0                                           -1
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4     6    8    10       12


Figure 11. Dynamic impacts of main monetary stimulus (no interaction)
and its interaction with infrastructure investment on bank loans to the average
firm. Notes : The dynamic responses are expressed as percentage changes from
the initial quarter 0 (i.e., changes from the pre-stimulus period). Dash-dotted
lines represent the corresponding .90 probability bands. Quarter 1 corresponds
to 2009Q1 and quarter 12 corresponds to 2011Q4.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                 58



4                                           2

                                           1.5
3
                                            1

                                           0.5
2
                                            0
1                                         -0.5

                                           -1
0
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4    6    8    10       12



3
                                            1

2                                          0.5

                                            0
1
                                          -0.5
0
                                           -1
-1
                                          -1.5

-2                                         -2
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4    6    8    10       12



5                                           1

4                                          0.5

3                                           0

2                                         -0.5

1                                          -1

0                                         -1.5
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4    6    8    10       12


Figure 12. Dynamic impacts of main monetary stimulus (no interaction)
and its interaction with infrastructure investment on bank loans to the aver-
age SOE firm and the average non-SOE firm. The right column displays the
non-SOE loan response relative to the SOE loan response. Notes : The dy-
namic responses are expressed as percentage changes from the initial quarter 0
(i.e., changes from the non-stimulus period). Dash-dotted lines and error bars
represent the corresponding .90 probability bands. Quarter 1 corresponds to
2009Q1 and quarter 12 corresponds to 2011Q4.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                  59



8                                            4

6
                                             3
4

2                                            2

0
                                             1
-2

-4                                           0
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4     6    8    10       12



8                                            1

                                             0
6
                                            -1

4                                           -2

                                            -3
2
                                            -4

0                                           -5
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4     6    8    10       12


Figure 13. Dynamic impacts of main monetary stimulus (no interaction)
and its interaction with infrastructure investment on bank loans to the average
firm. Notes : The dynamic responses are expressed as percentage changes from
the initial quarter 0 (i.e., changes from the pre-stimulus period). Dash-dotted
lines represent the corresponding .90 probability bands. Quarter 1 corresponds
to 2009Q1 and quarter 12 corresponds to 2011Q4.
     MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                       60



10                                           8

 8
                                             6
 6

 4                                           4

 2
                                             2
 0

-2                                           0
     0   2   4     6    8     10   12             0   2   4    6     8    10       12



 1                                           2

 0
                                             0
-1

-2                                           -2

-3
                                             -4
-4

-5                                           -6
     0   2   4     6    8     10   12             0   2   4    6     8    10       12



 5                                           5

 4                                           4

 3                                           3

 2                                           2

 1                                           1

 0                                           0

-1                                           -1
     0   2   4     6    8     10   12             0   2   4    6     8    10       12


Figure 14. Dynamic impacts on bank loans to the average SOE firm and the
average non-SOE firm in response to main monetary stimulus (no interaction)
and its interaction with infrastructure investment. The right column displays
the non-SOE loan response relative to the SOE loan response. Notes : The
dynamic responses are expressed as percentage changes from the initial quarter
0 (i.e., changes from the non-stimulus period). Dash-dotted lines and error bars
represent the corresponding .90 probability bands. Quarter 1 corresponds to
2009Q1 and quarter 12 corresponds to 2011Q4.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                  61



4                                            4

3
                                             3

2
                                             2
1

                                             1
0

-1                                           0
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4     6    8    10       12



5                                          0.5

4

3                                            0

2

1                                         -0.5

0
                                            -1
-1
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4     6    8    10       12


Figure 15. Dynamic impacts of main monetary stimulus (no interaction)
and its interaction with infrastructure investment on bank loans to the average
firm. Notes : The dynamic responses are expressed as percentage changes from
the initial quarter 0 (i.e., changes from the pre-stimulus period). Dash-dotted
lines represent the corresponding .90 probability bands. Quarter 1 corresponds
to 2009Q1 and quarter 12 corresponds to 2011Q4.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                 62



6                                           4

5                                           3
4
                                            2
3
                                            1
2

1                                           0

0                                          -1
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4    6    8    10       12



2                                           1

1                                           0

0                                          -1

-1                                         -2

-2                                         -3

-3                                         -4
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4    6    8    10       12



4                                          1.5

3                                           1

2                                          0.5

1                                           0

0                                         -0.5

-1                                         -1
     0      2    4   6    8   10   12            0   2   4    6    8    10       12


Figure 16. Dynamic impacts of main monetary stimulus (no interaction)
and its interaction with infrastructure investment on bank loans to the aver-
age SOE firm and the average non-SOE firm. The right column displays the
non-SOE loan response relative to the SOE loan response. Notes : The dy-
namic responses are expressed as percentage changes from the initial quarter 0
(i.e., changes from the non-stimulus period). Dash-dotted lines and error bars
represent the corresponding .90 probability bands. Quarter 1 corresponds to
2009Q1 and quarter 12 corresponds to 2011Q4.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                       63

  Appendix A provides the data description and the sources. Appendix B provides technical
details of the first-stage macro model. Appendix C provides technical details of how to
compute 90% probability intervals of dynamic responses. Appendix D provides additional
results for the impacts of monetary stimulus.

                     Appendix A. Data description and sources

   The methodology of collecting and constructing the quarterly aggregate series is based
on Higgins and Zha (2015) and Chang, Chen, Waggoner, and Zha (2016). The main data
sources are China's National Bureau of Statistics, the People's Bank of China, and CEIC.
The proc X-12 procedure in the SAS software package is used for seasonal adjustment.
In our firm-quarter dataset, we seasonally adjust aggregated new loans and total assets
for each sector and each type of firm (e.g., a manufacturing-SOE combination). We then
multiply each firm-level variable by the ratio of the seasonally adjusted aggregate to the
non-seasonally adjusted aggregate. This method allows us to obtain seasonally adjusted
firm-quarter data. Because the sample is short in the time dimension, we use the seasonal
ARIMA(0, 1, 1)(0, 1, 1)4 model to perform seasonal adjustments. This model is similar to
the seasonal ARIMA(0, 1, 1)(0, 1, 1)12 model, known as the airline model, that Box, Jenkins,
Reinsel, and Ljung (2015) used to seasonally adjust monthly airline passenger data. Results
without seasonal adjustments are similar to those with seasonal adjustments. We provide,
below, a detailed description of the aggregate and firm-quarter variables used in the main
text as well as in appendices.
M2: Supply of M2, quarterly average of the monthly series (billions of RMB). For the last
        monthly observation, we use the level of M2 (CEIC ticker CKSAAC). The 12 monthly
        observations prior to the last observation are constructed recursively from the month-
        over-month gross growth rates of CKSAAC each multiplied by a constant adjustment
        factor. The adjustment factor is chosen so that the 12-month growth rate of the last
        observed value of our constructed series is equal to the last published 12-month growth
        rate (CEIC ticker CKSAACA). Once these last 13 observations are determined, we
        recursively construct the level series back to 1996M4 with the published year-over-
        year growth rate, back to 1994M12 with the year-over-year growth rate provided
        by the PBC, and back to 1990M3 with an interpolated year-over-year growth rate
        derived from the quarterly level of M2 (CEIC ticker CKAAC). Sources: NBS, CEIC,
        People's Bank of China, and Chang, Chen, Waggoner, and Zha (2016).
GDP: Real GDP by value added (billions of 2008 RMB), seasonally adjusted with SAS
        proc X12. Sources of raw data: NBS and CEIC. Detailed method of construction
        described in Higgins and Zha (2015).
GDP growth target: Real GDP growth target set by the central government of China.
        Sources: NBS and CEIC.
CPI: Consumer price index, seasonally adjusted. Constructed by splicing together gross 1-
        month (CEIC ticker CIAHJZ) and 12-month (CEIC ticker CIEA) inflation rates, con-
        verting to a quarterly index, and seasonally adjusting with SAS proc X12. Sources:
        NBS and CEIC.
          MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                 64

Infrastructure investment: Gross capital formation for the infrastructure sector. The
       series, based on the expenditure side of national domestic product, is interpolated
       by fixed-asset investment and deflated by the investment price index. Sources: NBS
       and CEIC.
Investment price: The price index of fixed asset investment. Seasonally adjusted with SAS
       proc X12. Sources of raw data: NBS and CEIC. Primarily based on quarterly CEIC
       series "CIAHQA: CN: Fixed Asset Inv Price Index: Overall (PY=100)," which starts
       in 2004Q1. The 2003Q1-Q4 levels use corporate goods investment price, which is
       derived from CEIC ticker CIACWZ "(DC)Corporate Goods Price Index: Investment
       Goods; Dec1993=100" and CEIC ticker CIQDBAA "CN: Corporate Goods Price
       Index: Investment Goods; Prev Year=100," with a very small adjustment such that
       the adjusted 2004Q1 4-quarter growth rate is consistent with CIAHQA.
Assets: A firm's total physical and financial assets. CSMAR item A001000000.
Investment: Cash paid to acquire and construct fixed assets; intangible assets and other
       long-term assets. CSMAR item C002006000 after undoing year-to-date operation.
Leverage: A firm's leverage defined as a ratio of the firm's total liabilities to its total assets.
       Ratio of CSMAR item A002000000 to CSMAR item A001000000.
NPL: Non-performing loans. A firm's credit quality defined as the ratio of the firm's out-
       standing bank loans in lower rating categories (i.e., substandard, doubtful, and loss
       categories) to its total outstanding bank loans. The international standard loan clas-
       sification consists of five categories: normal, special-purpose, substandard, doubtful,
       and loss.
Guarantee: The ratio of a firm's outstanding bank loans with at least one third-party
       credit guarantor to its total outstanding bank loans. This ratio serves as a proxy
       to enhancement of the firm's existing credit. According to the contract, a credit
       guarantor guarantees to pay a borrower's debt if the borrower defaults on a loan
       obligation.


                      Appendix B. The first-stage macro model

   We do not impose any restrictions on subsystem (8) to avoid the "incredible restrictions"
criticism of Sims (1980). Without any restrictions, subsystem (8) is unidentified because the
transformed system
                                          4
                                          X                      4
                                                                 X
    (QA0 )xt + (Qbm,0 ) log Mt = (Qc) +         (QAk )xt   k +         (Qbm,k ) log Mt   k   + Q t ,
                                          k=1                    k=1

where Q is any orthogonal matrix, generates the same dynamics of xt as does the original
system (8).
  Although subsystem (8) is unidentified, the following propositions show that the monetary
policy equation is identified.

Proposition B.1. When the system represented by (5) and (8) is jointly estimated, mon-
etary policy represented by equation (5) is identified, even though subsystem (8) itself is
unidentified.
             MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                                                                     65

Proof. Consider the complete system composed of (5) and (8), which can be written in the
SVAR form of
  " 1          #"         # " 0   y,t g #
     m,t
            0     log M t
                                       y,t 1
           1 n             =      m,t

    bm,0 A0         xt            c
  |     {z     }             |   {z          }
      e0,t
      A                                                    c
                                                           ~t
      2            h                              i3 "                   #           2               h                                 i3 "               #
          1+           y,t                                                                                 y,t
               m                  
                                             0                                               m                           
                                                                                                                               0
   +4      m,t         m,t        m,t   1(n 2)        5 log Mt       1
                                                                             +4           m,t             m,t          m,t   1(n 2)        5 log Mt   2

          bm,1                    A1                      xt 1                           bm,2                          A2                      xt 2
      |                      {z                       }                              |                           {z                        }
                         e1,t
                         A                                                                                      e2,t
                                                                                                                A
                                        "                   #"                   #       "                      #"                     #     "   #
                                             0        0          log Mt      3                  0          0           log Mt      4         m,t
                                   +                  1 n                            +                    1n                               +       . (B.1)
                                            bm,3 A3                xt 3                      bm,4 A4                     xt 4                t
                                        |       {z  }                                    |       {z  }
                                                 e3
                                                 A                                                   e4
                                                                                                     A

For system (B.1), we first show that the first equation (the monetary policy equation) is
identified. According to Theorem 2 of Rubio-Ram´        irez, Waggoner, and Zha (2010), this
equation is identified if the following statement is true: if Q  eA
                                                                  e0,t = A
                                                                         b0,t , where Q
                                                                                      e is an
orthogonal matrix, and A  b0,t maintains the form of
                                 "            # " 11           #
                                   b11
                                   A     b12      b0,t 0
                                                  A
                                     0,t A0,t             1 n ,
                                               =
                                   b21
                                   A 0,t
                                         b
                                         A22
                                          0,t     b
                                                  A 21
                                                         Ab22
                                                    0,t    0,t

     e must be of the form
then Q
                                                      "             # 2                               3
                                                          e
                                                          Q 11 e
                                                               Q 12      1                       0
                                                                     = 4                      1n 5
                                                                                                   .                                                  (B.2)
                                                          e21 Q
                                                          Q    e22       0                   Qe22
                                                                                     n 1

To show that the above statement is true,                            note that QeAe0,t = A
                                                                                         b0,t is equivalent to
                     "                                                         # " 11         #
                       e11 A
                       Q   e11    e12 e21                             e12 A
                                                                          e22      Ab0,t 0
                            0,t + Q A0,t                              Q    0,t            1 n .
                                                                                =
                       e21 A
                       Q   e11    e22 e21
                            0,t + Q A0,t
                                                                      e22 A
                                                                      Q   e22
                                                                           0,t     Ab 21  b22
                                                                                          A               0,t          0,t

      e22 is invertible for the system and Q
Since A                                     e12 A
                                                e22 = 0, we have Qe12 = 0. Because Q
                                                                                   e is an
       0,t                                       0,t
orthogonal matrix, it must be that Q e21 = 0 and Qe11 = 1. This proves (B.2).            


   Let  denote a collection of all the parameters for the system represented by (5) and (8)
and   ^ be its posterior estimate. Conditional on ^ and the actual data of log Mt and xt for
all t, we compute the estimated shocks denoted by   ^m,t and ^t . The variables driven only by
monetary policy changes, xm                                                o
                              t , and by non-monetary aggregate shocks, xt , are computed as
follows.

     · Set ^t = 0 for all t.
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                          66

      · Compute the decomposed paths of log Mt and xt with ^m,t through the system rep-
        resented by (5) and (8).
      · Denote the decomposed path of xt by xm
                                             t .
                   o     o       m
      · Compute xt as xt = xt xt .
This decomposition is unique as stated in the following proposition.

Proposition B.2. While subsystem (8) itself is unidentified, the decomposed variables xm
                                                                                       t and
 o                  ^
xt , conditional on  and the data, are uniquely determined.

Proof. From the proof of Proposition B.1, one can see that if we multiply system (B.1) by an
orthogonal matrix Q  e to obtain an observationally equivalent system, Q         e must be of the form
given by (B.2). Multiplying B.1 by such an orthogonal matrix, the resulting reduced-form
system will be
                                                                                        "       #
        e0,t
           1      e0,t
                     1 e              1 e
                                   e0,t             e0,t
                                                       1 e            1 e
                                                                   e0,t            e0,t
                                                                                      1     m,t
   zt = A    e
             ct + A    A1,t zt 1 + A    A2,t zt 2 + A    A3 zt 3 + A    A4 z t 4 + A              (B.3)
                                                                                          e 0 t
                                                                                          Q 22

where zt = [log Mt x0t ]0 . The estimated shocks,   ^m,t and ^t , are obtained from B.3, given   ^
and the data. The monetary policy shock       ^m,t does not depend on Q   e22 , while ^t does. But
since this decomposition sets  ^t to zero, the decomposition is uniquely defined (i.e., does not
depend on Q e22 ).                                                                              


Appendix C. Computing the 90% probability intervals of dynamic responses

   We first generate random draws of the coe cients in regression (4). Conditional on each
random draw of the coe cients, we then compute a random path of dynamic responses using
equation (11). Specifically, we begin with grouping the regression coe cients in regression (4)
into the vectors                   h                             i0
                               j      j   j       j   j        j
                                 =  d 0 · · · d ` b0 · · · b`
and                                   h                                                  i0
                                 j                                  j0
                                     = c1,j · · · cN,j                   cj 0 cj
                                                                               z
                                                                                 0                            (C.1)
and the regressors into the vectors
                     h                                                                                   i0
              xj,t = bj,t 1 "m,t · · · "m,t                    o                    o
                                                          `   ginfra ,t "m,t · · · ginfra,t ` "m,t   `

and                                         h                                       i0
                                 xi,j,t =       c0i,j,t   x0j,t    o0
                                                                   t
                                                                          0
                                                                         zi,j,t 1

where j 2 {SOEs, non-SOEs, All firms} and c0i,j,t is a vector of firm dummies whose ith
element is 1 and remaining elements are 0. The fitted values for Equation (4) can be rewritten
in compact form as
                                      bi,j,t = ^ j 0 xi,j,t ,
           MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                                          67

while the fitted values for equation (11) can be rewritten as

                                                bj,t = ^ j 0 xj,t .                                          (C.2)

  We stack firm-specific residuals in regression (4) into the T  1 vector
              h                                                                  i0
        j = 1,j,2007Q2+`+1 · · · 1,j,2013Q2 · · · N,j,2007Q2+`+1 · · · N,j,2013Q2 ,

where 2013Q2 is the last data point in the time dimension and T = N (21 `). Letting
Nx denote the length of xi,j,t , we define j =  0j  0j , denote the hth random draw from the
                                                                  ( h)
inverse Wishart (IW) distribution IW(j , T +2 Nx ) by j , denote the hth random draw of
          0      (h)
  j
    +  (h) chol( j (X j 0 X j ) 1 ) by ^ j, (h) , where chol represents the Choleski decomposition
of the enclosed matrix
              h                                                                          i0
        Xj = x1,j,2007Q2+`+1 · · · x1,j,2013Q2 · · · xN,j,2007Q2+`+1 · · · xN,j,2013Q2 ,

and  (h) is an Nx  1 vector randomly drawn from the iid Gaussian distribution N (0, I Nx )
(see Ba´nbura, Giannone, and Reichlin (2010) for technical details).
   For j in equation (C.2), we extract the subvector j,(h) from the hth draw j,(h) , using
equation (C.1) for 1  h  H (H is the number of random draws). A random draw of the dy-
namic response function f (h) = [f (h) (1, j ), . . . , f (h) (12, j )]0 for j 2 {SOE, non-SOE, All firms}
in sector j is generated by feeding in three consecutive shocks and interaction terms

 "Stim        Stim        Stim        o             Stim        o             Stim        o             Stim
  m,2009Q1 , "m,2009Q2 , "m,2009Q3 , ginfra,2009Q1 "m,2009Q1 , ginfra,2009Q2 "m,2009Q2 , ginfra,2009Q3 "m,2009Q3 .

The 5th and 95th percentiles of the set {f h (t, j )}H
                                                     h=1 deliver the .90 probability bands of
                             38
dynamic responses at time t.

    Appendix D. Additional results for the impacts of monetary stimulus

   In this section, we report additional estimated results that supplement the discussion
in the main text. Tables D.1-D.5 report the numerical values for relative impacts of the
2009 monetary stimulus on bank credit to non-SOEs relative to SOEs. The positive values
indicate that non-SOEs received more loans than SOEs, and vice versa. Tables D.7-D.10
report additional results when the first-stage regression is omitted. The impacts of monetary
stimulus on bank credit to LGFVs and non-LGFVs in non-infrastructure sectors are reported
in Table D.6. Detailed discussion of all these supplemental tables is in the main text.
   In all these regressions, the dependent variable is a firm-quarter observation of newly
issued bank credit to a firm scaled by its total nominal assets. The right-hand variables
include contemporaneous and lagged monetary policy shocks and their interactions with
the respective growth rates of infrastructure investment. The firm-level control variables
include the NPL ratio, the guarantee ratio, assets, and the leverage ratio, all lagged by one
38We  set H = 1000. Since all the random draws are iid, 1000 draws are su cient for achieving accuracy.
Note that the dynamic response results do not depend on particular values of t and other variables.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                 68

period. The aggregate control variables include lagged GDP growth, lagged inflation, and
contemporaneous and lagged growth rates of infrastructure investment.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                    69

Table D.1. Relative impacts of monetary stimulus on loans to non-SOEs: manufacturing

                            Main eect Interaction eect Total eect
                                (1)           (2)          (3)
                 2009Q1       -0.69          -0.22      -0.90
                             ( 0.38)        (0.38)       (0.32)
                 2009Q2        1.61          0.40       -1.20
                             ( 0.71)        (0.54)       (0.41)
                 2009Q3         1.19         0.46         -0.74
                             ( 0.75)        (0.57)       (0.45)
                 2009Q4         0.38         -0.55        -0.93
                             ( 0.52)        (0.51)       (0.51)
                 2010Q1        0.07          -0.25        -0.18
                              (0.35)        (0.16)       (0.31)
                 2010Q2        0.00          0.01         -0.01
                             ( 0.18)        (0.01)       (0.19)
Notes : Impacts relative to those on SOE loans (we take monetary impacts on loans to
SOEs as a benchmark for comparison). The superscript * represents the 0.1 significance
level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01. Each panel regression has both firm-level controls and
aggregate controls.



      Table D.2. Relative impacts of monetary stimulus on loans to non-SOEs:
      the entire economy

                            Main eect Interaction eect Total eect
                               (1)            (2)          (3)
                                                 
                 2009Q1        0.17        -0.59        -0.42
                             ( 0.20)        (0.19)       (0.16)
                 2009Q2        0.29        -1.06        -0.77
                             ( 0.36)        (0.28)       (0.21)
                                                 
                 2009Q3        0.34        -0.88         -0.54
                             ( 0.37)        (0.28)       (0.23)
                                                  
                 2009Q4        0.26         -0.53         -0.27
                             ( 0.26)        (0.26)       (0.26)
                 2010Q1        0.16          -0.11        0.05
                              (0.17)        (0.08)       (0.15)
                 2010Q2        0.06          0.01         0.07
                             ( 0.09)        (0.01)       (0.09)
Notes : Impacts relative to those on SOE loans (we take monetary impacts on loans to
SOEs as a benchmark for comparison). The superscript * represents the 0.1 significance
level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01. Each panel regression has both firm-level controls and
aggregate controls.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                    70

Table D.3. Relative impacts of monetary stimulus on loans to non-SOEs: infrastructure

                            Main eect Interaction eect Total eect
                               (1)            (2)          (3)
                 2009Q1         0.25         -0.02        -0.27
                              (0.39)        (0.41)       (0.31)
                 2009Q2         0.05         0.21         0.16
                             ( 0.72)        (0.56)       (0.42)
                 2009Q3        0.21          -0.55        -0.34
                              (0.80)        (0.60)       (0.47)
                 2009Q4        0.46         -0.97         -0.51
                              (0.55)        (0.54)       (0.52)
                 2010Q1        0.35         -0.29         0.06
                              (0.36)        (0.17)       (0.31)
                 2010Q2        0.19          0.00         0.20
                              (0.19)        (0.01)       (0.19)
Notes : Impacts relative to those on SOE loans (we take monetary impacts on loans to
SOEs as a benchmark for comparison). The superscript * represents the 0.1 significance
level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01. Each panel regression has both firm-level controls and
aggregate controls.



      Table D.4. Relative impacts of monetary stimulus on loans to non-SOEs:
      real estate

                            Main eect Interaction eect Total eect
                               (1)            (2)          (3)
                                                  
                 2009Q1      2.73           -1.63        1.10
                              (0.70)        (0.70)       (0.54)
                                                 
                 2009Q2      4.61          -3.09         1.52
                              (1.25)        (0.97)       (0.72)
                                  
                 2009Q3      4.22            -1.27       2.95
                              (1.34)        (0.98)       (0.78)
                                  
                 2009Q4      3.02            0.21        3.23
                              (0.90)        (0.89)       (0.84)
                                  
                 2010Q1      1.63            0.11        1.74
                              (0.56)        (0.22)       (0.48)
                                   
                 2010Q2       0.65           -0.01       0.64
                              (0.28)        (0.03)       (0.29)
Notes : Impacts relative to those on SOE loans (we take monetary impacts on loans to
SOEs as a benchmark for comparison). The superscript * represents the 0.1 significance
level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01. Each panel regression has both firm-level controls and
aggregate controls.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                    71

      Table D.5. Relative impacts of monetary stimulus on loans to non-SOEs:
      the remaining economy

                            Main eect Interaction eect Total eect
                 2009Q1      1.27          -1.09          0.18
                              (0.37)        (0.36)       (0.30)
                 2009Q2      2.29          -2.52          -0.24
                              (0.68)        (0.53)       (0.38)
                 2009Q3       1.78         -1.76          0.02
                              (0.70)        (0.55)       (0.43)
                 2009Q4        0.60          -0.01        0.59
                              (0.47)        (0.50)       (0.47)
                 2010Q1        0.02          0.14         0.16
                             ( 0.31)        (0.13)       (0.26)
                 2010Q2         0.00         -0.01        -0.01
                             ( 0.15)        (0.02)       (0.16)
Notes : Impacts relative to those on SOE loans (we take monetary impacts on loans to
SOEs as a benchmark for comparison). The superscript * represents the 0.1 significance
level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01. Each panel regression has both firm-level controls and
aggregate controls.
                Table D.6. Estimation results for dynamic panel regression (4) for LGFVs in non-infrastructure sectors

                                            Manufacturing           Real estate          Other non-infrastructure sectors
                                       LGFVs Non-LGFVs         LGFVs Non-LGFVs           LGFVs         Non-LGFVs
       d0 : main eect                    1.018     0.349        0.146       0.868        0.474 
                                                                                                           0.441
                                        (0.621)    (0.108)     (0.173)     (0.582)       (0.176)          (0.088)
       d1 : main eect                   1.418 
                                                   0.311       0.456        0.795        0.652            0.450
                                        (0.655)    (0.115)     (0.183)     (0.616)       (0.187)          (0.094)
       d2 : main eect                    0.312      0.091        0.023      0.076        0.361             0.121
                                        (0.551)    (0.096)     (0.156)     (0.518)       (0.158)          (0.079)
       d3 : main eect                    0.236      0.067       0.029        0.459        0.108            0.150
                                        (0.459)    (0.081)     (0.129)     (0.430)       (0.131)          (0.065)
       b0 : interaction eect             8.168        1.063      0.440       4.218       5.401              1.325
                                        (6.638)    (1.163)     (1.868)     (6.251)       (1.913)          (0.949)
       b1 : interaction eect             8.538      2.976        3.715      2.052         3.613            2.138
                                        (8.464)    (1.462)     (2.359)     (7.829)       (2.389)          (1.188)
       b2 : interaction eect             12.364       0.251      2.091      14.327          0.724          0.788
                                        (8.439)    (1.463)     (2.346)     (7.879)       (2.391)          (1.200)
       b3 : interaction eect             1.271      1.002        0.494      0.922           0.628          1.064
                                        (7.360)    (1.263)     (2.033)     (6.865)       (2.079)          (1.039)
           k   dk : main eect           2.984      0.817       0.608        1.281        1.596            1.162
                                        (1.222)    (0.216)     (0.346)     (1.153)       (0.353)          (0.175)
       P


           k bk :   interaction eect     5.612        3.288      6.740      15.572        7.661            2.665
                                       (19.567)    (3.374)     (5.447)    (18.243)       (5.559)          (2.768)
       P


       Number of Observations             805        4968       1012         368           5014            11661
       Fixed eects                        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes
       Firm-level controls                Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes
                                                                                                                                    MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE




       Aggregate controls                 Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes
Notes : Values in parentheses are standard errors. The superscript * represents the 0.1 significance level, ** 0.5, and *** 0.01.
                                                                                                                                    72
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                     73

       Table D.7. Estimation results for the dynamic panel regression without the
       first-stage estimation: manufacturing

                                           All firms    SOEs      Non-SOEs
           d0 : main eect                  0.267       0.484       0.243
                                            (0.035)    (0.139)     (0.036)
           d1 : main eect                  0.252       0.573       0.216
                                            (0.040)    (0.156)     (0.040)
           d2 : main eect                  0.214        0.170      0.220
                                            (0.035)    (0.137)     (0.036)
           d3 : main eect                  0.080        0.059      0.084
                                            (0.029)    (0.113)     (0.029)
           b0 : interaction eect              0.401     0.402        0.476
                                            (0.283)    (1.113)     (0.288)
           b1 : interaction eect              0.352       2.165      0.150
                                            (0.345)    (1.357)     (0.352)
           b2 : interaction eect             1.639      3.001       1.475
                                            (0.331)    (1.299)     (0.337)
           b3 : interaction eect             0.645      0.977       0.813
           P                                (0.308)    (1.210)     (0.313)
               k   dk : main eect          0.813       1.286       0.763
           P                                (0.083)    (0.326)     (0.084)
               k bk :   interaction eect     3.036        3.787     2.914
                                            (0.769)    (3.019)     (0.783)
           Number of Observations            55499       5773       49726
           Fixed eects                        Yes        Yes         Yes
           Firm-level controls                Yes        Yes         Yes
           Aggregate controls                 Yes        Yes         Yes
Notes : Values in parentheses are standard errors. The superscript * represents the 0.1
significance level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                     74

       Table D.8. Estimation results for the dynamic panel regression without the
       first-stage estimation: real estate

                                          All firms    SOEs       Non-SOEs
          d0 : main eect                  1.297        0.349       1.391
                                           (0.130)    (0.215)      (0.141)
          d1 : main eect                  1.295       0.577        1.371
                                           (0.145)    (0.240)      (0.158)
          d2 : main eect                  0.466        0.084       0.505
                                           (0.129)    (0.213)      (0.140)
          d3 : main eect                  0.273         0.117      0.310
                                           (0.104)    (0.173)      (0.113)
          b0 : interaction eect             6.045       1.134       6.557
                                           (1.037)    (1.723)      (1.128)
          b1 : interaction eect             8.033       1.091       8.776
                                           (1.259)    (2.086)      (1.370)
          b2 : interaction eect             7.120      4.548        7.403
                                           (1.218)    (2.012)      (1.326)
          b3 : interaction eect             0.255      0.271        0.253
          P                                (1.129)    (1.872)      (1.228)
              k   dk : main eect          3.331       0.895        3.577
          P                                (0.305)    (0.504)      (0.331)
              k bk :   interaction eect   20.942        6.502      22.483
                                           (2.829)    (4.682)      (3.078)
          Number of Observations            14950      1380         13570
          Fixed eects                        Yes        Yes          Yes
          Firm-level controls                Yes        Yes          Yes
          Aggregate controls                 Yes        Yes          Yes
Notes : Values in parentheses are standard errors. The superscript * represents the 0.1
significance level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                     75

       Table D.9. Estimation results for the dynamic panel regression without the
       first-stage estimation: the rest of the economy

                                           All firms    SOEs     Non-SOEs
           d0 : main eect                  0.705       0.451      0.940
                                            (0.072)    (0.088)    (0.112)
           d1 : main eect                  0.733       0.510      0.941
                                            (0.081)    (0.098)    (0.126)
           d2 : main eect                  0.202       0.184      0.220
                                            (0.072)    (0.087)    (0.111)
           d3 : main eect                    0.087      0.092      0.084
                                            (0.058)    (0.070)    (0.090)
           b0 : interaction eect             1.289      0.432      2.834
                                            (0.578)    (0.702)    (0.899)
           b1 : interaction eect             1.641      1.656      4.663
                                            (0.699)    (0.846)    (1.091)
           b2 : interaction eect             2.751       1.058     4.273
                                            (0.677)    (0.821)    (1.054)
           b3 : interaction eect             0.809      0.327      1.284
           P                                (0.628)    (0.762)    (0.979)
               k   dk : main eect          1.727       1.238      2.185
           P                                (0.169)    (0.205)    (0.264)
               k bk :   interaction eect     4.873      1.356     10.486
                                            (1.572)    (1.909)    (2.449)
           Number of Observations            34960      16675      18285
           Fixed eects                        Yes        Yes        Yes
           Firm-level controls                Yes        Yes        Yes
           Aggregate controls                 Yes        Yes        Yes
Notes : Values in parentheses are standard errors. The superscript * represents the 0.1
significance level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                     76

       Table D.10. Estimation results for the dynamic panel regression without the
       first-stage estimation: the entire economy

                                          All firms    SOEs       Non-SOEs
          d0 : main eect                  0.502       0.449        0.522
                                           (0.035)    (0.062)      (0.041)
          d1 : main eect                  0.532       0.497        0.546
                                           (0.039)    (0.069)      (0.046)
          d2 : main eect                  0.247       0.219        0.258
                                           (0.034)    (0.061)      (0.041)
          d3 : main eect                  0.154       0.130        0.164
                                           (0.028)    (0.050)      (0.033)
          b0 : interaction eect              0.244    1.084         0.687
                                           (0.277)    (0.497)      (0.330)
          b1 : interaction eect              0.424    1.326         1.012
                                           (0.335)    (0.600)      (0.401)
          b2 : interaction eect             3.002      1.801        3.397
                                           (0.324)    (0.581)      (0.387)
          b3 : interaction eect              0.254     0.462         0.492
          P                                (0.301)    (0.541)      (0.359)
              k   dk : main eect          1.435       1.296        1.490
          P                                (0.081)    (0.145)      (0.097)
              k bk :   interaction eect     3.924      1.071        5.588
                                           (0.753)    (1.351)      (0.898)
          Number of Observations           157895      40549       117346
          Fixed eects                        Yes        Yes          Yes
          Firm-level controls                Yes        Yes          Yes
          Aggregate controls                 Yes        Yes          Yes
Notes : Values in parentheses are standard errors. The superscript * represents the 0.1
significance level, ** 0.05, and *** 0.01.
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE              77

                                    References

Acharya, V. V., T. Eisert, C. Eufinger, and C. Hirsch (2019): "Whatever It Takes:
 The Real Eects of Unconventional Monetary Policy," Review of Financial Studies, 32,
 1­53.
Bai, C.-E., C.-T. Hsieh, and Z. M. Song (2016): "The Long Shadow of a Fiscal Ex-
 pansion," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 129­181.
Bai, Y., D. Lu, and X. Tian (2016): "Do Financial Frictions Explain Chinese Firms'
 Saving and Misallocation?," Unpublished Manuscript.
  ´ bura, M., D. Giannone, and L. Reichlin (2010): "Large Bayesian Vector Autore-
Ban
 gressions," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 25(1), 71­92.
Berkowitz, D., H. Ma, and S. Nishioka (2017): "Recasting the Iron Rice Bowl: The
 Reform of China's State-Owned Enterprises," Review of Economics and Statistics, 99,
 735­747.
Boehm, C. E. (Forthcoming): "Government Consumption and Investment: Does the Com-
 position of Purchases Aect the Multiplier?," Journal of Monetary Economics.
Box, G. E. P., G. M. Jenkins, G. C. Reinsel, and G. M. Ljung (2015): Time Series
 Analysis: Forecasting and Control. Wiley, Hoboken, New Jersey, 5th edn.
Brandt, L., J. Van Biesebroeck, and Y. Zhang (2012): "Creative Accounting or Cre-
 ative Destruction? Firm-level Productivity Growth in Chinese Manufacturing," Journal
 of Development Economics, 97, 339­351.
Brunnermeier, M. K., D. Palia, K. A. Sastry, and C. A. Sims (2019): "Feedbacks:
 Financial Markets and Economic Activity," Working Papers 257, Princeton University,
 Department of Economics, Center for Economic Policy Studies.
Brunnermeier, M. K., M. Sockin, and W. Xiong (2017): "China's Gradualistic Eco-
 nomic Approach: Does It Work for Financial Development?," American Economic Review
 Papers & Proceedings., 107, 608­613.
Chakraborty, I., I. Goldstein, and A. MacKinlay (2020): "Monetary Stimulus and
 Bank Lending," Journal of Financial Economics, 136, 189­218.
Chang, C., K. Chen, D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2016): "Trends and Cycles in
 China's Macroeconomy," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2015, 30, 1­84, University of
 Chicago Press.
Chen, K., P. Higgins, D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2017): "Impacts of Monetary
 Stimulus on Credit Allocation and Macroeconomy: Evidence from China," NBER Working
 Paper No. 22650.
Chen, K., J. Ren, and T. Zha (2018): "The Nexus of Monetary Policy and Shadow
 Banking in China," American Economic Review, 108(12), 3891­3936.
Chen, Z., Z. He, and C. Liu (2020): "The Financing of Local Government in China:
 Stimulus Loan Wanes and Shadow Banking Waxes," Journal of Financial Economics,
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                 78

  137, 42­71.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1999): "Monetary Policy
  Shocks: What Have We Learned and To What End?," in Handbook of Macroeconomics,
  ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1A, pp. 65­148. North-Holland, Amsterdam,
  Holland.
Cloyne, J., C. Ferreira, and P. Surico (2020): "Monetary Policy when Households
  have Debt: New Evidence on the Transmission Mechanism," Review of Economic Studies,
  87, 102­129.
Cong, L. W., H. Gao, J. Ponticelli, and X. Yang (2019): "Credit Allocation Under
  Economic Stimulus: Evidence from China," Review of Financial Studies, 32, 3412­3460.
Conley, T. G., and B. Dupor (2013): "The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act:
  Solely a Government Jobs Program?," Journal of Monetary Economics, 60, 535­549.
Feyrer, J., and B. Sacerdote (2012): "Did the Stimulus Stimulate? Eects of the
  American Recovery and Reinvestment Act," NBER Working Paper No. 16759.
Foley-Fisher, N., R. Ramcharan, and E. Yu (2016): "The Impact of Unconventional
  Monetary Policy on Firm Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Maturity Extension
  Program," Journal of Financial Economics, 122, 409­429.
Gao, H., H. Ru, and D. Y. Tang (2018): "Subnational Debt of China: the Politics-
  finance Nexus," SSRN Working Paper No. 2801878.
Garin, A. (2019): "Putting America to Work, Where? Evidence on the Eectiveness of
  Infrastructure Construction as a Locally Targeted Employment Policy," Journal of Urban
  Economics, 111, 108­131.
Higgins, P. C., and T. Zha (2015): "China's Macroeconomic Time Series: Methods and
  Implications," Unpublished Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2009): "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
  China and India," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXXIV(4), 1403­1448.
Huang, Y., M. Pagano, and U. Panizza (Forthcoming): "Local Crowding Out in
  China," Journal of Finance.
Kandrac, J., and B. Schlusche (2017): "Quantitative Easing and Bank Risk Taking:
  Evidence from Lending," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-125, Board of
  Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Leduc, S., and D. Wilson (2013): "Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere? Theory
  and Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment," NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual 2012, 27, 89­142, University of Chicago Press.
          (2017): "Are State Governments Roadblocks to Federal Stimulus? Evidence on
  the Flypaper Eect of Highway Grants in the 2009 Recovery Act," American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 9, 253­292.
Leeper, E. M. (2019): "Discussion of 'The Role of Market Competition in Fiscal Policy
  Transmission' by Sophia Chen and Yu Shi," Presentation Slides at the IMF-FRBA China
         MONETARY STIMULUS AMIDST THE INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT SPREE                    79

  Workshop.
Leeper, E. M., T. B. Walker, and S.-C. S. Yang (2010): "Government Investment
  and Fiscal Stimulus," Journal of Monetary Economics, 57, 1000­1012.
Ma, H., X. Qiao, and Y. Xu (2015): "Job Creation and job Destruction in China During
  19982007," Journal of Comparative Economics, 43, 1085­1100.
Morais, B., J. luis Peydro, J. Roldan-Pena, and C. Ruiz-ortega (2019): "The
  International Bank Lending Channel of Monetary Policy Rates and QE: Credit Supply,
  Reach-for-Yield, and Real Eects," Journal of Finance, LXXIV(1), 55­90.
Ramey, V. A. (2019): "The Macroeconomic Consequences of Infrastructure Investment,"
  Unpublished Manuscript, University of California at San Diego.
Rodnyansky, A., and O. M. Darmouni (2017): "The Eects of Quantitative Easing on
  Bank Lending Behavior," Review of Financial Studies, 30, 3858­3887.
Ru, H. (2018): "Government Credit, a Double-Edged Sword: Evidence from the China
  Development Bank," Journal of Finance, LXXIII, 275­314.
Rubio-Ram´   irez, J. F., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2010): "Structural Vector Au-
  toregressions: Theory of Identification and Algorithms for Inference," Review of Economic
  Studies, 77, 665­696.
Sims, C. A. (1980): "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica, 48(1), 1­48.
Wang, J., and X. Wang (2015): "Capital Misallocation in China: Financial Frictions or
  Policy Distortions?," Journal of International Economics, 97, 325­338.
Wilson, D. (2012): "Fiscal Spending Jobs Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009 American
  Recovery and Reinvestment Act," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4, 251­
  282.
Wong, C. (2011): "The Fiscal Stimulus Programme and Public Governance Issues in
  China," OECD Journal on Budgeting, 2011/3, 1­21, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/16812336.
Wu, G. L. (2018): "Capital Misallocation in China: Financial Frictions or Policy Distor-
  tions?," Journal of Development Economics, 130, 203­223.
Xiong, W. (2019): "The Mandarin Model of Growth," Unpublished Manuscript, Princeton
  University.
Yu, M. (2015): "Processing trade, tari reductions and firm productivity: Evidence from
  Chinese firms," Economic Journal, 125, 943­988.
