                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  BOARD DYNAMICS OVER THE STARTUP LIFE CYCLE

                                           Michael Ewens
                                           Nadya Malenko

                                        Working Paper 27769
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27769


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27769.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael Ewens and Nadya Malenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Board Dynamics over the Startup Life Cycle
Michael Ewens and Nadya Malenko
NBER Working Paper No. 27769
September 2020
JEL No. G24,G34

                                        ABSTRACT

Venture capital (VC) backed firms face neither the governance requirements nor a major
separation of ownership and control of their public peers. These differences suggest that
independent directors could play a unique role on private firm boards. This paper explores the
dynamics of VC-backed startup boards using new data on board member entry, exit, and
individual director characteristics. We document several new facts about board size, the
allocation of control, and composition dynamics. At formation, a typical board has four members
and is entrepreneur-controlled. Independent directors are found on the median board after the
second financing event, when control over the board becomes shared, with independent directors
holding the tie-breaking vote. These patterns are consistent with independent directors playing
both a mediating and advising role over the startup lifecycle, and thus representing another
potential source of value-add to entrepreneurial firm performance.


Michael Ewens
California Institute of Technology
MC 228-77
1200 East California Avenue
Pasadena, CA 91125
and NBER
mewens@caltech.edu

Nadya Malenko
University of Michigan
R5322, Ross School of Business
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
nmalenko@umich.edu




A Data Appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27769
1     Introduction
The board of directors has ultimate decision-making authority over significant corporate matters.
While the literature has extensively explored the composition of public firm boards, we know
comparatively little about the boards of private firms. In contrast to the public firm board that
is governed by an extensive set of regulations, the flexibility available to the private firm board
leaves open the possibility that its composition and dynamics play a relatively larger role in
firm outcomes. The goal of this paper is to study the venture capital-backed startup board
and its evolution from the first round of financing to exit. We examine the determinants of
board composition across firms and over time, the allocation of control over the board, and
the roles of independent directors, i.e., directors who are neither representatives of the venture
capitalists nor founders.
    The venture capital (VC) setting is an intriguing area to investigate the board of directors
because investors play an active role in their investments and their board positions are often
central to exerting power (e.g., Lerner, 1995; Kaplan and Str¨
                                                             omberg, 2003). However, there is
little evidence both on the director composition ­ entrepreneur, VC, and independent ­ and on
how the balance of power on the board changes over the startup's life. Next, the widespread
presence of independent directors on startup boards is interesting in two key aspects. First,
unlike in public firms, their presence on startup boards is voluntary and guided by the value they
can create and the roles they can play. Second, the traditional monitoring role for independent
directors of public firms is less important in VC-backed startups because VC investors have
both the time and powerful incentives to monitor the managers of their portfolio companies. In
fact, we find that the dynamics of board composition over time and across startups is consistent
with independent directors playing a previously under-explored "mediation" role, mediating
and resolving disputes between venture capitalists and entrepreneurs (Blair, 2014; Broughman,
2010, 2013).
    To study these questions, we build a novel dataset of VC-backed startup boards by merging
two key data sources. The first is Form D filings on SEC EDGAR, which list individual directors,
beneficial owners, and top executives. Form D data post 2008 are available in machine-readable


                                                2
format, and the pre-2008 data are collected by a combination of pdf processing and manual
data analysis. We merge Form D data with VentureSource, which provides information on
investor-directors and independent directors but does not have data on directors representing
the founders. The resulting sample covers 7,201 startups over 2002­2017. These data represent
one of the largest samples in terms of both startups and sample period studied in the literature.1
For each startup, we observe the evolution of its board from the first VC financing round.
       The dynamics of board size and composition reveal the evolution of control over the startup
life cycle. At first financing, the average (median) board has 3.6 (3) members, and control over
the board is most frequently allocated to the entrepreneurs/executives. As the startup grows
and raises capital, the average startup adds both venture capital investors and independent
directors. This pattern provides a direct view of the professionalization process led by venture
capitalists (Hellmann and Puri, 2002). The average board size across a firm's life is 4.4, with
approximately 2 seats held by VCs, 1.7 by executives, and 0.8 by independent directors.
       Next, although the presence of independent directors is not required by law, it is widespread:
the fraction of firm-year observations with at least one independent director on the board is 49%,
and the fraction of startups that had an independent director by their fourth round of financing
is 63%. Moreover, in about 33% of observations, neither the VCs nor the entrepreneurs control
the majority of seats on the board, so whenever these two parties disagree, independent directors
play a tie-breaking role and thus have substantial power over board decisions. In addition, the
composition of startup boards and the allocation of board control exhibit interesting dynamics
over the last two decades. For example, VC control over startup boards has been steadily
declining: the fraction of startups in which VC investors controlled the majority of board seats
after the second financing round was about 60% for startups originated in 2002, but fell to
about 25% for startups originated in 2013. Not only VC control, but even the presence of VC
investors on startup boards has been declining as well. This trend has been accompanied by
an increasing fraction of boards controlled by the entrepreneurs and a slight decline in the
   1
    Lerner (1995) studies 307 biotechnology firms, Kaplan and Str¨
                                                                 omberg (2003) investigate 213 VC investments,
and Broughman (2010) exploits rich data on 54 VC-backed firms. Amornsiripanitch, Gompers, and Xuan
(2019) have the largest sample of VC-backed boards, however, it faces limitations because the data provider
(VentureSource) typically lacks entry dates and does not track executive directors.



                                                      3
use of independent directors. Such patterns are observed both based on a broad definition of
independent directors (as any directors who are not representing VC investors or entrepreneurs)
and based on a more conservative definition, where only directors with no previous professional
ties with either the VCs or the entrepreneurs are considered independent.
   To understand these trends and the overall dynamics of startup board composition, we
investigate which factors determine the allocation of board control and the roles that independent
directors play on these boards. First, independent directors could play an advisory and resource
provision role, whereby they provide advice and access to valuable resources and networks.
However, this role alone cannot explain why such directors are often given substantial voting
power over the decisions: if the only role of independent directors were to provide advice and
connections, there would be no need to give them a tie-breaking role. Moreover, the firm could
establish an advisory board (as is frequently done in private firms) or add these individuals to
the board as "board observers."
   We therefore investigate the previously under-explored role of independent directors, which
has been proposed in the law literature (Blair and Stout, 2001; Broughman, 2010, 2013) ­ the
"mediation" role. The idea of the mediation role is that in an incomplete contracts setting
(Grossman and Hart, 1986; Hart and Moore, 1990), independent directors with a tie-breaking
role can improve both ex-post efficiency, by picking decisions that maximize the value of the
startup, and ex-ante efficiency, by incentivizing both the VC and the entrepreneur to make
capital and human capital investments, respectively. This can be more efficient than giving
full control to either of the two parties, and even more efficient than state-contingent control
(Aghion and Bolton, 1992). Intuitively, suppose that at a certain point, the firm needs to make a
decision that causes a disagreement between the VC and the entrepreneur. Such disagreements
are likely to arise for decisions involving subsequent rounds of financing, delayed exits, the
sale of the firm, or CEO replacement, and particularly after negative shocks that require
reorganization. If full control over the board is given to either the VC or the entrepreneur,
then the party in control will pick the decision it prefers the most. However, there may be
circumstances when it is more efficient to instead take some "middle-ground" action, and this
can be achieved by allocating a tie-breaking role to an independent director, who maximizes


                                                4
the value of the startup as a whole. Moreover, by picking this middle-ground action, rather
than an action that favors one party over the other, the independent director gives incentives
to each of the parties to make ex-ante investments. Put differently, allocating the tie-breaking
role to independent directors offers a commitment to both the VC and the entrepreneur to
refrain from opportunistic behavior in the future, and such commitment would be impossible
to achieve if one of the parties had full control, even if it were on a state-contingent basis.2
       Whether giving a tie-breaking role to independent directors is optimal, crucially depends on
the stage of the firm's life cycle and the allocation of bargaining power between the entrepreneurs
and VCs. When one party's (either VC's or entrepreneur's) participation and effort are much
more crucial for the startup compared to the other party (i.e., the relative bargaining power of
one of the parties is particularly high) then allocating full board control to that party can be
optimal despite potentially inefficient decisions ex-post. However, when investments by both
parties are crucial for the startup to succeed (i.e., neither the VC's nor the entrepreneur's
relative bargaining power is very high), it is optimal to give independent directors a tie-breaking
role. We refer to such allocation of board control as "shared control."
       This logic leads to our key predictions. First, within a startup life cycle, as the cumulative
amount of capital contributed by the VC investors increases, control over the board will shift
from entrepreneur control at early stages of financing, to shared control at intermediate stages
of financing, and to VC control at later stages of financing. Second, across firms, for any given
point in the startup life cycle, we expect the allocation of control to move from entrepreneur
control, to shared control, and then to VC control as the VC's bargaining power relative to the
entrepreneur increases.
       We show that these predictions are broadly consistent with the observed patterns in the
data, within and across firms. First, within a firm's life cycle, the allocation of control over
the board shifts from the entrepreneur, to shared control, and then to VC control as the firm
goes through financing rounds. In particular, conditional on a change in board control from
one year to the next, entrepreneur control is 71% likely to switch to shared control, and shared
   2
    Many term sheets have provisions that give preferred shareholders veto rights as a class. We focus on those
actions that require a board vote, of which there are many.



                                                      5
control is 85% likely to switch to VC control. For example, after the first round of financing,
48% of firms over our sample period have entrepreneur-controlled boards and only 20% have
VC-controlled boards; the average board has 57% of seats controlled by the entrepreneurs,
30% of seats controlled by the VCs, and 13% of seats controlled by independent directors.
After the second financing round, shared control and VC control are the two most common
arrangements constituting 36% of observations each, while only 28% of firms have entrepreneur
control. For example, the median firm has two entrepreneur directors, two VC directors, and
one independent director, with an independent director playing a tie-breaking role. Finally,
in the fourth round of financing, VC control is the most common arrangement (63% of the
sample), with the average firm having 53% of seats controlled by the VCs. These patterns are
robust to controlling for industry-by-year fixed effects, location fixed effects, and the capital
raised by the startup in the financing round.
   We next test our predictions in the cross-section of firms. We proxy for the VC's bargaining
power relative to the entrepreneur in two ways. The first measure is constructed at the industry
level: we consider the equity stake that VC investors obtain in startups for a given amount of
contributed capital (i.e., the ratio of capital invested by the VC to post-money valuation), and
take its average across all financings within an industry in the previous year. Assuming that
the amount of capital contributed by the VC is determined by the firm's production needs and
not by the parties' bargaining power, a higher industry-average VC equity stake during the
previous year corresponds to higher industry-level VC bargaining power in negotiations over
the firm's valuation. Our second proxy is a measure of dry powder, which is a rough estimate
of the amount of available capital in active VC funds. It is constructed at the geographical
region level and is calculated as the sum of all capital raised by VC funds in this region in the
past, net of the sum of all capital invested by VCs in this region in the past. In years when dry
powder is relatively low, VC bargaining power is high (because the supply of funds is scarce),
and vice versa.
   Consistent with the above predictions, there is a monotonic negative relation between
entrepreneur control over the board and both proxies for the VC's bargaining power, controlling
for industry and location fixed effects. Likewise, there is a monotonic positive relation between


                                                6
VC control over the board and both proxies. Both the within-firm and the cross-sectional results
are robust to a more conservative definition of independent directors, which treats directors
with prior professional ties with the VC or the entrepreneur as being affiliated with that party,
and only considers unconnected directors as truly independent.3
      Finally, the above discussed time-series trends in the allocation of board control are also
broadly consistent with our hypotheses. In particular, prior literature has identified two
important changes to the supply of private equity capital over the last decades. The first was
the deregulation of private equity markets, which made it easier for both startups and the
private funds investing in them to raise capital (Ewens and Farre-Mensa, 2020). The second
has been the growth in direct private equity investments by non-traditional investors, such
as sovereign wealth funds, mutual funds, and hedge funds (e.g., Fang, Ivashina, and Lerner,
2015; Chernenko, Lerner, and Zeng, 2017; Ewens and Farre-Mensa, 2020). These changes have
increased the supply of private capital and, as a result, the bargaining power of startup founders
vis-`
    a-vis VC investors (e.g., Ewens and Farre-Mensa, 2020; Eldar, Hochberg, and Litov, 2020).
In addition, technological advancements, such as the advent of Amazon's Web Services in 2006,
decreased the costs of starting new businesses and thereby lowered the capital contributed by
VC investors in early stages (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf, 2018). Both the reduction in
VC bargaining power due to greater availability of private capital and the reduction in VC
investments predict lower VC control and higher entrepreneur control over the board, which is
exactly what we observe in the data. The decrease in the use of independent directors that
accompanies higher entrepreneur control over boards is consistent with the mediation role
hypothesis.
      Overall, our paper presents novel evidence about the composition and evolution of startup
boards. Our results are suggestive of the previously unexplored role of independent directors ­
mediation. This role could be relevant not only for startup boards, but also in other settings
that involve multiple large blockholders with potentially conflicting interests.
  3
      All these results are also robust to considering only healthcare or IT startups separately.




                                                         7
Related literature

Our paper contributes to the large literature on corporate boards (see Adams, Hermalin, and
Weisbach (2010) for a comprehensive survey). Given the data limitations, most of this literature
focuses on boards of publicly listed firms. There is a small literature that studies what drives
VC board membership and what actions VC board members take.4 Sahlman (1990) and
Gorman and Sahlman (1989) were the first to document that board membership is an important
way that investors interact and add value to startups in their portfolios. Lerner (1995) is
the first comprehensive study on VC board activity, which focuses on VC directors' role in
CEO turnover and on how VC board positions relate to their geographic distance to the firm.
Amornsiripanitch, Gompers, and Xuan (2019) investigate which VC investors take a board
seat and find that prior investor-founder relationship and lead investor status are important
predictors of VC board membership. Venugopal and Yerramilli (2019) combine CrunchBase,
AngelList, and BoardEx and study whether non-executive directors' experience, investment in
the firm, and ties with its founders and investors are associated with their appointment to the
board, as well as how their appointment is associated with subsequent outcomes. Researchers
have also studied the role of board seats in contracts and general investor control rights. Kaplan
and Str¨
       omberg (2003) examine a sample of VC contracts and find that most separately define
board seats, cash flow rights, and control rights. Board rights are often allocated in response
to bad states, thus shifting power from entrepreneur to VC. The role of independent directors
is not a focus of their study. Kaplan and Str¨
                                             omberg (2004) find that two measures of risks
faced by startups ­ internal and external ­ are highly correlated with board seat provision to
investors, and VC board control is predictive of interventions such as CEO replacement. Finally,
in the context of public firms, Field, Lowry, and Mkrtchyan (2013) and Iliev and Lowry (2020)
document that VC investors continue to play an active role on boards of VC-backed startups
after they go public.
      Our contribution to these papers is twofold. First, our data uniquely cover board composition
for a comprehensive sample of VC-backed firms from 2002 to 2017 and how it evolves from
  4
      Cornelli and Karaka¸
                         s (2015) study the role of boards in LBOs backed by private equity funds.




                                                      8
first financing to exit. Standard datasets, such as VentureSource and CrunchBase, do not have
data on executive directors, often have limited data on independent directors, and cannot fully
document board dynamics due to missing start and end dates of directorships. To our knowledge,
Form D filings are the only public source of information on startup board composition and
evolution. We analyze both post-2008 and non-machine-readable pre-2008 Form D filings, which
allows us to identify board members beyond the VC investors, capture board control as well as
directors' start and end dates, and more directly test the unique roles of each type of board
member. Second, we study very different questions. While most of the above papers examine
what factors lead a VC investor to take a board seat and analyze how this impacts outcomes,
our focus, in contrast, is on the determinants of board composition, the allocation of board
control, and on the roles of independent directors, especially, their mediation role.
   In the context of public firms, the literature emphasizes two key roles of the board and
independent directors in particular. One is monitoring: independent directors are supposed
to monitor the manager on behalf of the shareholders, evaluate and incentivize managerial
performance, and replace the manager when needed (Hermalin and Weisbach, 1998). Consistent
with the monitoring role, Weisbach (1988) shows that CEO turnover is more sensitive to firm
performance when boards are dominated by outside directors than when they are insider-
dominated. Byrd and Hickman (1992) and Cotter, Shivdasani, and Zenner (1997) find that
outsider-dominated boards perform better in tender offers, both as bidders and as targets.
Nguyen and Nielsen (2010) and Fracassi and Tate (2012) study the value effects of outside
directors using sudden director deaths and show that the value contribution of directors is
higher when they are more independent of the CEO. The second role of directors on public
firm boards is advisory: the board draws on its members' knowledge and experience to advise
management on key corporate decisions and strategic directions (Adams and Ferreira, 2007).
For example, Coles, Daniel, and Naveen (2008) argue that board advice is especially important
in complex firms; Field, Lowry, and Mkrtchyan (2013) emphasize the advisory role of busy
directors for recent IPO firms; and Harford and Schonlau (2013) show that directors' acquisition
experience is valued in the labor market for directors. Differently from this literature, we
emphasize the mediation role of independent directors.


                                               9
    The idea of the mediation role goes back to Blair and Stout (2001), who emphasize that
"directors ought to be viewed not as "agents" who serve only the shareholders, but as "mediating
hierarchs" who ... are charged with the task of balancing the sometimes-conflicting claims
and interests of the many different groups... ." Similarly, Blair (2014) contrasts directors'
monitoring role, which is supposed to alleviate "vertical" conflicts of interest (between managers
and shareholders) with their mediation role, which focuses on "horizontal" conflicts of interest
(between different stakeholders). She points out that such horizontal conflicts of interest are
quite likely in VC-backed firms, where disagreements can arise between the holders of preferred
and common shares or between the holders of different classes of preferred shares, e.g., for
decisions involving the sale of the firm or its merger with another firm. Broughman (2010,
2013) presents a theory showing how independent directors can mediate conflicts between VC
investors and entrepreneurs and why this can be preferred to both unilateral control of one party
and to board deadlock (Donaldson, Malenko, and Piacentino, 2020), and presents descriptive
statistics on a sample of 54 VC-backed firms sold in 2003 or 2004. While the mediation role
has received attention in the legal literature, we are aware of only one paper in the finance
literature that explicitly discusses this role, albeit in a very different setting. Burkart, Miglietta,
and Ostergaard (2017) analyze Norwegian public firms at the turn of the 20th century, when
firms were not required to have a board. They show that a firm was more likely to set up a
board when its ownership structure included many small shareholders, and hypothesize that
boards both monitored the management and mediated among shareholders.



2     The startup board
Through surveys and small sample data collection, we have a broad understanding of what
venture capital-backed boards do. First, a recent survey of venture capitalists in Gompers,
Gornall, Kaplan, and Strebulaev (2020) shows that a typical VC considers board control an
important part of deal negotiation. The board itself has many responsibilities, summarized well
by Kaplan and Str¨
                 omberg (2003):

          "The board is generally responsible for (1) hiring, evaluating, and firing top man-

                                                  10
       agement; and (2) advising and ratifying general corporate strategies and decisions."
      (p.287)

    Likewise, the 2007 white paper by a group of VC industry experts summarizes the general
duties of startup directors as "serving as fiduciaries for all shareholders; hiring, evaluating, and
firing the CEO and approving officer selection; ... reviewing and confirming basic company
objectives and business strategy; ... approving equity incentives and establishing executive
compensation; [and] overseeing regulatory and legal compliance" (p.12).5
    Moreover, Fried and Ganor (2006) emphasize that "startup boards--unlike public company
boards--are frequently and intimately involved in strategic decision-making and personnel issues"
and note that board control gives the controlling party the ability to "initiate fundamental
transactions such as mergers, IPOs, and liquidations" (p.987).



3      Data
We seek to create a database of board composition and dynamics of U.S.-based VC-backed
startups financed from 2002 to 2017. The source of startups is the data provider VentureSource,
supplemented with regulatory Form D filings. Form D filings are exemption requests made by
startups raising private capital. Identifying the full board of directors, specifically executives,
demands that we impose several sample filters to minimize measurement error. First, we
require the startup to raise equity financing (e.g., not convertible notes or straight debt) at least
once during the 2002­2017 sample period, in order to ensure that there are some shareholders
who could have board rights. Second, for at least one equity financing during the sample
period, equity capital has to be provided by at least one traditional U.S.-headquartered venture
capital investor.6 Third, we require that the startup's first VC financing in VentureSource
    5
      See "A Simple Guide to the Basic Responsibilities of VC-backed Company Directors," issued by the Working
Group on Directory Accountability and Board Effectiveness.
    6
      Most major commercial data providers define a traditional VC investor as a firm that manages limited life
funds that raise capital from institutional investors. Those funds have a fee and carry compensation scheme for
general partners and have a stated objective of investing in high-growth private firms. Investors that are thus
excluded include corporate venture capitalists, angel investors, individuals, and large private equity investors
(e.g., buyout or growth equity investors). Startups in VentureSource that only raised capital from any of these



                                                      11
is accompanied by the filing of a Form D (to ensure that we see the board over the entire
life of the startup, starting at first VC financing). A lack of a filing may be because the
startup raised capital in only one state or simply failed to comply with the regulation.7 Fourth,
the startup's Form Ds must report at least one executive director by the end of the sample
period. This condition is important because VentureSource does not track executive directors.
Finally, we start tracking startups after they raise their first VC equity financing (as reported
in VentureSource) or when they file their first Form D (whichever comes first). With the
VentureSource sample defined above, we search for these startups on the SEC EDGAR site,
i.e., find their CIK identifiers.
    Form D filings list the individual directors, beneficial owners, and top executives. For
2002­2009, these filings are available in pdf form. Individual names and titles, such as executive
or director, were extracted with a combination of pdf processing and manual data collection.
The Internet Appendix has more details on the disclosure regulations and our data collection
steps. Filings posted after 2008 are in machine-readable format (XML). The resulting list of
directors and their association with the firms ­ executive or non-executive ­ is next merged
with the board of directors and executive listing (first and last names) in VentureSource.
VentureSource provides information on investor-directors and independent directors; it also
has information on partners at the investing VC firms and the startup's executives. However,
VentureSource does not indicate whether executives have board positions, so Form D data are
crucial for identifying executive directors. The combination of the two databases thus provides
a new view on executive directors unavailable in VentureSource and also flags individuals in
Form Ds as one of three types: executive, investor, or independent director.8 The Form D
excluded investors are thus not in our sample. To avoid capturing startups that are mis-classified as VC-backed
or that are relatively developed by the time they are tracked by VentureSource, we also exclude any startups
whose first observed financing is a public investment in private equity, a restart round, a secondary transaction,
a later-stage financing, or a grant from a private organization.
    7
      See the Internet Appendix for the analysis of regulatory regimes and ways to avoid Form D filing.
    8
      In particular, an executive director has two boxes checked on the Form D ("Director" and "Executive
Officer"). For other directors, we rely on VentureSource to identify their type: We used the list of investors and
VC partners (that had invested in the startup) from VentureSource to identify the non-executive directors on
the Form D as investor-directors. The remainder of directors in Form D were identified as independent directors
(part of them merged with the VentureSource independent directors, called "Outsiders"). The reason we could
not rely solely on Form D to identify investor-directors is that only some years have a "Beneficial Owner" tick
box that could potentially identify investors separate from independent directors; we also found many instances


                                                       12
data are themselves an imperfect source of board data. There are cases where VentureSource
reports investor-directors or independent directors not found in a contemporaneous Form D.9
We believe that these are cases where the election of the director happened after the Form D
filing deadline, so we add directors only available in VentureSource to our sample. Overall, we
believe the combination of requiring a Form D with at least one executive director over the
firm's life and using all directors from both Form Ds and VentureSource addresses limitations
of both data sources.
    The Form D data also provide a crucial piece of information often missing in commercial
data providers: director start dates and end dates. Regulations require that Form Ds must
be filed within 15 days of the first sale of securities, so we can accurately assign start dates
with the information on directors from the filing. Thus, for investor-directors or independent
directors in both VentureSource and the Form D, the latter allows us to fill in missing start
dates.10 After all these data are combined, we still may lack the start dates of some directors.
For these, PitchBook provided additional board member start dates. As for director end dates,
they are set either to six months prior to the first Form D filing in which a given director is
no longer listed,11 or prior to the exit of the firm (e.g., IPO, failure, or acquisition). Startups
without exits by the end of the sample period are tracked for two years after their last VC
financing event.12 The final data set provides the composition and dynamics of the full board
of directors for our sample of startups. The current sample includes 7,201 startups.
    The last step before the analysis is a transformation of the data. The merge of VentureSource
where a director did not have "Beneficial Owner" checked but was known to be a major investor.
    9
      About 85% of the investor-directors listed in VentureSource are found in the Form D. Each individual in
the Form D who does not match to a known investor in VentureSource is treated as an independent director.
Approximately 19% of independent directors are only found in the Form D filings. We ignore startups where
VentureSource lists the startup as having at least one unknown investor (or "undisclosed") and we cannot
confirm the ID's identity in VentureSource.
  10
      To get start dates from VentureSource for directors only available in VentureSource, we used a combination
of reported start dates in VentureSource and dates when the VentureSource research team updated the board
data. During most of our sample period, VentureSource contacted a startup or its investors twice a year. If a
start date was missing, but the "last update date" field was known and varied across board members (if they
are all the same, VentureSource said it was most likely late backfill), then we used this update date.
  11
      If the previous Form D filing is less than 6 months from this filing, then the end date is set to the halfway
point between the two filings.
  12
      This assumption ensures that we do not impose stale board data from still-private startups. Effectively, this
assumption treats the startup as "failed" as of two years post-last VC financing (or end of sample if sooner).



                                                       13
and the Form D results in a unit of observation at the financing event. Using the date of
first financing and either the eventual exit (e.g., IPO or acquisition) or the end of the sample
period, we create a startup-year panel. The board characteristics for years with more than one
financing are set to the last financing of that year, while board characteristics in years without
financings are imputed from the previous year.
       Table 1 reports the cross-sectional characteristics of the firms in our sample and compares
them to firms in VentureSource that satisfied the main sample rules (raised equity financing
by at least one traditional U.S.-based VC during our sample period), but either never filed a
Form D (58% of that sample) or filed it at some point but did not satisfy other sample rules
(e.g., because there was a VC financing before the first Form D filing). Firms in our sample
are more likely to have a first round Series A because seed financings are often raised from
smaller, non-traditional VCs and non-VC investors, who are less likely to comply with Form
D regulations. Sample firms are also more likely to be headquartered outside CA: startups
outside CA often need to raise capital out of state and as a result, as we discuss in the Internet
Appendix, cannot satisfy the exemptions to avoid form D filing. Next, driven by some backfill
in Form D filings by firms going public,13 sample firms are more likely to go public and in turn,
have more financings. The differences in total capital raised are due to a combination of two
effects. The first is that Form D filers tend to raise more capital than non-form D filers, as
is apparent from Section 3.1 of the Internet Appendix. The second effect, which dominates
the first, is that out-of-sample firms include not only non-form D filers, but also startups that
filed form D at a certain point but had VC financings before that, leading to some survivorship
bias and resulting in them raising more capital than in-sample form D filers.14 Despite these
differences, we believe that our sample of startups is generally representative of the VC universe
during the sample period.
  13
     Based on conversations with practitioners, firms doing an IPO tend to retroactively file Form Ds for their
prior financings, because going public requires compliance with disclosure regulations.
  14
     Given that out-of-sample firms consist of both non-form D filers and form-D filers not satisfying out filters,
the same competing effects are also present for other characteristics.




                                                       14
Form D filers and data accuracy. In Section 3 of the Internet Appendix, we discuss several
potential concerns about our use of Form D data both for sample inclusion and the board data
itself. First, we ask whether startups with at least one Form D filing are different from the
average VC-backed startups. The analysis suggests that Form D filers are a bit older, are less
likely to be based in California, and raise more capital over their lives. We explore the sources of
these differences based on the existing disclosure regulations. Next, we investigate whether these
differences manifest themselves in board characteristics. Using a small, nearly-comprehensive
sample of board data for non-Form D filers in one state, we find that boards of Form D filers
are larger on average but exhibit no major differences in dynamics or composition. Finally,
we address whether Form Ds provide accurate data on board seats using a small sample of
boards from the single state and certificates of incorporation. In the vast majority of cases
where we have information on boards from both a Form D and other sources, there is agreement
between the two, and any disagreements are often driven by idiosyncratic features of the startup.
We conclude that board data collected from a combination of Form D filings and commercial
databases has no major bias in the cross-section or time series in terms of board composition
and dynamics.


Allocation of board control. One of our main goals is to understand how control over
the board is allocated among investors, entrepreneurs (who we refer to interchangeably as
executives), and independent directors. We therefore introduce the following definitions of
board control. We call a board "VC-controlled " if VC directors hold strictly more than 50% of
board seats, or if VC directors hold exactly 50% of the seats and entrepreneurs hold strictly less
than 50% of seats (suggesting that they jointly control the remaining half of seats together with
independent directors).15 Similarly, we call a board "entrepreneur-controlled" if entrepreneurs
hold strictly more than 50% of board seats, or if they hold exactly 50% of the seats while VCs
hold strictly less than 50%. In addition, our sample includes some startups whose boards are
initially empty but add directors in subsequent rounds of financing. We define such boards at
  15
    In this second type of a board, the most unfavorable situation for the VC investor is the one in which the
independent directors always side with the entrepreneur, resulting in deadlock. In all other scenarios, the VC
would be able to implement its preferred decision.


                                                     15
their initial, empty, stage as entrepreneur-controlled because the absence of a board is likely to
mean that the entrepreneur has full control over the decisions. Finally, the remaining category
corresponds to "shared control." In a typical board in this category, both VCs and entrepreneurs
hold strictly less than 50% of seats, while the remaining seats are held by independent directors,
who are thus playing a tie-breaking role whenever the two parties disagree.



4     Descriptive statistics
This section describes the basic patterns in the board data for the firms in our sample. Table 2
presents summary statistics for the panel data of board composition. Because Form Ds are
only filed during new financing rounds, we observe board composition only in years when new
financings are raised. For each year without a financing event, we impute board data from the
previous financing event. Accordingly, Panel A reports all firm-year observations, while Panel
B only reports the subset of firm-years in which the firm raised at least one equity financing.
    According to Panel B, the average board size across a firm's life is 4.4. About 2 of the
directors are VCs, while 1.7 and 0.8 of the seats are held by executives and independent
directors, respectively. This composition corresponds to an average of 39%, 46%, and 15%
of seats controlled by VCs, executives, and independent directors, respectively. The use of
independent directors is very common: they are present in 49% of firm-year observations.
    Figure 1 reports board seat counts by firm age, where age 0 corresponds to the year when
the startup first raises VC equity financing. On average, startup boards start with fewer VC
investors than executives. By three years after their first VC financing, startup boards have
more directors who are investors than executives. The figure also reveals that the number of
independent directors also grows over time (from zero to one for a median firm) but, importantly
for our results, it grows more slowly than VC seats.
    Figure 2 reports the fraction of the board composed by each type of director by firm age.
Consistent with the patterns in Figure 1, the fraction of executives on the board decreases
(from 0.55 in early years to 0.30 in later years), and the fraction of investor-directors increases
with age. The median fraction of seats occupied by independent directors first increases but


                                                16
stabilizes at about 0.15 after the first two years.
       There is also an interesting distinction between the evolution of startup boards depending on
the type of exit. In particular, Figure 3 considers two subsamples: firms that exited via an IPO
in the left panel, and firms that exited via being acquired in the right panel. The x-axis captures
the number of years prior to exit. For each year prior to exit, we only consider the subsample
of startups that were active and still private at that time (i.e., the set of firms for t = -s are
those that exited in s or greater years since first VC financing). The comparison of the two
figures reveals that firms doing an IPO significantly increase their board size approaching the
IPO compared to acquired firms: the average board size right before exit is 7 for IPO exits and
approximately 5 for exits via an acquisition.16 In addition, IPO firms add more independent
directors: prior to going public, an average startup has two independent directors, compared to
only less than one independent director prior to being acquired. A potential explanation for
this difference is the regulatory requirement of at least 50% independent directors for publicly
listed firms: adding such directors in advance, in anticipation of going public, allows them to
learn about the startup and thereby be more effective after the IPO. This evidence is consistent
with the professionalization and standardization of startups by VC investors (Hellmann and
Puri, 2002; Rajan, 2012).
       We next ask whether the composition of boards has changed over our sample period in
terms of board control. The left panel of Figure 4 presents the time series summary of VC
board control for age cohorts. The x-axis is the year a startup raises its first round of VC
equity, and each time series presents the fraction of that cohort that had a VC-controlled board
by round one, two, and three. First, the figure reveals a significant decline in the probability
that a startup has VC majority control over the board. The youngest firms have experienced
the largest decline: first- and second-round boards have roughly half the probability of VC
control since 2012 than those in the early 2000s. The right panel of Figure 4 presents the same
time series cohort analysis, but for the fraction of firms with entrepreneur board control in
each of the rounds. Together, these figures show a shift in board control from VC investors to
  16
    This board size is comparable to that found in Baker and Gompers (2003) for a set of newly-public firms
from 1978­1987.



                                                    17
entrepreneurs.
       Figure 5 explores some of the sources of these changes in VC and entrepreneur majority
by breaking down other components of the board at the time of the first VC equity financing.
Consider first the solid line, which reports the fraction of startups at age zero that have a board
with at least one VC director. This fraction has decreased significantly and consistently over
the sample period. The declined representation of VC investors on the board has also been
accompanied by smaller board size (dashed line). Finally, the blue dotted line shows that the
role of independent directors on startup boards has declined as well, albeit not as strongly: the
fraction of age-zero boards with at least one independent director has declined since the early
2000s, falling from 40% to 35%.
       In the next sections, we explore the roles of independent directors in startup boards, which
allows us to explain both these descriptive statistics of board composition over the firm's life
cycle (Section 6.1) and these time-series trends (Section 6.3).



5        Mediation role of independent directors
In this section, we discuss the mediation role of independent directors and derive our key
empirical predictions. Although we are unaware of research in finance considering this role on
startup boards, statements by industry practitioners show that they believe that independent
directors act as mediators in some cases. For example, the NVCA (the lobbying group for
the VC industry) provides popular "model documents" such as investor rights agreements,
certificates of incorporation, and voting agreements.17 In the latter, they discuss that in the
eyes of the court, independent directors can lessen the need for alternative contractual terms
that deal with exit decision conflicts. To introduce the mediation role of independent directors,
we present a very simple model, which is based on Aghion and Bolton (1992) and Broughman
(2010, 2013). Intuitively, the mediation role can arise in the setting of Aghion and Bolton (1992)
if we consider three (or more) actions that the firm could take, as opposed to two.
  17
   See https://nvca.org/model-legal-documents/ and https://nvca.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/
06/NVCA-Model-Document-Voting-Agreement.docx.



                                                  18
5.1    Model

Consider a risk-neutral entrepreneur (E) and a risk-neutral venture capitalist (VC). The
entrepreneur is cash-constrained. At time 0, the VC investor decides whether to finance the
firm, and the entrepreneur decides whether to contribute his human capital. Both parties have
their outside options, I V C and I E , if they choose to not contribute their capital and human
capital, respectively. If one of the parties does not make the investment, the payoffs of both
parties are zero.
   If the parties invest, then at time 1, the firm can take one of three possible actions 1, 2,
and 3. These actions can correspond to any important decisions that are likely to give rise
to conflicts of interest between the VC and the entrepreneur: raising a subsequent round of
financing, the sale of the firm, CEO replacement, or the timing of the exit such as an IPO.
   The present value of the payoff for the entrepreneur from action i is given by ViE , and the
payoff for the VC is ViV C . For simplicity, we assume there is no discounting. We also make the
following assumptions:

  1. V1V C > max{V2V C , V3V C }

  2. V3E > max{V1E , V2E }

  3. V2E + V2V C > max{V1E + V1V C , V3E + V3V C }.

   These assumptions imply that the VC investor prefers action 1 the most, the entrepreneur
prefers action 3 the most, and action 2 is efficient in that it maximizes the combined payoff.
   Contracts are incomplete, and the parties cannot contract on actions. Instead, the choice
between the actions is made by the board. The board can be controlled in three different ways.
In an entrepreneur-controlled (VC-controlled) board, the entrepreneur (VC investor) has full
decision-making authority to choose the action. In a board with "shared control," neither the
VC nor the entrepreneur have the majority of the seats, and there is an independent director,
who maximizes the joint payoff of the two parties, i.e., the total value of the startup. Under
shared control, the decision-making protocol is as follows: the VC and the entrepreneur each
suggest an action, and the independent director chooses between the two proposed actions.

                                               19
   We next compare the three allocations of control over the board from the perspective of
ex-ante and ex-post efficiency.


Entrepreneur control. Under E-control, the entrepreneur would like to choose action 3.
However, there is a possibility of renegotiation. We assume that the VC investor makes a
take-it-or-leave it offer to the entrepreneur to induce him to take a different action. Then, the
ex-post efficient action 2 is implemented, and the VC gives the entrepreneur just enough cash
to make him indifferent between actions 2 and 3, i.e., the amount of V3E - V2E . Therefore, the
payoffs of the entrepreneur and the VC are, respectively, V3E and V2V C - V3E - V2E . For this
allocation of control to be ex-ante efficient (in the sense that both investments are made), the
following constraints need to be satisfied:


                                                   V3E  I E ,                                  (1)

                                   V2V C - V3E - V2E      IV C.


VC control. Under VC control, the VC would like to choose action 1. Because the en-
trepreneur is cash constrained, there is no renegotiation, so action 1 is chosen. This allocation
of control is ex-ante efficient if and only if


                                            V1E  I E ,                                         (2)

                                           V1V C  I V C .


   Note that if V1E < I E , it is technically possible for the VC to offer cash to the entrepreneur
at stage 0. For simplicity, we shut down this option, motivating it by the lack of commitment
power by the entrepreneur: if the entrepreneur's human capital investment is non-verifiable, he
could take cash at stage 0 and then still not invest his human capital and instead exercise his
outside option to get I E , so such transfers would not occur.


Shared control with independent director as the mediator. Suppose that V1E + V1V C =
V3E + V3V C , so that the independent director is never indifferent between the two proposed

                                                 20
actions. Then, in equilibrium, at least one of the parties will propose action 2, and it will be
chosen by the independent director.18 Hence, the action is ex-post efficient, and there is no
need for renegotiation. For this allocation of control to be ex-ante efficient, we need


                                                V2E  I E ,                                                 (3)

                                              V2V C  I V C .


Which allocation of control is optimal?

As the above arguments imply, VC control is not ex-post efficient, while both entrepreneur
control and shared control achieve ex-post efficiency. However, these allocations of control may
not be ex-ante efficient. In particular, it follows from (1)-(3) that it is easiest to satisfy the
VC's participation constraint under VC control because in this case, the payoff of the VC is the
highest. As a result, if I V C is sufficiently high, i.e., I V C  (V2V C , V1V C ], then giving control to
the VC is necessary to ensure that the firm is financed. Therefore, VC control can be optimal
despite the potential ex-post inefficiency.
    Similarly, if I E is sufficiently high, then giving control to the entrepreneur is necessary to
ensure that the entrepreneur invests his human capital in the project -- both VC control and
shared control may not promise the entrepreneur enough rents to motivate him to make the
investment.
    Finally, for intermediate levels of I V C and I E , shared control ensures both ex-ante and
ex-post efficiency, and hence is optimal.


5.2     Predictions

A key conclusion from the above analysis is that as I V C increases relative to I E , control should
shift from (1) entrepreneur control, to (2) shared control, and then to (3) VC control. This
conclusion gives rise to two sets of predictions: within the firm's life cycle and across firms.
  18
     For example, it cannot be that the independent director chooses action 1 in equilibrium. In this case, the
entrepreneur can benefit from deviating and proposing action 2, because it will be chosen by the independent
director over any other action and because V2E > V1E (the inequality V2E > V1E follows from combining
assumptions 1 and 3 above).


                                                      21
    First, within the firm's life cycle, as the amount of capital contributed by the VC and,
accordingly, the value of its stake in the firm increases with financing rounds, I V C increases
relative to I E . Intuitively, the outside option of the VC investor is to sell its stake in the firm,
and this outside option increases with the amount of contributed capital. Hence, our first
prediction is the following:

    Prediction 1. Within the firm's life cycle, control over the board will shift from (1)
entrepreneur control in early financing rounds; (2) to shared control in subsequent financing
rounds; and (3) to VC control in late financing rounds.

    Second, across firms, the bargaining power of the VC relative to the entrepreneur (in the
sense of their outside opportunities from investing capital and human capital, respectively)
corresponds to a higher I V C relative to I E . Hence, our second prediction is as follows:

    Prediction 2. Across firms, as the VC's bargaining power relative to the entrepreneur
increases, control over the board will shift from (1) entrepreneur control for low VC bargaining
power; (2) to shared control for intermediate levels of VC bargaining power; and then (3) to
VC control for high VC bargaining power.

    The VC's relative bargaining power is likely to be higher if private equity capital is scarce
relative to the supply of startups, which we exploit in some of our proxies for bargaining power
in Section 6.2.



6     Main analysis
In this section, we test the main predictions of the mediation role hypothesis, summarized in
Section 5.2. Section 6.1 examines Prediction 1 within the firm's life cycle, Section 6.2 examines
Prediction 2 in the cross-section, and Section 6.3 discusses how the above discussed trends in
the allocation of board control over the sample period can be viewed from the perspective of
the mediation role.




                                                 22
6.1      Allocation of control within the firm's life cycle

The first prediction of the mediation role is that over the startup life cycle, control over the
board will shift from entrepreneurs, to shared control with independent directors playing a
tie-breaking role, and then to VC control. We first note that the patterns in Figure 2 are
broadly consistent with this prediction: at age zero, entrepreneurs on average control more
than 50% of the seats, but they quickly lose full control and start sharing it with independent
directors and VCs, whereas the fraction of VC directors gradually increases over the firm's life
cycle.
   Table 3 offers more detailed statistics about the composition of an average and median
board at each round of financing. In the first round, entrepreneurs control about 57% of seats
in an average board, and the median board has two entrepreneurs and one VC investor. By the
second financing round, the most common arrangement is shared control: the median board
has two entrepreneurs, two VC investors, and one independent director to break the tie in case
of disagreement, and the average percentages of entrepreneur and VC board seats are 44% and
41% respectively, i.e., none of them controls the majority. Over subsequent rounds of financing,
the number and fraction of VC directors gradually increase, and by the fourth financing round,
the average firm has 53% of board seats controlled by VC investors.
   Table 4 and Figure 6 use the definitions of board control introduced in Section 3 to show
the evolution of board control within the life cycle. Consistent with Prediction 1, entrepreneur
control is the most common arrangement during the first financing round: 48% of startups are
controlled by entrepreneurs, as opposed to 20% by VC investors and 32% with shared control.
As the firm raises additional financing, entrepreneur control becomes much less common; in
contrast, the most common arrangements in the second round are shared control and VC control,
each comprising 36% of the sample. Finally, VC control is the most common arrangement
among startups that have progressed to the next rounds: it is observed in 52% and 63% of
startups in the third and fourth round, respectively. These patterns are clearly seen in the left
panel of Figure 6. The right panel of Figure 6 shows similar, although a bit noisier, dynamics
as a function of firm age.



                                               23
       To test the life cycle hypothesis directly, we calculate the transition probabilities between
the three types of board control. In particular, we ask: conditional on the board having a given
allocation of control in one year, what is the likelihood it will have a different allocation of
control in the next year? This analysis is presented in Table 5. The results in Panel A, which
considers all financing years, are consistent with the life cycle hypothesis: conditional on a
change in board control from one year to the next, entrepreneur control is 71% likely to switch
to shared control (30.47/(30.47+12.31)), whereas shared control is 85% likely to switch to VC
control (30.98/(30.98+5.55)). Conditional on the board being controlled by the VCs, VCs are
89% likely to retain control in the next year. The results in Panel B, which only considers
financing years in which there was a change in board size, are very similar.
       Finally, Table 6 and Figure 7 test the life cycle hypothesis controlling for industry by
year fixed effects, the capital raised by the startup in the financing round, and location fixed
effects, where location is defined as one of the nine Census divisions.19 Table 6 presents
the regression results, and Figure 7 plots the corresponding estimated coefficients from this
regression. Consistent with prior results, entrepreneur control becomes exceedingly less likely as
firm age increases (column 1) or as the firm goes through financing rounds (column 5), whereas
VC control becomes exceedingly more likely (columns 3 and 7). The fraction of startups with
shared control reflects the net of these two effects: on the one hand, as firm age/financing round
increases, part of the firms switch from entrepreneur control to shared control, and on the other
hand, part of the firms switch from shared control to VC control.20
       Columns 4 and 8 of Table 6 show that the presence of independent directors on the board
monotonically increases with startup age and financing round. This pattern is consistent with
the predictions of the mediation role, according to which independent directors are added to
the board once full entrepreneur control is no longer optimal. In addition, under the premise
that advice from the board becomes more important at later stages of the startup life cycle,
  19
     See, e.g., https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/monitoring-references/maps/us-census-divisions.php for the list of
nine Census divisions.
  20
     Whether the relation between the stage of the life cycle and shared control is positive or negative depends
on whether, as the startup matures, the first effect happens at a higher or lower speed than the second. In our
sample, entrepreneur control is replaced by shared control at a higher speed than shared control is replaced by
VC control in earlier years, but at a lower speed in later years, leading to the non-monotonic pattern in columns
2 and 6.


                                                       24
this pattern is also consistent with independent directors' advisory role. However, the advisory
role alone cannot explain why independent directors are not only added to the board, but are
also given critical voting power through their tie-breaking role.


6.2       Allocation of control and VC bargaining power

Proxies for VC bargaining power. To test the second prediction in Section 5.2, we use
two proxies to capture VC bargaining power relative to the entrepreneur. The first proxy is
based on valuations that VC investors pay for firms in a given industry, while the second is
based on the supply of VC capital in the region.
       To construct the first proxy, we consider each of the seven industry groups separately.21
Within each industry group, we calculate the average equity stake of the VCs (i.e., the ratio of
capital invested by the VCs to post-money valuation) in early financing rounds across all firms
during the previous year. For columns 1-4 of Table 7, we then split the observations within
each industry group into three groups: (1) the top quartile of average VC equity in the previous
year; (2) the bottom quartile of average VC equity in the previous year; and (3) the middle 50%
of observations. The top (bottom) quartile corresponds to the group with the highest (lowest)
VC bargaining power within industry. Similarly, columns 5-8 of Table 7 correspond to the split
of the sample period into quintiles within each industry. The idea of this measure is that if the
amount of capital contributed by the VC is determined by the firm's production needs and not
by the parties' bargaining power, then a higher average VC equity stake corresponds to higher
VC bargaining power in negotiations over the firm's valuation.
       To construct the second proxy, we use a measure of "dry powder," i.e., the supply of VC
capital available for investment, at the geographical location level. We use geographical location,
rather than industry as in the previous measure, because it is difficult to classify VC firms by
industry. Specifically, we consider nine Census divisions (which we refer to as "regions") and
allocate each startup and each VC to a given region based on the location of the startup and
the location of the VC firm's headquarters, respectively. Within each region, we measure dry
  21
    The four most represented industry groups are information technology, healthcare, consumer services, and
business and financial services.


                                                    25
powder in a given year as the total capital raised by all VC funds in this region since 1990 and
up to this year, minus the total capital invested into startups located in this region from 1996
up to this year. We then split all observations within each region into three groups: (1) the
top quartile of division-level dry powder in the previous year, which corresponds to the highest
supply of VC capital and hence the lowest level of VC bargaining power; (2) the bottom quartile
of division-level dry powder in the previous year, i.e., the highest VC bargaining power; and (3)
the middle 50%. This definition corresponds to columns 1-4, and in columns 5-8, we similarly
split the sample period into quintiles within region. Our preferred measure of bargaining power
is the equity-based proxy as the dry powder measure is noisier.22


Results. The main outcomes of interest are the allocation of board control (the dummies
for entrepreneur, VC, and shared control) and the presence of independent directors on the
board. We only consider the first equity financing round because for any subsequent round, the
allocation of control depends on the allocation of control during the previous financing rounds,
which makes the results harder to interpret. In Table 7, we regress each outcome variable on
dummies for high/highest and low/lowest VC bargaining power, as well as industry and region
fixed effects. In all regressions, the excluded category is the middle of the distribution. We do
not include year fixed effects because by construction, the variation in our bargaining power
measures is mostly coming from the time-series variation within an industry/division.
       The results based on the first proxy (average VC equity stakes in the industry-year) are
presented in Panel A of Table 7. Consistent with Prediction 2, column 1 and 5 show that
entrepreneur control is most likely when VC bargaining power is the lowest and becomes
increasingly less likely as VC bargaining power increases. For example, the fraction of startups
with entrepreneur control in the lowest (highest) quartile of VC bargaining power is higher
(lower) than in the middle of the distribution by 0.07 (0.16). These effects are economically
  22
     There are two major reasons why the dry power proxy is noisier than the equity-based measure. First,
in order to have more than annual variation, we assigned VC funds to geographic regions based on their
headquarters location. Most VCs are able to invest nationally and may have multiple offices making investments.
Second, because it is challenging to observe the exact VC fund that invests in a startup, the sum of capital
raised by startups is an imperfect measure of funds deployed by previously closed VC funds. For example, some
investors in equity financings are corporate VCs or individuals that do not invest out of traditional funds.



                                                     26
significant, given that the average fraction of entrepreneur-controlled boards in the first financing
round is 0.48. In contrast, and also consistent with the prediction, the fraction of VC-controlled
boards increases with VC bargaining power proxy: it is by 0.05 lower (0.12 higher) in the
bottom (top) quartile than in the middle of the distribution, with the sample average of 0.20.
   The relation between VC bargaining power and shared control reflects the net of these
two effects: whether it is positive or negative depends on whether, as VC bargaining power
increases, entrepreneur control is replaced by shared control at a higher or lower speed than
shared control is replaced by VC control. In our sample, entrepreneur control is replaced by
shared control at a slightly higher speed than shared control is replaced by VC control, leading
the likelihood of shared control to slightly increase with VC bargaining power. Finally, the
dummy variable for the presence of independent directors on the board has the same pattern as
the dummy for shared control, which is consistent with the idea that independent directors are
added to the board to mediate conflicts between investors and entrepreneurs.
   The corresponding results for the second proxy (dry powder) are presented in Panel B.
Although these results are noisier, they are all broadly consistent with those in Panel A.


6.3    Trends in board composition and control

We now return to the discussion of trends in board composition and board control, presented in
Figures 4 and 5. According to Prediction 2, the declining fraction of startups with VC-controlled
boards and the contemporaneous increase in the fraction of startups with entrepreneur-controlled
boards would be consistent with a decline in VC bargaining power over time. Are there reasons
to believe that there has been such a shift in bargaining power? The findings in the prior
literature suggest that this could indeed be the case, due to several technological and regulatory
developments in private equity markets.
   First, the literature documents that there has been a substantial increase in the supply of
private equity capital, which increased the outside opportunities of entrepreneurs relative to VCs
and thereby increased entrepreneurs' bargaining power. This happened due to a combination
of two effects. The first was the 1996 deregulation of private equity markets (the National



                                                 27
Securities Markets Improvement Act, or NSMIA), which made it easier for startups to raise
capital from out-of-state investors and, at the same time, made it easier for VC funds to raise
larger amounts of capital. Ewens and Farre-Mensa (2020) show that NSMIA increased the
supply of private capital and helped strengthen founders' bargaining power vis-a-vis investors.
The second, related, effect has been the entry of non-traditional investors, such as mutual funds,
hedge funds, and sovereign wealth funds, which have become increasingly active in making
direct private equity investments in startups (e.g., Fang, Ivashina, and Lerner, 2015; Chernenko,
Lerner, and Zeng, 2017; Ewens and Farre-Mensa, 2020).
   In addition to these changes on the financing side, there have been important changes on the
technological side. Specifically, the 2006 introduction of cloud computing services by Amazon
significantly lowered the cost of forming new internet-based startups by removing the need for
large upfront investments in hardware. Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2018) show that
this decrease in the cost of starting new businesses increased the prevalence of a "spray and
pray" investment approach, whereby VC investors provide lower amounts of funding to a larger
number of startups. Similarly, Eldar, Hochberg, and Litov (2020) show that this technological
change coincided with a shift towards founder-friendly dual-class structures.
   Both the reduction in VC bargaining power and the lower amount contributed by VCs in
early stages correspond to lower I V C in the model of Section 5. Section 5.2 therefore predicts a
greater likelihood of entrepreneur control and a lower likelihood of VC control over time, which
is exactly what we observe in Figure 4. Not only VC investors are less likely to control the
board during the first financing round, they are also less likely to join the board all together
(solid line in Figure 5). Figure 4 also reveals that the growth in entrepreneur-controlled boards
during the first financing round has been especially pronounced (from 0.3 in 2002 to 0.55 in
2013), even more so than the decline in VC-controlled boards (from 0.35 in 2002 to 0.15 in 2013).
The net effect of these two trends has been a slight decrease in the fraction of startups with
shared control and, correspondingly, a slight decrease in the presence of independent directors
on the board (dotted line in Figure 5) and board size (dashed line in Figure 5).
   Overall, the time-series dynamics of board composition and board control are broadly
consistent with the mediation role of the board and bargaining story hypothesis.


                                               28
6.4       Director connections

The mediation role of independent directors requires that they do not represent the sole interests
of either entrepreneurs or VC investors, and instead maximize the joint welfare of both parties.
Our baseline analysis defines an independent director as any director who is not affiliated with
either entrepreneurs or VCs. Because such directors are jointly appointed to the board by
mutual consent of entrepreneurs and VCs, it is reasonable to assume that they have incentives
to preserve their reputation with both parties and thus would not favor one over the other. In
addition, the fiduciary duty of the board is to maximize the interests of common stockholders,
which would counteract the potential bias that independent directors may have towards VCs.
Nevertheless, a potential concern is that due to their extensive networks and influence, VC
investors may exercise undue influence over director appointments, which would tilt such
mutually appointed directors towards favoring VCs despite their fiduciary duties.
       Therefore, in this section, we use a more conservative definition of independent directors
by analyzing the data on past connections between independent directors on the one hand,
and VCs and/or entrepreneurs on the other. We only classify an independent director as truly
independent, or "unconnected," if the director has not had prior interactions with either VC
investors or entrepreneurs in any of his prior positions.
       An interaction between an independent director and one of his co-directors on the board can
occur one of three main ways. First, the independent director (ID) could have a past interaction
via a board seat. In this interaction type, the ID's past board positions could be in the role of
an ID or an investor as found in VentureSource.23 Second, an independent director could have
had a past executive or founding position at a previous startup as recorded in VentureSource
and, through these past positions, could be connected to that previous startup's investors or
board members. In particular, a connection or interaction with a past investor can happen
because (i) the investor was a director in the past startup or (ii) was a partner at a firm of
any of the investors in the past startup (e.g., a general partner at an investor that did not
take a board seat). Third, the ID could have previously had an investor role such as lead
  23
   Recall that we cannot observe executive directors in VentureSource outside of our data that incorporates
Form Ds.


                                                    29
investor, investor-director, or partner at a VC firm. These past experiences introduce a wealth
of possible connections through syndication and/or board seats. In sum, each pair of "investor
and independent director" and "executive and independent director" on the current board can
have a connection via any past investment activity, board activity, or employment within the
VC industry. We then classify the independent director in such a pair to be "connected" (to
the investor or executive, respectively). This connection definition is agnostic about the past
roles that the ID or the other co-director played in the past (e.g., the ID could be a founder in
the past, while the entrepreneur on the current board could have been a VC). Finally, if the ID
is connected to both the entrepreneur and VC, then we effectively ignore the connections and
treat this director as truly independent.
   We next redefine board control given these connection classifications: we consider a director
connected to VCs (entrepreneurs) through his past professional experience as a representative
of VCs (entrepreneurs). Under this new definition, some startup boards that were previously
classified as having shared control are now reclassified as having VC (entrepreneur) control.
   Table 8 presents the descriptive statistics on director connections and the reclassification of
board control. Overall, the fraction of startups that had at least one unconnected independent
director gradually increases over the startup life cycle, from 31% in the first round to 50% in
the fourth round, which exhibits a similar start but less steep increase than patterns observed
in Table 4. Across financing rounds, between 70% and 80% of independent directors are not
connected to either VCs or entrepreneurs. Directors connected to entrepreneurs are rather rare
(about 1% of all independent directors), so the remaining 20%-30% of independent directors
are connected to VCs. This leads to a slight reclassification of certain startups' board control:
around 10% (3%) of startups with at least one independent director that were previously
classified as having shared control are now classified as having VC (entrepreneur) control.
   Tables 9 and 10 repeat the analysis in Tables 6 and 7, respectively, but using the new
definitions of board control. This analysis reveals very similar results to those obtained without
the director connections data. There is a pronounced monotonic positive (negative) relation
between startup age/financing round and VC (entrepreneur) control over the board, and,
similarly, there is a monotonic positive (negative) relation between proxies for VC bargaining


                                               30
power and VC (entrepreneur) control over the board. Thus, our main conclusions are robust to
the more conservative definition of independent directors.



7     Robustness
Our results are robust to two assumptions in the Form D data creation. First, recall that when
a non-executive director listed on the Form D does not merge with a VC investor or partner at
a VC investing firm, then we assign that individual as an independent director. Some of these
directors were found in VentureSource or Pitchbook as independent directors, thus verifying
their type. However, we could not find corroborating evidence of the independent director
status in many cases. The first robustness tests reruns the full set of results after excluding
any startup that has at least one such independent director assignment that did not have
verification in Pitchbook or VentureSource. Implementing this rule results in a sample of 6,249
startups (14% sample loss) and no meaningful change to the main results (see Section 4.3 of
the Internet Appendix).
    Second, a major rule for our sample creation is the filing of at least one Form D filing over
the startup's life. Some startups fail to file a Form D with every financing event, so it is possible
that this rule leaves us with stale boards due to a lack of new disclosures. It effectively means
that for startups that stopped filing Form D at a certain point, we rely on VentureSource to
identify any changes to the board after that point. The second robustness test drops a startup
from the sample if they have a known VC financing, but no Form D was filed in the previous
two years. The resulting sample has 6,881 (4.5% sample loss) startups and the results are
quantitatively unchanged, as shown in Section 4.3 of the Internet Appendix.



8     Conclusion
We study the determinants of board composition at VC-backed startups and its evolution from
the first financing round to exit. We are particularly interested in the following questions. What
are the roles of independent directors on boards of VC-backed firms? How is control over the


                                                 31
board allocated between VC investors, entrepreneurs, and independent directors? And how do
independent directors' roles and the allocation of control over the board depend on factors such
as the stage of the startup life cycle, the amount of financing provided by VC investors, and
the bargaining power of the two parties?
   We examine these questions using a novel dataset, which covers more than 7,200 startups
from 2002 to 2017. We show that independent directors are widespread, even though their
presence is not required by regulation. Moreover, they often have substantial voting power: in
many cases, neither the VC-affiliated directors nor the entrepreneurs control the majority of
board seats, so independent directors play a tie-breaking role, effectively making the decision
whenever the two parties disagree. Such disagreements are likely to arise for issues related
to the sale of the firm or its merger with another firm, subsequent financing rounds, or CEO
replacement.
   Our key hypothesis is that unlike in public firms, where the main roles of independent
directors are monitoring and advising, an important role of independent directors in VC-backed
firms is mediation. Specifically, independent directors can help mediate conflicts between VC
investors and entrepreneurs on the board, which can increase both the ex-post efficiency of
decisions taken by the firm and the ex-ante likelihood that the firm is financed. As the amount
of financing contributed by VC investors increases or as VC bargaining power relative to the
entrepreneur increases, the mediation role of independent directors becomes more important.
As a result, the allocation of control over the board is likely to change from entrepreneur control,
to shared control with independent directors serving as tie-breakers, and then to VC control.
We show that the patterns of board composition and board control are broadly consistent with
the predictions of the mediation role. We also show that over time, control over boards has
shifted from VC control to greater shared and entrepreneur control, consistent with the general
trend towards lower VC bargaining power that has been documented in other studies.
   Overall, our results provide suggestive evidence for a previously under-explored role of
independent directors. The mediation role could be relevant for other types of companies with
two or more large blockholders that have conflicting interests. Thus, exploring this role further,
beyond the setting of VC-backed startups, could be an interesting direction for future research.


                                                32
References
Adams, Ren´
          ee B., and Daniel Ferreira, 2007, A Theory of Friendly Boards, The Journal of
  Finance 62, 217­250.

Adams, Renee B., Benjamin E. Hermalin, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2010, The Role of Boards
  of Directors in Corporate Governance: A Conceptual Framework and Survey, Journal of
  Economic Literature 48, 58­107.

Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton, 1992, An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial
  Contracting, The Review of Economic Studies 59, 473­494.

Amornsiripanitch, Natee, Paul A. Gompers, and Yuhai Xuan, 2019, More than Money: Venture
  Capitalists on Boards, The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 35, 513­543.

Baker, Malcolm, and Paul A Gompers, 2003, The determinants of board structure at the initial
  public offering, The Journal of Law and Economics 46, 569­598.

Blair, Margaret M., 2014, Boards of Directors as Mediating Hierarchs, Seattle University Law
  Review 38, 297.

       , and Lynn A. Stout, 2001, Trust, Trustworthiness, and the Behavioral Foundations of
  Corporate Law, University of Pennsylvania Law Review 149, 1735­1810.

Broughman, Brian, 2013, Independent Directors and Shared Board Control in Venture Finance,
  Review of Law & Economics 9, 41­72.

Broughman, Brian J., 2010, The Role of Independent Directors in Startup Firms, Utah Law
  Review 2010, 461.

Burkart, Mike, Salvatore Miglietta, and Charlotte Ostergaard, 2017, Why Do Boards Exist?
  Governance Design in the Absence of Corporate Law, Working paper.

Byrd, John W., and Kent A. Hickman, 1992, Do outside directors monitor managers?: Evidence
  from tender offer bids, Journal of Financial Economics 32, 195­221.

                                            33
Chernenko, Sergey, Josh Lerner, and Yao Zeng, 2017, Mutual Funds as Venture Capitalists?
  Evidence from Unicorns, NBER Working Paper Series: Working Paper Series.

Coles, Jeffrey L., Naveen D. Daniel, and Lalitha Naveen, 2008, Boards: Does one size fit all?,
  Journal of Financial Economics 87, 329­356.

Cornelli, Francesca, and Oguzhan Karaka¸
                                       s, 2015, CEO Turnover in LBOs: The Role of Boards,
 Working paper.

Cotter, James F., Anil Shivdasani, and Marc Zenner, 1997, Do independent directors enhance
  target shareholder wealth during tender offers?, Journal of Financial Economics 43, 195­218.

Donaldson, Jason R., Nadya Malenko, and Giorgia Piacentino, 2020, Deadlock on the Board,
  Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Eldar, Ofer, Yael Hochberg, and Lubomir Litov, 2020, The Rise of Dual-Class Stock IPOs and
  Venture Capital Financing, Working paper.

Ewens, Michael, and Joan Farre-Mensa, 2020, The Deregulation of the Private Equity Markets
  and the Decline in IPOs, The Review of Financial Studies 00, 59.

Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2018, Cost of experimentation
  and the evolution of venture capital, Journal of Financial Economics 128, 422­442.

Fang, Lily, Victoria Ivashina, and Josh Lerner, 2015, The disintermediation of financial markets:
  Direct investing in private equity, Journal of Financial Economics 116, 160­178.

Field, Laura, Michelle Lowry, and Anahit Mkrtchyan, 2013, Are busy boards detrimental?,
  Journal of Financial Economics 109, 63­82.

Fracassi, Cesare, and Geoffrey Tate, 2012, External Networking and Internal Firm Governance,
 The Journal of Finance 67, 153­194.

Fried, Jesse M., and Mira Ganor, 2006, Agency Costs of Venture Capitalist Control in Startups,
  New York University Law Review 81, 967­1025.

                                               34
Gompers, Paul A, Will Gornall, Steven N Kaplan, and Ilya A Strebulaev, 2020, How do venture
  capitalists make decisions?, Journal of Financial Economics 135, 169­190.

Gorman, Michael, and William A. Sahlman, 1989, What do venture capitalists do?, Journal of
  Business Venturing 4, 231­248.

Grossman, Sanford J, and Oliver D Hart, 1986, The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory
  of vertical and lateral integration, Journal of political economy 94, 691­719.

Harford, Jarrad, and Robert J. Schonlau, 2013, Does the director labor market offer ex post
  settling-up for CEOs? The case of acquisitions, Journal of Financial Economics 110, 18­36.

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1990, Property rights and the nature of the firm, Journal of
  political economy 98, 1119­1158.

Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2002, Venture Capital and the Professionalization of
  Start-Up Firms: Empirical Evidence, The Journal of Finance 57, 169­197.

Hermalin, Benjamin E., and Michael S. Weisbach, 1998, Endogenously Chosen Boards of
  Directors and Their Monitoring of the CEO, The American Economic Review 88, 96­118.

Iliev, Peter, and Michelle Lowry, 2020, Venturing beyond the IPO: Financing of Newly Public
  Firms by Venture Capitalists, The Journal of Finance 75, 1527­1577.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Str¨
                              omberg, 2003, Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real
  World: An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts, The Review of Economic Studies
  70, 281­315.

       , 2004, Characteristics, Contracts, and Actions: Evidence from Venture Capitalist
  Analyses, The Journal of Finance 59, 2177­2210.

Lerner, Josh, 1995, Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms, The Journal of
  Finance 50, 301­318.

Nguyen, Bang Dang, and Kasper Meisner Nielsen, 2010, The value of independent directors:
  Evidence from sudden deaths, Journal of Financial Economics 98, 550­567.

                                              35
Rajan, Raghuram G., 2012, Presidential Address: The Corporation in Finance, The Journal of
  Finance 67, 1173­1217.

Sahlman, William A., 1990, The structure and governance of venture-capital organizations,
  Journal of Financial Economics 27, 473­521.

Venugopal, Buvaneshwaran, and Vijay Yerramilli, 2019, Outside Directors at Early-Stage
  Startups, Working paper.

Weisbach, Michael S., 1988, Outside directors and CEO turnover, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 20, 431­460.




                                           36
9     Tables and Figures

9.1    Figures

                                  Figure 1: Board composition: counts

      The figure reports the average and median number of board seats held by executives, independent
      directors, and venture capitalists. The x-axis is the years since first VC equity financing (i.e. when
      we start tracking startup boards).




                                                       37
                         Figure 2: Board composition: percentage

The figure reports the average and median fraction of board seats held by executives, independent
directors, and venture capitalists. The x-axis is the years since first VC equity financing (i.e. when
we start tracking startup boards).




                                                 38
                        Figure 3: Board composition by exit type

The figure reports the composition of an average startup board for the years prior to either an
initial public offering (IPO) or acquisition. The x-axis reports the years prior to either exit event
and only considers the set of startups with some activity in those years (e.g., if a startup went
public in 5 years, then their board data are only in the years [-5, 0]).




                                                 39
      Figure 4: Percent of firms with VC and entrepreneur control over time

The figure reports the percentage of startups by year and financing round (sequence of equity
financings) where the venture capitalists (investors) control more than 50% of board seats (left)
and the same percentage controlled by the executives (right). What remains are startups where
neither party controls the board, i.e., startups with shared control. The x-axis is the year that the
startup first raised venture capital financing and thus compares cohorts of startups over their first
three financing rounds. For example, the Round 3 statistics in 2002 include the set of startups first
financed in 2002 that also had at least a third financing round by the end of the sample period.




                                                40
                             Figure 5: Boards at first financing

The left y-axis reports the percentage of startup boards (with at least one director) that have at
least one independent director (dotted line) and at least one VC-director (solid line) in the year of
the first VC equity financing. The right y-axis reports the average board size in the year of the
first VC equity financing. The x-axis is the year of the first VC equity financing.




                                                 41
Figure 6: Board control by firm stage: Financing round number and years since first VC

   The figure reports the percentage of startups by financing round. "Entrepreneur" is the percentage
   of startups where executives/entrepreneurs control the board, "VC" is the percentage of startups
   where investors control the board, and "Shared" is the percentage of startups in which neither
   VCs nor entrepreneurs control the board.




                                                  42
             Figure 7: Board control by firm stage: Regression estimates

The figure reports the coefficient estimates (and 95% confidence intervals with robust standard
errors) from the regressions reported in Table 6. The top figure reports coefficients from columns
(1)-(3) for firm age, and the bottom figure reports coefficients from columns (5)-(7) for financing
round. Controls in the regression include log capital raised, fixed effects for year-industry, and
location fixed effects.




                                                43
9.2   Tables




               44
                             Table 1: Summary statistics: firms in and out of sample (2002­2017).

         The table reports the firm-level statistics for those in and out of our sample. "In sample" startups are those that
         ever filed a Form D and satisfied all the conditions listed in Section 3. "Out-of-sample" startups are those that
         raised equity financing by at least one traditional U.S.-based VC during 2002-2017 and first round was not one
         of the rounds listed in footnote 4, but either (1) never filed a Form D; or (2) filed a Form D at some point but
         do not satisfy the conditions in Section 3, i.e., did not list any executive director over the firm's life or raised a
        VC financing before the first Form D. "Year first VC" is the year the startup first raised a VC equity financing.
        "First round Series A" is a dummy for whether that financing round was a Series A (the alternatives: Seed, Later,
         Growth, PE). "CA" and "MA" are dummy variables for whether the startup is headquartered in California or
         Massachusetts. "Total capital raised" is the sum of equity capital raised by the startup as of 2019Q3. "# equity
         financings" is the total number of equity financings as of the end of 2019Q3. "Had Angel or Accel. round" is a
         dummy variable equal to one if the startup ever had an angel financing or accelerator event. "Has Form D" is a
         dummy variable if the startup ever filed a Form D.




45
                                                      In sample                                      Out-of-sample
                                      Obs       Mean         Median       Std dev      Obs       Mean         Median       Std dev
     Year first VC                   7,201     2010.738     2011.000       4.303      7,467     2011.783     2013.000       4.179
     First round Series A            7,201      0.722         1.000       0.448       7,467      0.635         1.000        0.481
     CA                              7,201      0.400         0.000        0.490      7,467       0.491        0.000        0.500
     MA                              7,201      0.099         0.000        0.299      7,467      0.068         0.000        0.252
     Went public (as of 2019Q2)      7,201       0.036        0.000       0.187       7,467       0.025        0.000        0.157
     Acquired (as of 2019Q2)         7,201      0.339         0.000       0.474       7,467       0.273        0.000        0.446
     Total capital raised            7,125      36.999       12.640       97.073      7,033      42.313       11.000       244.870
     # equity financings             7,201       2.929        3.000        1.746      7,467       2.740        2.000        1.735
     Year founded                    7,201     2008.631     2009.000       4.664      7,467     2010.156     2011.000       4.804
     First round syndicate size      7,201      2.627         2.000       1.692       7,467      2.542         2.000        1.724
     Had Angel or Accel. round       7,201      0.118         0.000       0.323       7,467       0.118        0.000        0.323
     Has Form D                      7,201       1.000        1.000        0.000      7,467       0.417        0.000        0.493
                                      Table 2: Summary statistics: firm-year observations

         The table reports the summary statistics for startups in our sample. Panel A summarizes the set of firm-year
         observations where we include all years from first VC financing to exit date. That is, the unit of observation is
         firm-year regardless of whether the startup raised capital in this year. For each year without a financing event,
         the board data are imputed from the last financing event. Panel B reports the same summary statistics for the
         subset of years when the startup raised at least one equity financing.

                                                                   Panel A: Firm-year; all boards
                                      Obs            Mean              25th           Median              75th        Std dev
     Board size                      35,134         4.365             3.000            4.000           6.000           1.982
     # VC directors                  35,134         1.918             1.000            2.000           3.000           1.550
     # executive directors           35,134         1.637             1.000           2.000            2.000           0.769
     # independent directors         35,134         0.810             0.000           0.000            1.000           1.059
     % VC directors                  35,134         0.390             0.200            0.400           0.600           0.253




46
     % executive directors           35,134         0.452             0.250           0.400            0.600           0.268
     % independent directors         35,134         0.158             0.000           0.000            0.273           0.194
     Has ID                          35,134         0.492             0.000            0.000           1.000           0.500
     Year                            35,134        2011.822          2009.000        2012.000         2015.000         3.762
                                                              Panel B: Firm-financing years; all boards
                                      Obs            Mean              25th           Median              75th        Std dev
     Board size                      16,642         4.430             3.000            4.000           6.000           2.016
     # VC directors                  16,642         1.957             1.000            2.000           3.000           1.554
     # executive directors           16,642         1.681             1.000           2.000            2.000           0.788
     # independent directors         16,642         0.792             0.000           0.000            1.000           1.063
     % VC directors                  16,642         0.393             0.250            0.429           0.571           0.248
     % executive directors           16,642         0.457             0.250           0.400            0.600           0.265
     % independent directors         16,642         0.150             0.000           0.000            0.250           0.188
     Has ID                          16,642         0.479             0.000            0.000           1.000           0.500
     Year                            16,642        2011.408          2008.000        2012.000         2015.000         3.995
                                           Table 3: Summary statistics: financing-level.

     The table reports summary statistics of boards of directors for financing rounds. A financing is an equity raise by the startup.

                                                                           Boards at financing # 1
                                              Obs           Mean           25th          Median           75th          Std dev
             Board size                       7,201         3.564          2.000          3.000           5.000          1.749
             # VC directors                   7,201         1.264          0.000          1.000           2.000          1.207
             # executive directors            7,201         1.716          1.000          2.000           2.000          0.816
             # independent directors          7,201         0.585          0.000          0.000           1.000          0.953
             % VC directors                   7,201         0.304          0.000          0.333           0.500          0.251
             % executive directors            7,201         0.569          0.333          0.500           0.750          0.282
             % independent directors          7,201         0.127          0.000          0.000           0.250          0.193
             No VC directors                  7,201         0.322          0.000          0.000           1.000          0.467
                                                                           Boards at financing # 2
                                              Obs           Mean           25th          Median           75th          Std dev
             Board size                       4,502         4.515          3.000          4.000           6.000          1.817
             # VC directors                   4,502         1.979          1.000          2.000           3.000          1.393
             # executive directors            4,502         1.724          1.000          2.000           2.000          0.782
             # independent directors          4,502         0.811          0.000          1.000           1.000          1.044
             % VC directors                   4,502         0.407          0.250          0.429           0.571          0.230
             % executive directors            4,502         0.436          0.250          0.400           0.500          0.235




47
             % independent directors          4,502         0.156          0.000          0.118           0.250          0.187
             No VC directors                  4,502         0.148          0.000          0.000           0.000          0.355
                                                                           Boards at financing # 3
                                              Obs           Mean           25th          Median           75th          Std dev
             Board size                       2,505         5.220          4.000          5.000           6.000          1.837
             # VC directors                   2,505         2.600          2.000          2.000           3.000          1.482
             # executive directors            2,505         1.645          1.000          2.000           2.000          0.769
             # independent directors          2,505         0.976          0.000          1.000           2.000          1.108
             % VC directors                   2,505         0.482          0.333          0.500           0.625          0.213
             % executive directors            2,505         0.347          0.200          0.333           0.429          0.193
             % independent directors          2,505         0.170          0.000          0.167           0.286          0.182
             No VC directors                  2,505         0.070          0.000          0.000           0.000          0.256
                                                                           Boards at financing # 4
                                              Obs           Mean           25th          Median           75th          Std dev
             Board size                       1,300         5.758          5.000          6.000           7.000          1.829
             # VC directors                   1,300         3.100          2.000          3.000           4.000          1.571
             # executive directors            1,300         1.585          1.000          1.000           2.000          0.739
             # independent directors          1,300         1.074          0.000          1.000           2.000          1.131
             % VC directors                   1,300         0.528          0.400          0.500           0.667          0.195
             % executive directors            1,300         0.297          0.167          0.250           0.400          0.160
             % independent directors          1,300         0.174          0.000          0.167           0.286          0.173
             No VC directors                  1,300         0.033          0.000          0.000           0.000          0.179
                                  Table 4: Summary statistics: financing-level control.

     The table reports the financing-level statistics on board control.

                                                                 Boards at financing # 1
                                    Obs           Mean           25th          Median      75th    Std dev
      Entrepreneur control         7,201          0.479         0.000           0.000      1.000    0.500
      VC control                   7,201          0.201         0.000           0.000      0.000    0.401
      Shared control               7,201          0.320         0.000           0.000      1.000    0.467
      Has ID                       7,201          0.364         0.000           0.000      1.000    0.481
                                                                 Boards at financing # 2
                                    Obs           Mean           25th          Median      75th    Std dev
      Entrepreneur control         4,502          0.279         0.000           0.000      1.000    0.449
      VC control                   4,502          0.361         0.000           0.000      1.000    0.480




48
      Shared control               4,502          0.359         0.000           0.000      1.000    0.480
      Has ID                       4,502          0.505         0.000           1.000      1.000    0.500
                                                                 Boards at financing # 3
                                    Obs           Mean           25th          Median      75th    Std dev
      Entrepreneur control         2,505          0.141         0.000           0.000      0.000    0.348
      VC control                   2,505          0.516         0.000           1.000      1.000    0.500
      Shared control               2,505          0.343         0.000           0.000      1.000    0.475
      Has ID                       2,505          0.583         0.000           1.000      1.000    0.493
                                                                 Boards at financing # 4
                                    Obs           Mean           25th          Median      75th    Std dev
      Entrepreneur control         1,300          0.083         0.000           0.000      0.000    0.276
      VC control                   1,300          0.629         0.000           1.000      1.000    0.483
      Shared control               1,300          0.288         0.000           0.000      1.000    0.453
      Has ID                       1,300          0.632         0.000           1.000      1.000    0.482
         Table 5: Control over the startup life cycle: transition probabilities

Panel A reports the percentage of switches in board control across all startup financing-years
regardless of the change in board size. Panel B reports the percentage of switches in board control
within the subset of financing-years where there is some change in the size of the board.

                                             Panel A: All financing years
                                                 Board control at t
                                            E     Shared           VC
                 Board             E     57.22% 30.47%           12.31%
                control       Shared      5.55% 63.47%           30.98%
                at t - 1         VC       1.19% 9.83%            88.98%
                                         Panel B: Year w/ board size change
                                                 Board control at t
                                            E     Shared           VC
                 Board             E     35.60% 46.61%           17.80%
                control       Shared      8.31% 44.34%           47.35%
                at t - 1         VC       1.76% 15.05%           83.19%




                                                49
                               Table 6: Regressions of board control indicators over the startup life cycle

     The table reports the OLS regression estimates for four related dependent variables. Columns (1), (2), and (3) have a dependent variable that is equal
     to one if the startup's board has entrepreneur control, shared control, and VC control, respectively, as defined in Section 3. Column (4) has a dependent
     variable that is equal to one if the board has at least one independent director. The unit of observation is a startup financing-year (i.e., a year with at
     least one equity financing event). The regression specification in columns 1-4 is

                                                        8
                                           Yit = 0 +         s 1ageit =s + 1 Kit + IndustryY earF Eit + LocationF Ei + it ,
                                                       s=1


     where 1ageit =s is the dummy for whether the startup is of age s relative to the year when the startup first raised VC equity financing. The excluded
     category is the year of first financing. All financings for startups greater than 8 years old are winsorized to 8 years old. Kit is the log of the total capital
     raised by the startup in financing year t. "IndustryYearFE" are fixed effects for the interactions of year and industry. "Location FE" are fixed effects for
     the Census division of the startup's headquarters. The regression specification in columns 5-8 is similar, but uses 1roundit =s as the dummy for whether
     the startup is in its financing round s relative to the first VC equity financing. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. We use  ,  , and  to
     denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.


                                          E control      Shared       VC control      Has ID      E control      Shared       VC control       Has ID
                                              (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)
                 1 y.o.                    -0.17        0.028          0.14           0.12
                                           (0.011)      (0.011)        (0.010)        (0.012)
                 2 y.o.                    -0.26        0.041          0.22           0.17
                                           (0.010)      (0.012)        (0.011)        (0.012)
                 3 y.o.                    -0.32         0.0089        0.31           0.21
                                           (0.011)      (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.014)




50
                 4 y.o.                    -0.37         0.0022        0.37           0.23
                                           (0.011)      (0.016)        (0.016)        (0.016)
                 5 y.o.                    -0.38         -0.030        0.41           0.26
                                           (0.013)      (0.018)        (0.019)        (0.019)
                 6 y.o.                    -0.42         -0.039        0.46           0.29
                                           (0.013)      (0.021)        (0.021)        (0.022)
                 7 y.o.                    -0.44        -0.061         0.50           0.30
                                           (0.015)      (0.025)        (0.026)        (0.026)
                 8 y.o.                    -0.47          -0.035       0.50           0.32
                                           (0.012)      (0.022)        (0.022)        (0.022)
                 Round # 2                                                                          -0.20       0.038           0.16           0.14
                                                                                                   (0.0086)     (0.0093)       (0.0083)       (0.0094)
                 Round # 3                                                                          -0.34         0.017         0.32           0.21
                                                                                                   (0.0093)      (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.012)
                 Round # 4                                                                          -0.40       -0.041          0.44           0.26
                                                                                                    (0.010)      (0.014)        (0.014)        (0.015)
                 Round # 5+                                                                         -0.45       -0.062          0.51           0.32
                                                                                                   (0.0097)      (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.015)
                 Log capital raised       -0.077         0.0035        0.073         0.034         -0.079        0.0031        0.076          0.035
                                          (0.0028)      (0.0031)       (0.0029)      (0.0032)      (0.0028)     (0.0031)       (0.0029)       (0.0032)
                 Observations               16257        16257          16257         16257          16257        16257          16257          16257
                 R2                          0.21         0.014          0.20         0.092           0.21        0.015           0.20          0.093
                 Ind. X Year FE               Y             Y             Y             Y              Y            Y              Y              Y
                 Location FE                  Y             Y             Y             Y              Y            Y              Y              Y
           Table 7: Regressions of board characteristics on bargaining power

The table reports regression analysis of startup boards at their first equity financing event. We ask whether the
startup board is controlled by the entrepreneur (columns (1) and (5)), whether board control is shared (columns
(2) and (6)), whether the board is controlled by the VC (columns (3) and (7)), and whether the board has at least
one independent director (columns (4) and (8)). In Panel A, the main controls are proxies for VC bargaining power
measured at the year prior to the financing round using average equity stakes acquired by VCs in the industry-year
(e.g., a VC investment resulted in the sale of 30% of the as-if-converted shares). "Low VC b.p" is equal to one if the
startup raised capital after a year of bottom quartile VC equity stakes in startups in the same industry across the
sample period. "High VC b.p." is a dummy for the top quartile (the excluded category is the middle 50%) of VC
equity stakes. Columns (5) - (8) further split the sample periods into quintiles of the bargaining power proxy with
the excluded category being the middle quintile. Panel B considers an alternative proxy for bargaining power using
the total capital raised by VCs in the region from 1990 up to the previous year net of the total capital invested
in startups located in that region from 1996 up to that same previous year. This "dry powder" measure captures
the amount of capital available to startups. A region is one of the nine Census divisions of the U.S. Because the
measures are within industry or region, the variation within is coming entirely from year of first financing, so the
analysis excludes year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. We use  ,  , and  to
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                              E control   Shared    VC control Has ID E control Shared           VC control   Has ID
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                            Panel A: Equity stake proxy
Low VC b.p. (equity)           0.074      -0.025     -0.049        -0.020
                               (0.016)    (0.015)     (0.011)     (0.015)
High VC b.p. (equity)          -0.16      0.038       0.12        0.025
                               (0.013)    (0.013)     (0.011)     (0.013)
Lowest VC b.p.                                                             0.067 -0.045            -0.022      -0.025
                                                                            (0.021)   (0.020)     (0.015)     (0.020)
Low VC b.p.                                                                  0.037     -0.019      -0.019      -0.013
                                                                            (0.020)   (0.019)     (0.013)     (0.019)
High VC b.p.                                                               -0.082       0.011     0.070       0.0034
                                                                            (0.019)   (0.018)     (0.014)     (0.019)
Highest VC b.p.                                                             -0.19 0.046            0.14       0.030
                                                                            (0.017)   (0.016)     (0.013)     (0.016)
Observations                    7199        7199       7199         7199      7199      7199        7199        7199
R2                              0.060      0.0074      0.061       0.031     0.069    0.0094        0.065      0.032
Mean dep. var.                  0.48        0.32        0.20        0.36      0.48      0.32         0.20       0.36
                                                             Panel B: Dry powder proxy
Low VC b.p. (dry powder)       0.046       -0.013    -0.033        -0.015
                               (0.014)    (0.014)     (0.011)     (0.014)
High VC b.p. (dry powder)       -0.016     -0.011     0.027       -0.0050
                               (0.014)    (0.013)     (0.011)     (0.013)
Lowest VC b.p.                                                              0.041      -0.016       -0.025     -0.012
                                                                            (0.021)   (0.020)      (0.016)    (0.020)
Low VC b.p.                                                                0.069 -0.0075          -0.062        0.016
                                                                            (0.019)   (0.018)      (0.014)    (0.018)
High VC b.p.                                                                -0.0099   -0.0044        0.014     0.019
                                                                            (0.019)   (0.018)      (0.015)    (0.018)
Highest VC b.p.                                                             -0.0066    -0.013       0.019       0.012
                                                                            (0.017)   (0.016)      (0.014)    (0.016)
Observations                    7199        7199       7199         7199      7199      7199         7199       7199
R2                              0.031      0.0051      0.038       0.030     0.033    0.0051        0.040      0.031
Mean dep. var.                  0.48        0.32        0.20        0.36      0.48      0.32         0.20       0.36
Year FE                           N          N           N            N         N         N            N          N
Ind. FE                           Y          Y           Y            Y         Y         Y            Y          Y
Location FE                       Y          Y           Y            Y         Y         Y            Y          Y




                                                         51
                                  Table 8: Summary statistics: financing-level connected IDs.

     The table reports the financing-level statistics on connected IDs. "Had unconnected ID" is the fraction of all financing-level
     observations that had at least one director unconnected to either the VC or the entrepreneur. We then focus on the subsample of
     financing-level observations that have at least one independent director. Within this sample, "% IDs unconnected" is the fraction of
     independent directors that are unconnected to either VCs or entrepreneurs, and "% IDs VC-connected" ("% IDs Entrep.-connected")
     is the fraction of independent directors connected to VCs (entrepreneurs) through their past professional positions. "Change to
     VC control w/ conn." ("Change to entrep. control w/ conn.") is the percent of observations in this sample that were classified as
     having shared control without the data on connections, but were reclassified as having VC (entrepreneur) control based on director
     connections.

                                                                                Boards at financing # 1
                                                       Obs         Mean          25th        Median         75th        Std dev
             Had unconnected ID                        7,201        0.311       0.000         0.000         1.000        0.463
             % IDs unconnected                         2,618        0.797       0.667         1.000         1.000        0.364
             % IDs VC-connected                        2,618        0.192       0.000         0.000         0.250        0.355
             % IDs Entrep.-connected                   2,618        0.011       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.098
             Change to VC control w/ conn.             2,618        0.101       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.302
             Change to entrep. control w/ conn.        2,618        0.029       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.167
                                                                                Boards at financing # 2
                                                       Obs         Mean          25th        Median         75th        Std dev




52
             Had unconnected ID                        4,502        0.416       0.000         0.000         1.000        0.493
             % IDs unconnected                         2,272        0.752       0.500         1.000         1.000        0.388
             % IDs VC-connected                        2,272        0.236       0.000         0.000         0.500        0.381
             % IDs Entrep.-connected                   2,272        0.012       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.103
             Change to VC control w/ conn.             2,272        0.124       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.329
             Change to entrep. control w/ conn.        2,272        0.020       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.139
                                                                                Boards at financing # 3
                                                       Obs         Mean          25th        Median         75th        Std dev
             Had unconnected ID                        2,505        0.475       0.000         0.000         1.000        0.499
             % IDs unconnected                         1,461        0.725       0.500         1.000         1.000        0.393
             % IDs VC-connected                        1,461        0.264       0.000         0.000         0.500        0.388
             % IDs Entrep.-connected                   1,461        0.011       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.093
             Change to VC control w/ conn.             1,461        0.136       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.342
             Change to entrep. control w/ conn.        1,461        0.011       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.104
                                                                                Boards at financing # 4
                                                       Obs         Mean          25th        Median         75th        Std dev
             Had unconnected ID                        1,300        0.498       0.000         0.000         1.000        0.500
             % IDs unconnected                          822         0.697       0.500         1.000         1.000        0.406
             % IDs VC-connected                         822         0.293       0.000         0.000         0.500        0.402
             % IDs Entrep.-connected                    822         0.010       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.088
             Change to VC control w/ conn.              822         0.127       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.333
             Change to entrep. control w/ conn.         822         0.011       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.104
                 Table 9: Regressions of board control indicators over the startup life cycle (with connections)

     This table is the analog of Table 6, but using the data on director connections to define board control. The table reports the OLS regression estimates for
     four related dependent variables. Columns (1), (2), and (3) have a dependent variable that is equal to one if the startup's board has entrepreneur control,
     shared control, and VC control, respectively, as defined in Section 3, where a director connected to VCs (entrepreneurs) is considered as a representative of
     VCs (entrepreneurs) in the definition of board control. Column (4) has a dependent variable that is equal to one if the board has at least one unconnected
     independent director. The unit of observation is a startup financing-year (i.e., a year with at least one equity financing event). All startup financings for
     startups greater than 8 years old are winsorized to 8 years old. All variables are as defined in Table 6. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses.
     We use  ,  , and  to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.


                                E control       Shared       VC control       Has unc. ID        E control       Shared        VC control       Has unc. ID
                                    (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)               (8)
      1 y.o.                     -0.17           0.0065        0.16            0.083
                                (0.0090)        (0.010)       (0.0091)         (0.0093)
      2 y.o.                     -0.25           0.0062        0.25             0.12
                                (0.0092)        (0.011)        (0.010)          (0.010)
      3 y.o.                     -0.32         -0.033          0.35             0.16
                                 (0.010)        (0.012)        (0.012)          (0.013)
      4 y.o.                     -0.37         -0.049          0.42             0.16
                                 (0.011)        (0.014)        (0.015)          (0.016)
      5 y.o.                     -0.37         -0.077          0.45             0.19
                                 (0.013)        (0.016)        (0.018)          (0.019)




53
      6 y.o.                     -0.42         -0.096          0.51             0.20
                                 (0.013)        (0.019)        (0.020)          (0.023)
      7 y.o.                     -0.43          -0.10          0.53             0.21
                                 (0.016)        (0.023)        (0.025)          (0.028)
      8 y.o.                     -0.46          -0.11          0.56             0.20
                                 (0.014)        (0.023)        (0.025)          (0.030)
      Round # 2                                                                                   -0.20           0.012           0.19             0.10
                                                                                                 (0.0086)       (0.0090)         (0.0085)         (0.0093)
      Round # 3                                                                                   -0.33         -0.028            0.36             0.15
                                                                                                 (0.0092)        (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.012)
      Round # 4                                                                                   -0.40         -0.089            0.49             0.18
                                                                                                  (0.010)        (0.013)          (0.013)          (0.015)
      Round # 5+                                                                                  -0.45          -0.13            0.57             0.22
                                                                                                 (0.0096)        (0.013)          (0.014)          (0.016)
      Log capital raised         -0.076        -0.0079         0.084             0.027           -0.079        -0.0085           0.087            0.028
                                 (0.0038)      (0.0037)        (0.0042)          (0.0049)        (0.0028)       (0.0029)         (0.0029)         (0.0032)
      Observations                 16257         16257          16257             16257            16257          16257            16257            16257
      R2                            0.20         0.019           0.23             0.064             0.21          0.021             0.24            0.064
      Ind. X Year FE                 Y             Y              Y                 Y                Y              Y                Y                Y
      Location FE                    Y             Y              Y                 Y                Y              Y                Y                Y
 Table 10: Regressions of board characteristics on bargaining power (with connections)

   This table is the analog of Table 7, but using the data on director connections to define board control. The table
   reports regression analysis of startup boards at their first equity financing event. We ask whether the startup
   board is controlled by the entrepreneur (columns (1) and (5)), whether board control is shared (columns (2)
   and (6)), whether the board is controlled by the VC (columns (3) and (7)), and whether the board has at least
   one unconnected independent director (columns (4) and (8)). In Panel A, the main controls are proxies for VC
   bargaining power measured at the year prior to the financing round using average equity stakes acquired by VCs
   in the industry-year (e.g., a VC investment resulted in the sale of 30% of the as-if-converted shares). "Low VC
   b.p" is equal to one if the startup raised capital after a year of bottom quartile VC equity stakes in startups in the
   same industry across the sample period. "High VC b.p." is a dummy for the top quartile (the excluded category
   is the middle 50%) of VC equity stakes. Columns (5) - (8) further split the sample periods into quintiles of the
   bargaining power proxy with the excluded category being the middle quintile. Panel B considers an alternative
   proxy for bargaining power using the total capital raised by VCs in the region from 1990 up to the previous year
   net of the total capital invested in startups located in that region from 1996 up to that same previous year. This
   "dry powder" measure captures the amount of capital available to startups. All variables are as defined in Table 7.
   Robust standard errors reported in parentheses. We use  ,  , and  to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and
   10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                            E control   Shared    VC control   Has unc. ID E control Shared        VC control    Has unc. ID
                               (1)        (2)        (3)            (4)          (5)        (6)       (7)            (8)
                                                               Panel A: Equity stake proxy
Low VC b.p. (equity)         0.076       -0.021    -0.054        -0.0089
                             (0.016)    (0.014)     (0.012)      (0.015)
High VC b.p. (equity)        -0.16      0.029       0.13          0.011
                             (0.013)    (0.012)     (0.012)      (0.012)
Lowest VC b.p.                                                               0.074 -0.054             -0.019        -0.020
                                                                              (0.021)    (0.019)     (0.016)       (0.020)
Low VC b.p.                                                                   0.043       -0.018     -0.025        0.0017
                                                                              (0.020)    (0.018)     (0.014)       (0.019)
High VC b.p.                                                                 -0.075 -0.0044          0.079         -0.0054
                                                                              (0.019)    (0.018)     (0.015)       (0.018)
Highest VC b.p.                                                               -0.18       0.021       0.16           0.013
                                                                              (0.017)    (0.016)     (0.014)       (0.016)
Observations                  7199       7199       7199          7199          7199       7199        7199          7199
R2                            0.062     0.0057      0.068         0.025        0.070     0.0068        0.074         0.026
Mean dep. var.                0.47       0.29       0.24           0.31         0.47       0.29        0.24          0.31
                                                               Panel B: Dry powder proxy
Low VC b.p. (dry powder)     0.043      -0.0082    -0.034        -0.0083
                             (0.014)    (0.013)     (0.012)      (0.013)
High VC b.p. (dry powder)     -0.013    -0.023     0.036         -0.0044
                             (0.014)    (0.013)     (0.012)      (0.013)
Lowest VC b.p.                                                                 0.037      -0.020       -0.017      -0.0024
                                                                              (0.021)    (0.019)      (0.017)      (0.019)
Low VC b.p.                                                                  0.061       -0.0015     -0.059          0.012
                                                                              (0.019)    (0.017)      (0.015)      (0.017)
High VC b.p.                                                                   -0.019    -0.0078      0.027         0.0082
                                                                              (0.018)    (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.017)
Highest VC b.p.                                                               -0.0077    -0.027       0.034         0.0068
                                                                              (0.017)    (0.016)      (0.015)      (0.016)
Observations                  7199       7199       7199          7199          7199       7199         7199         7199
R2                            0.032     0.0045      0.043         0.025        0.034     0.0047        0.046        0.025
Mean dep. var.                0.47       0.29       0.24           0.31         0.47       0.29         0.24         0.31
Year FE                         N         N           N              N            N          N           N             N
Ind. FE                         Y         Y           Y              Y            Y          Y           Y             Y
Location FE                     Y         Y           Y              Y            Y          Y           Y             Y




                                                              54
