                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ECONOMIC ASPECTS OF THE ENERGY TRANSITION

                                          Geoffrey Heal

                                       Working Paper 27766
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27766


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




This paper is based on a plenary lecture given at the Italian Association of Environmental and
Resource Economists at Brescia on February 7th 2020. Part of the paper summarizes joint work
with Wolfram Schlenker. I am grateful to Christian Gollier for valuable comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Geoffrey Heal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Economic Aspects of the Energy Transition
Geoffrey Heal
NBER Working Paper No. 27766
September 2020
JEL No. Q42,Q54

                                           ABSTRACT

I make three points relating to the transition from fossil fuels to non-carbon energy. One is that
the economic cost of moving from fossil fuels to renewable energy in electricity generation is
very low, and probably lower than many estimates of the economic benefits from this change.
The second is that, if it were to move the economy away from fossil fuels and from oil in
particular, a carbon tax would have to be much great than generally believed, in the range of $400
per ton CO2 or above. Finally, decarbonization of the economy implies electrification, the
replacement of fossil fuels by electricity in for example space heating. Currently electricity is far
too expensive for this to be politically realistic: this is because its price does not reflect its
marginal cost but this plus a wide range of fixed costs that are recovered in the per kilowatt hour
charge. If we are to electrify the economy then the price of electricity will need to be nearer to its
marginal cost, which raises questions about the business models of utilities.


Geoffrey Heal
Graduate School of Business
516 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
gmh1@columbia.edu
1       Overview
Decarbonizing our economies is one way of solving the climate problem. This
would require decarbonizing the following: electric power generation; trans-
portation; space, water and process heating; and agriculture. All are signifi-
cant sources of greenhouse gases. In the U.S. transportation recently overtook
power generation as the main source of greenhouse gases, and current trends
suggest that this will soon happen at the global level too.
    Only on the first of these have we made any significant progress. In elec-
tricity generation, the transition from fossil fuels is clearly under way. In
the U.S. the share of electric power generated by coal has fallen from over
50% to 21% in the last fifteen years, and in the U.K. there is a similar story,
falling to 5% in 2018 from 30% in 2014.1 In this paper I review some of the
microeconomic issues raised by this transition in power production. One is
the cost of the transition, and in particular what exactly should be charged
to the transition as opposed to the normal operation of the energy system.
I argue that the net cost of the transition to renewable energy in the U.S.
is much smaller than generally believed, and indeed is an order of magni-
tude less than the benefits from reducing emissions from fossil fuels. Closely
connected to this is the issue of intermittency and the costs of integrating
intermittent power sources into the grid - either by storage or by spatial
diversification. Then there is the question of how to provide incentives to
move away from fossil fuels - a common suggestion being the use of a carbon
tax, and I will argue that this is likely to be far less effective than is widely
assumed and that we need to think of alternatives. Tied to this are a set of
questions about electricity pricing: the other side of the coin of decarboniza-
tion of the economy is electrification, and this will only happen if electricity
prices provide consumers with the right incentives. Currently they don't.
    1
    See https://www.mjbradley.com/sites/default/files/MJBAcoalretirementissuebrief.pdf
and https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy in the United Kingdom




                                          2
2    Costs of decarbonizing power production
In 2017 I published a paper estimating the investment required to make all
electric power generation in the US carbon-free by 2050 [6]. I gave a wide
range of estimates, the best case being $1.28 trillion and the worst being
$3.97 trillion. In the short time since that paper was published, costs have
fallen faster than I anticipated, both for renewable energy sources such as
wind and solar photovoltaic, and also for energy storage devices such as
lithium ion batteries. I am therefore redoing my earlier calculations with
the best current cost estimates. Over the three decades between now and
mid century, costs will of course change again, so that the numbers here
are still only suggestive estimates. With two exceptions, I am taking U.S.
Energy Information Agency current costs, as of mid 2019, and projecting
these forward. As costs have tended to fall rather than rise, I expect that
this will produced an overestimate of the cost of a carbon-free power system,
but any estimate of the size of the error is guesswork.
     My conclusion is that the likely net investment required to go carbon-free
is now as little as $0.179 trillion. I no longer think it is useful to give a
worst case scenario, as the drop in costs and increases in efficiency over the
last decade now seems obviously irreversible, and it is clear that prices will
only move one way. This figure of $0.179 trillion includes offsets from fuel
savings as we no longer need to buy coal or gas, and also includes capital cost
offsets reflecting the fact that most coal plants in the US have to be replaced
well before 2050 as they are already near the ends of their useful lives. The
cost of replacing them should therefore not be charged to the conversion to
non-carbon energy sources. Each of these offsets is of the order of one trillion
dollars, so they have big impacts on the final numbers. Although the cost
of replacing old coal plants should not be regarded as a cost of conversion
to carbon-free energy sources, it is nevertheless a real cost that has to be
paid, and if we include it in the total then the cost increases from $0.179
trillion to $1.18 trillion. But the bulk of this is replacing very old power

                                       3
plants that are unsafe and obsolete, and need to be replaced whether we
convert to clean energy or not. My earlier estimates also included both of
these offsets, so the cost including both offsets has fallen from $1.28 trillion
to $0.179 trillion. This low number reflects the fact that renewable power
from wind and solar PV plants is now less expensive than power from gas,
coal or nuclear plants, as documented for example by Lazards' studies of the
levelized cost of electricity from alternative sources.2 If it were not for the
intermittency of renewables, we would save money by converting to clean
power. As it is, we need to invest in storage to manage the intermittency
and this leaves us with a small net cost to converting the power sector to
non-carbon energy sources. On an annualized basis, assuming we complete
the transition to renewable power by 2050, the two costs are $6.1bn and
$41bn.


2.1     Methodology
The method that I use for these calculations is the same as in the earlier
paper, and is entirely straightforward. I calculate the amount of wind and
solar PV nameplate capacity that would be needed to produce all the mWh
of electricity currently produced by coal and gas plants,3 and then calculate
the cost of this capacity. I then make an estimate of the amount of storage
capacity needed to deal with the intermittency of the renewable sources.
Together with an allowance for improving the grid, this gives the total gross
cost of the transition to renewables. Against this I set the offsets mentioned
above: the savings in fossil fuel costs that result from replacing coal and gas
by wind and solar, and also the allowance for the fact that all coal-fired power
stations and many gas-fired ones would anyway have to be replaced before
2050, so that the cost of replacing them is not properly attributable to the
   2
      https://www.lazard.com/media/451086/lazards-levelized-cost-of-energy-version-130-
vf.pdf
    3
      Coal and gas produce 61% of total annual mWh, and total annual mWh are about 4
billion.


                                          4
energy transition. I assume that the savings in fossil fuel costs grow linearly
from now to 2050, and that fossil fuel plants are replaced at a constant rate.
    The most debatable assumption in this process is the assumption about
how much storage would be needed to cope with the intermittency of the re-
newable capacity that we install during the transition. Unfortunately there is
no firm formula for calculating the storage needed to manage the integration
of renewables into the grid. The number depends on the extent to which
demand can be managed by appropriate incentive programs, the number of
dispatchable power plants, and the covariances between the outputs of the
renewable energy plants in use: clearly large negative covariances will reduce
the need for storage. I assume that we need sufficient storage capacity to
hold the output that all renewable plants produce over a period of two days.
There are studies that suggest that this is an appropriate amount, and indeed
is perhaps too large. For a review of the issues this raises and references to
the literature see [5]. A recent paper by Shaner et al [12] studies the possi-
bility of meeting US power demand purely from renewable energy from an
engineering perspective and looks at the trade-off between storage and "over-
building," i.e. constructing more renewable capacity than is strictly needed
to meet demand, so as to take advantage of spatial diversification. They
assume all demand is met from renewable energy or storage, whereas here
I am merely replacing output from existing fossil fuel plants by renewables,
keeping in place existing hydro, geothermal and nuclear capacities. So about
66% of the annual output of mega-watt hours is coming from renewables and
storage. Shaner et al cite several earlier engineering studies of the possibil-
ity of meeting US demand purely from renewables: these generally conclude
that by choosing locations to exploit low or negative covariances is it easily
possible to meet 80% of demand from renewables without storage, and that
meeting the last 20% purely from renewables is very expensive, with the last
2% being especially so.4 I am avoiding this problem by assuming existing
  4
      Note that to use low or negative covariances of output at renewable power stations to



                                             5
non-fossil supplies to remain in place.
    The other assumption that I am making is that there is no seasonality
to patterns of demand and supply: I can just work with annual totals. This
is a simplification, and from some preliminary calculations seems to be one
that does no great violence to the total costs involved.
    The key facts and assumptions that underlie the calculations that follow
are the following:

   1. The U.S. produces about 4 billion mWh of electric power each year

   2. 61% of this comes from coal and gas

   3. I assume that we replace the 61% of 4 bn mWh from coal and gas by
      wind and solar in equal amounts

   4. I assume that we need enough storage capacity to hold two days of the
      output of renewable energy

   5. I assume that we need to increase the milage of high voltage grid lines
      by 25%

   6. Total electricity production remains constant from now to 2050.


2.2     Data
Table 1 lists all the key parameters used in the calculations, and their values.

   With the exceptions of the costs of storage and of solar power, all of
these represent current values as given by the Energy Information Agency
or an equivalent source.5 It is reasonable to expect equipment costs to fall
reduce storage needs, it is necessary to construct extra capacity, known as "overbuilding."
   5
     The EIA figure for the cost of solar capacity is $1.9/W: industry sources that I talk
with suggest that it is out-of-date and far too high. Many sources cite actual costs of
close to $1/W - see for example https://news.energysage.com/solar-farms-start-one/ and
https://www.seia.org/research-resources/solar-market-insight


                                            6
                    Parameter                    Value
              Cost of wind capacity           $1,500/kW
               Wind capacity factor               0.42
             Cost of solar PV capacity          $1.1/W
             Solar PV capacity factor             0.26
                  Cost of storage              $75/kWh
             Cost of high voltage lines     $2,000,000/mile
             Miles of HV lines needed            50,000
               Cost of coal capacity          $3,000/kW
                    Cost of coal                $50/ton
               Cost of gas capacity           $1,000/kW
                    Cost of gas               $3/mmbtu

Table 1: Parameter values for the cost of the energy transition in the U.S.

and capacity factors to rise over the next three decades, so that these figures
are probably overestimates of the costs we will encounter. 6 The cost of
storage, which today is in the region of $125/kWh, is widely expected to
be at or below $100/kWh by the end of 2020, and to continue falling after
that. So looking forward as far as 2050, a cost of $75/kWh does not seem
unreasonably optimistic. The declines in the cost of storage are likely to be
more significant than those in the costs of wind and solar power, and so seem
to merit anticipation.


2.3    Results
All calculations are available in an Excel spreadsheet on my web site.7 Table
2 shows the various elements of the calculations:
    These figures show that the annual incremental cost of transitioning to
fossil-fuel-free electricity generation system, if the total investment is spread
  6
     https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/assumptions/pdf/table 8.2.pdf            and
https://www.energy.gov/eere/wind/downloads/2017-wind-technologies-market-report,
presentation, slide 38,
   7
     https://geoffreyheal.com/publications/publications-on-climate-change/



                                        7
                      Category              Cost $ trillions
                    Capacity costs                $1.68
                     Storage costs                $1.08
                      Grid costs                   $0.1
                     Fuel savings                -$1.12
              Capacity replacement offsets       -$1.01
               Total fuel offsets only          $1.189
                  Total all offsets             $0.179
                Annual rate all offsets         $0.0061
              Annual rate fuel offsets only      $0.041

              Table 2: Costs of the energy transition in the U.s.

over the period from 2021 to 2050, is $6.1 billion. This a fraction of what the
US currently invests in the energy sector.8 This incremental cost estimate
does not include the cost of replacing fossil fuel power plants that come to
the ends of their lives, as these would have to be replaced, and these costs
incurred, even if there were no transition to carbon-free electricity. Hence the
costs of these replacements are not properly attributable to decarbonization.
However these costs do have to be incurred, as the power plants will need
to be replaced, and if we included these costs the total annual investment
rises to $41 billion. This difference emphasizes the fact that many fossil fuel
plants will need replacement in the period from now to 2050. The total of
$41 billion a year is less than current energy infrastructure investment levels.
But it must be emphasized that the increase from $6.1 billion to $41 billion
has nothing to do with the cost of the transition to clean energy: it reflects
the fact that we have a lot of very old power stations that badly need to
be replaced. It is important to distinguish the cost of failing to keep our
infrastructure up-to-date from the costs of the energy transition.9
   8
    Roughly $50bn annually.
   9
    A similar issue arises with the U.S.'s nuclear power stations, which provide about
20% of the megawatt hours generated annually in the U.S. All but two or three will also
be well beyond their usable lives by 2050, and will have to be replaced. I am implicitly
assuming here that they are replaced by non-fossil, non-renewable power (nuclear, hydro,


                                           8
2.4    Environmental Benefits
The costs of replacing fossil fuels by renewable energy are low, of the order
of tens of billions per year. Studies of the benefits suggest that they are
far greater, making the replacement of fossil fuels an unusually attractive
investment. Phasing out coal and gas in electricity generation would reduce
CO2 emissions by about 2 billion tons per year.10 Suppose the social cost
of carbon to be $100 per ton (this is a controversial issue - estimates range
from $30 to $600). Then the social benefits from stopping the CO2 emissions
from coal and gas in power generation in the U.S. amount to $200bn annually,
roughly an order of magnitude greater than the costs. Furthermore, these
benefits will continue for ever, whereas the costs are fully paid by 2050. Of
course, the benefits will not reach the full $200bn until 2050: if we assume
that fossil fuels are phased out linearly between now and then, on average
greenhouse gas emissions will fall by 1bn tons per year between now and
2050, with a value of $100bn, with the full $200bn applicable after 2050. As
greenhouse gases are a global public bad, many of these benefits will accrue
to countries other than the U.S.
    In addition to the greenhouse gas benefits from switching to renewable
energy, there are substantial benefits from reducing other forms of atmo-
spheric pollution in the areas where fossil fuels are being burned - pollution
from SO2 , N Ox and P M2.5 and P M10 . The costs of these pollutants in the
U.S. have been estimated at between $361 and $888 billion per year [1][9].


3     Carbon Taxes
There is strong agreement amongst economists that a carbon tax is an ef-
fective method to reduce carbon emissions. For example, The Initiative on
geothermal, etc.), as replacing them by renewables would probably increase the need for
storage and or grid enhancements.
  10
     See U.S. Energy Information Agency, https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=74&t=11



                                         9
Global Markets (IGM) at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business
maintains a representative panel of economists. A carbon tax was favored by
almost all these economists, and there was a greater divergence with views by
the general public than for any other question [11].11 Every environmental
economics text sees the internalization of external costs as a necessary step
on the road to efficiency. Carbon emissions create externalities, and a tax will
internalize them [10]. The Pigouvian framework is the default setup when
it comes to thinking about environmental policy, as a Pigouvian tax drives
a wedge between producers and consumer prices and in a static one-period
model generally reduces the equilibrium quantity.
    However, fossil fuels are an exhaustible resource with a limited supply.
Scarcity rents can be a significant portion of the price to ensure that the
limited supply is optimally allocated between periods [8]. For example, Saudi
Arabia's production cost are in the range of $5-8 per barrel, yet the oil price
in 2019 was around $60 per barrel. In the standard Hotelling model, all
resources are used up, and a tax is paid out of the scarcity rents of producers.
The tax might slightly shift consumption patterns over time, but does not
change the cumulative use of the resource.
    The point that Wolfram Schlenker and I make in a recent paper [7] is
that the Pigouvian and Hotelling frameworks lead to rather different con-
clusions when it comes to thinking about the effectiveness of a carbon tax.
Pigou emphasizes the impact of a tax on substitution between commodities,
in this case between energy sources. Hotelling on the other hand empha-
  11
    The statement "A tax on the carbon content of fuels would be a less expensive
way to reduce carbon-dioxide emissions than would a collection of policies such as cor-
porate average fuel economy requirements for automobiles" was agreed to by 92.5% of
economists, while only 22.5% of the general public agreed, as measured by the Chicago
Booth Kellogg School Financial Trust Index survey. Suport for a carbon tax is growing
among various policy circles. The New York Times reported that "Republican Group
Calls for Carbon Tax" (2/7/17), and the Financial Times noted that "Leading Corpo-
rations Support US Carbon Tax" (6/20/17). The Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition
(www.carbonpricingleadership.org) is a coalition of international and national organiza-
tions and corporations dedicated to promoting a carbon tax.



                                          10
             Fuel units CO2 , mt            Price, $ Tax, $
             Coal  mt    2.86                 50      143
             Gas mmbtu   0.053                 3      2.65
             Oil   bbl   0.35                 60      17.6

              Table 3: Impact of $50 carbon tax on fossil fuels

sizes the impact of a tax on an exhaustible resource on the time-path of
consumption of that resource. It can lead to the substitution from present
to future consumption, so that less of the resource is consumed by any date
but the same amount is consumed overall. One of the clear conclusions of
the Hotelling model of equilibrium in a resource market is that if there is a
substitute for the resource - think of renewable energy - available at a price in
excess of the marginal extraction cost of the resource, then all of the resource
will be consumed eventually, and a carbon tax can only change this under
rather stringent conditions. Carbon taxes reduce carbon emissions less once
these dynamic considerations are incorporated. To be precise, the only way
in which a carbon tax will reduce consumption of and emissions from fossil
fuels is by pricing the most expensive grades of fossil fuel out of the market.
    Table 3 shows the impact of a $50 per ton CO2 tax on the costs of the
three fossil fuels, coal, gas and oil. Column 2 shows the units in which these
are measured, and column 3 the amount of CO2 produced by burning one
unit of each in metric tons. Column 4 shows the current price and column 5
the carbon tax per unit resulting from a $50 carbon tax. Clearly the impact
on coal will be huge: the tax is three times the current price. And the impact
on gas will also be substantial, as the tax is roughly the same as the current
wholesale price. But with oil whose price has been ranging between $65 and
$40 per barrel, the impact is less dramatic. The marginal extraction cost of
oil from many sources is less than $10, so that the tax can readily be paid
from the scarcity rent and even if passed on to the consumer it will only raise
the price to a level that is within the range of prices in the recent past (in
2014 the price was in excess of $100 per barrel).

                                       11
3.1    A Formal Model of Carbon Tax Impact
To formalize these issues, we assume a fossil fuel which is sold at a price pt
with a marginal extraction cost of m. There is a carbon tax of  per unit: this
tax is based on the chemical characteristics of the fuel and does not depend
on its price. The fossil fuel competes with a renewable resource which is
available in unlimited amounts at marginal and average cost R > m. This
is a perfect substitute for the fossil fuel (a "backstop technology" ), so if the
fuel is consumed we must have

                                    pt        R                              (1)

Demand for the fuel is given by D(pt ). We know that the market price of
the fuel will rise exponentially away from m +  at rate r, and that pt =
h0 ert + m +       R if the fuel is sold. Heal and Schlenker [7] establish the
following result:

Theorem 1. A dynamic competitive equilibrium with a carbon tax  , with
                                   T               T
m +  < R, is characterized by 0 D (pt ) dt = 0 D (h0 ert + m +  ) dt = S0
and pT = h0 erT + m +  = R. These determine the initial rental rate h0
and the date T at which pt = R and the fossil fuel is exhausted. There is no
interval over which the fossil fuel and the renewable energy source are both
used. If the tax rate is raised to  > , m +  < R, then the above remains
true so that total fossil fuel consumption is not changed. The tax
increase decreases the initial rental rate h0 and increases the date T at
which the fossil fuel is exhausted. If the tax is so high that m +  > R then
the fossil fuel is never consumed.

   In simple terms, the tax either has no effect at all on the cumulative
consumption of the fossil fuel, or it drives it out of the market completely.
In the former case, the tax reduces the scarcity rent and extends the time
period over which the fuel is used, as shown in figure 1.


                                         12
          Tax increases T and reduces h0. Either has no impact on emissions or reduces to zero.

           $                                                                            R




                                                                                        Scarcity rent




          h0
                                                                                        Tax
                                                                                       Marginal extraction cost

                                           Time                                       T: resource exhausted




                      Figure 1: Equilibrium with single fossil fuel

3.1.1    Many fuel grades

We now introduce a more comprehensive model in which there are I different
fuel sources with differing marginal extraction costs mi , numbered in increas-
ing order of extraction costs, m1 < m2 < ..... < mI and mI < R. The initial
stock of the i - th fuel is Si,0 . In this case we can establish a more nuanced
result:

Theorem 2. Competitive equilibrium: dates Ti , i = 1, 2, ....I, Ti < Ti+1 , and
initial rents h0,i , i = 1, 2, ..., I such that for all i, pi,t = mi +  + hi,0 ert , Ti-1 
              T
t  Ti and Tii-1 D (pi,t ) dt = Si,0 . The price moves continuously so that

          pi,Ti = mi +  + hi,0 erTi = pi+1,Ti = mi+1 +  + hi+1,0 erTi i                                           (2)

and the last price of the fuel equals that of renewable energy: pI,TI = R.

    The key conclusions here are that if extraction cost plus tax of grade j
is less than the backstop price, i.e. mi +  < R, then the carbon tax will
merely delay consumption of the fuel, but if the tax raise the cost of grade j
above the backstop price, i.e. mj +  > R (but mj < R), then with the tax,

                                                           13
                    TaxincreasesT1 andT2,reducesrents.

           R

          $

                                                           Scarcityrent2




                                    Scarcityrent1

                                                                    Tax
        h1,0                                Tax
                                          MEC1                    MEC2

                          Time               T1:grade1exhausted       T2:grade2exhausted




                   Figure 2: Equilibrium with two grades

grade j will never be used and total consumption and emissions will fall as a
result of the tax. In general the tax delays the use of all grades and may in
addition force the most expensive grades out of the market: the latter effect
reduces emissions whereas the former merely reschedules them. A key
insight is that there are two distinct mechanisms through which tax affects
consumption, rescheduling and reduction. Figure 2 shows how this process
works in the case of I = 2. The scarcity rent on each grade is reduced,
and the time over which it is used extended. And if it were the case that
M EC 2 + tax > R then the more expensive grade would never be used.
    Figure 3 shows the results of simulating this model with data on the world
oil market from Rystadt. It shows prices (red) and consumption levels (blue)
from 2020 to 2160 for carbon taxes of $0, $50, $100, $200 and $400 per ton
of CO2 emitted.
    As the tax rises, the consumption profile is flatter, starting lower and
falling less rapidly, but extends for longer. On the price side, initial prices

                                          14
            Figure 3: Taxes, price and quantity in the oil market

rise with the tax, but the price profiles cross and ultimately the prices are
lower for high taxes than for lower or no taxes. Figure 4 summarizes some
crucial conclusions from the analysis: it shows the carbon tax needed to
achieve any specified reduction in cumulative oil use. If we want to reduce
cumulative oil consumption by for example 30%, then we need a tax of about
$500 per ton of CO2: if we wanted to reduce oil consumption by two thirds
we would need a tax of over $600 per ton CO2.
    A theoretical insight into what is happening here comes from the Slutsky
equation,

                             xn   hn xn
                                =   -   xn
                             pn   pn W
which tells us that the impact of price change on regular demand x    pn
                                                                        n
                                                                          is the
sum of two effects, the impact on compensated demand (the substitution
effect hn
       pn
          ) plus the impact of the change in real income on demand (the
income effect x n
               W n
                  x ). For oil substitution effect is roughly zero (as there are
no real substitutes for oil in many of its applications) so we need a large
income change for a large reduction in demand.


                                      15
                  Figure 4: CO2 tax and oil consumption

4    Alternatives to a carbon tax
It seems very likely from the previous section that a tax high enough to be
effective in reducing oil demand, would be too high to be politically accept-
able: a tax that reduces oil consumption by 50% would be about $575 per
ton CO2, which translates into a tax of $201 per barrel of oil or $4.9 per
gallon (or 1.26 per liter), more than doubling the current U.S. retail prices
of gasoline. Recent experience with the political fall-out from attempts to
raise fuel prices (such as with the gilets jaunes in France) suggests that few
politicians would venture to propose such taxes. A cap and trade system
would achieve the same outcome, but the same problem would appear in a
different guise: the permit price would be very high, raising the retail price
of fuel to a similar level.
    What are the alternatives? Renewable energy has been a huge success
story - what has made it so? In the U.S., a combination of federal tax
subsidies (production and investment tax credits) plus state-level renewable
portfolio standards have worked well, and in the E.U., feed-in tariffs have

                                     16
driven rapid adoption. Perhaps the world needs equivalent measures to drive
the replacement of oil. It may be worth noting that renewable portfolio
standards and feed-in tariffs go some way towards disguising the costs of the
policy: they are of course ultimately reflected in the cost of energy, but not
in a way that makes it easy for the average consumer to recognize.
    In both the U.S. and the E.U., the main drivers of greater vehicle fuel
efficiency have been emission standards, the corporate average fuel efficiency
standard (CAFE) in the U.S., its EU equivalent, the CO2 emission per-
formance standards. Like renewable portfolio standards and feed-in tariffs,
these hide the cost of the policy from the consumer. An alternative would
be to combine with direct subsidies to electric vehicles and to the charging
infrastructure that they need.
    These suggestions run contrary to mainstream economics, which recom-
mends Pigouvian taxes and is generally strongly against subsidies or reg-
ulations. But sadly we seem to be in a second-best situation where the
first-best is politically inaccessible, so we are forced to look at policies that
no economics textbook would recommend.


4.1     Electricity pricing
As mentioned earlier, decarbonization generally implies electrification: re-
placing internal combustion engines by electric motors, and replacing oil and
gas heating by electric heating, of course with the electricity generated from
non-fossil sources. This means ensuring that electricity pricing provides con-
sumers with the right incentives. In particular it means that we need the
cost of using an extra kWh of electricity to reflect its marginal social cost.
Currently in New York City, and in most other large cities in the U.S., elec-
tric heating is many time more expensive than oil or gas heating.12 This
reflects the fact that power prices are in the range $0.15 to $0.20 per kWh,
  12
    See https://www.ny-engineers.com/blog/can-electric-heating-have-a-lower-cost-than-
gas-heating for details.


                                         17
which is way above the marginal social cost of electricity from renewable
sources.13 The marginal social cost of power from renewable sources is close
to zero, as wind, solar and hydro all have essentially zero operating costs. So
we would need much lower power prices to provide the correct incentives to
use clean power rather than fossil fuels. Perversely, not only are renewable
energy prices way above marginal social costs, but fossil fuel prices are below
marginal social costs.
    This immediately raises an old problem in pubic utility pricing: renewable
energy has low marginal costs but substantial fixed costs, and the costs of the
grid are also fixed. All of these fixed costs need to be covered, and can not
be recovered from pricing power at or near marginal cost. In most countries
the present pricing regime rolls all these fixed costs into the marginal price
of power, resulting in a price that is way too high for efficiency. However if
we price closer to marginal cost, as needed for efficiency, then we bump into
the iconic problem of Dupuit's bridge [3]: break-even pricing is inconsistent
with efficient use of the resource once it is built.
    The classic response to this conundrum has been to recommend two-part
tariffs, with a fixed charge or connection or membership charge recovering
the fixed costs and a usage tariff covering the variable costs. There are re-
sults establishing that two-part tariffs where the fixed charge is personalized
- depends on individual characteristics - can lead to an efficient pattern of
resource use: this is proven in Brown and Heal [2]. The intuition behind this
result is, to quote Brown and Heal, that "One might reasonably conjecture
that if an allocation is Pareto optimal, then the sum over all individuals of
this willingness to pay, should, together with payments for the goods actually
bought, cover the total costs of firm i." In simple partial equilibrium terms,
buying electricity at marginal cost generates consumer surplus, which if the
outcome is efficient should in total exceed the losses incurred by the firm in
selling at marginal cost, and in this case two-part tariffs or price discrimi-
 13
      Though possibly not above the marginal social cost of power from coal - see .



                                            18
nation can appropriate enough of this surplus to cover the losses. A more
recent related result is in Edlin, Eplebaum and Heller [4], who model a per-
fectly price-discriminating monopolist with increasing returns in production
interacting with a competitive sector and show that under certain conditions
perfect price discrimination leads to a Pareto efficient outcome. When these
results first appeared, personalized fixed charges in a two-part tariff system
seemed a remote and unrealistic concept: in today's information-rich and
privacy-poor world they seem far less speculative. This seems to be a topic
which merits revisiting within the context of utility pricing rather than in
the generic general equilibrium models cited above, as is the nature of the
utility business model and how it can adapt to a world of zero marginal cost
electricity and distributed generation.


5    Conclusions
This paper presents two new findings on decarbonization. A positive finding
is that removing fossil fuels from electricity generation is now feasible and
inexpensive. For the U.S. economy, one of the largest emitters of greenhouse
gases, it can be done at a cost that is less than current expenditure on
energy capital equipment. The costs of renewable energy are roughly the
same worldwide, so that the costs are likely to be low anywhere else in the
world. The reason the cost is so low is that the capital costs of renewable
energy have fallen dramatically over the last decade, and there are of course
no fuel costs, so that a modest increase in capital costs leads to a huge saving
in fuel costs.
    Less positive is that a carbon tax, which is widely assumed to be the
best way to wean economies off fossil fuels, would have to be of the order of
$500 per ton CO2 or more to move us away from oil. Intuitively this is not
surprising: many oil fields are very profitable and in addition the demand
for oil is highly inelastic because in some of its main uses there are few


                                      19
substitutes. In transport we are only just beginning to see the emergence of
electric vehicles, and in heating space, water and industrial processes we still
have few alternatives. Contrast this with the situation in power generation,
where wind and solar have become highly competitive over the last five years,
so that they now provide strong price competition for coal and gas. Because
a carbon tax would need to be so high, it seems sensible to seek alternatives.
Probably a modest carbon tax will have to be supplemented by emissions
standards for buildings and transportation.
    Another important issue is that decarbonization means electrification:
they are two sides of the same coin. With present electricity tariffs, electri-
fication would be outrageously expensive and impossible to sell politically.
To provide the right incentives and ensure efficient use of electricity we need
prices near marginal cost, which for renewable energy is close to zero, posing
problems for funding of fixed-cost-intensive renewable energy. So we need to
rethink the utility pricing model and find a pricing system that does not try
to recover fixed costs in the unit price.


References
 [1] Environmental Protection Agency. The benefits and costs of the clean
     air act from 1990 to 2020. 2.4

 [2] Donald Brown and Geoffrey Heal. Two-part tariffs, marginal cost pricing
     and increasing returns in a general equilibrium model. Journal of Public
     Economics, 13(1):25­49, February 1980. 4.1

 [3] Jules Dupuit. De las mesure de l'utilit´
                                            e des travaux publiques. Annales
     des Ponts et Chausse´es, 1844. 4.1

 [4] Aron Edlin, Mario Epelbaum, and Walter Heller. Is perfect price dis-
     crimination really efficient? welfare and existence in general equilibrium.
     Econometrica, 66(4):897­922, July 1998. 4.1

                                      20
 [5] Geoffrey Heal. Notes on the economics of energy storage. Working Paper
     22752, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 2016. 2.1

 [6] Geoffrey Heal. What would it take to reduce u.s. greenhouse gas
     emissions 802050? Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,
     11(2):319­335, July 2017. 2

 [7] Geoffrey Heal and Wolfram Schlenker. Coase, hotelling and pigou: The
     incidence of a caron tax and co2 emissions. Working Paper 26086, Na-
     tional Bureau of Economic Research, July 2019. 3, 3.1

 [8] Harold Hotelling. The economics of exhaustible resources. Journal of
     Political Economy, 39(2):137­75, 1931. 3

 [9] B Machol and S. Rizk. Econimic value of u.s. fossil fuel elecricity health
     impacts. Environment International, 52:75­80, 2013. 2.4

[10] Arthur Cecil Pigou. The Economics of Welfare. Macmillan, 1920. 3

[11] Paola Sapienza and Luigi zingales. Economic experts versus aver-
     age americans. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
     103(3):636­642, 2013. 3

[12] Matthew Shaner, Steven Davis, Nathan Lweis, and Ken Caldeira. Geo-
     physical constraints on the reliability of solar and wind power in the
     united states. Energy and Environmental Economics, 11:914­925, Febru-
     ary 2018. 2.1




                                      21
