                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        TO STAY OR TO MIGRATE? WHEN BECKER MEETS HARRIS-TODARO

                                         Pei-Ju Liao
                                         Ping Wang
                                        Yin-Chi Wang
                                        Chong Kee Yip

                                      Working Paper 27767
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27767


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We are grateful for comments from Douglas Almond, Carlos Garriga, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Wen-Tai
Hsu, Rachel Ngai, Ray Riezman, Michael Song, as well as participants at the AEA-ASSA Annual
Meetings, the Asian Meetings of the Econometric Society, the Society for Advanced Economic
Theory Meeting, the Regional Science Association International Meeting, and the Taiwan
Economic Research Conference and various seminars. Travel support from Academia Sinica, the
Research Grant Council of Hong Kong, the Center for Dynamic Economics of Washington
University, and the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan are gratefully acknowledged.
Needless to say, the usual disclaimer applies. Liao thanks the financial support from the Ministry
of Science and Technology of Taiwan, project No. MOST 103-2410-H-001-016-MY2. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pei-Ju Liao, Ping Wang, Yin-Chi Wang, and Chong Kee Yip. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
To Stay or to Migrate? When Becker Meets Harris-Todaro
Pei-Ju Liao, Ping Wang, Yin-Chi Wang, and Chong Kee Yip
NBER Working Paper No. 27767
September 2020
JEL No. O15,O53,R23,R28

                                         ABSTRACT

Allowing migration activity as an integral part of demographic transition and economic
development, we establish a locational quantity-quality trade-off of children and explore its
macroeconomic consequences. We construct a dynamic competitive migration equilibrium
framework with rural agents heterogeneous in skills and fertility preferences. We then establish
and characterize a mixed migration equilibrium where high-skilled rural agents with low fertility
preferences always migrate to cities, low-skilled with high fertility preferences always stay, and
only an endogenously determined fraction of high-skilled/high fertility preferences or low-
skilled/low fertility preferences ends up moving. By calibrating our model to fit the data from
China, we find interesting interactions between fertility and migration decisions in various
counterfactual experiments with respect to changes in migration, population control and rural
land entitlement policies. We conclude that overlooking the locational quantity-quality trade-off
of children may lead to nonnegligible biases in assessing the implications and effectiveness of
government policies.

Pei-Ju Liao                                     Yin-Chi Wang
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
National Taiwan Unversity                       National Taipei University
Taipei, Taiwan                                  New Taipei City, Taiwan
pjliao@ntu.edu.tw                               yinwang@mail.ntpu.edu.tw

Ping Wang                                       Chong Kee Yip
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis              Chinese University of Hong Kong
Campus Box 1208                                 Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
One Brookings Drive                             chongkeeyip@cuhk.edu.hk
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pingwang@wustl.edu
1    Introduction
Fifty years ago, Todaro (1969) and Harris and Todaro (1970) provided solid foundation for studying
the process of rural-urban migration commonly observed in developing countries. Thanking to the
more recent contribution by Lucas (2004), there has been a vast interest in examining urbanization
and structural transformation within a dynamic general equilibrium framework. While this renewed
literature has generated useful insight toward understanding urban labor and housing issues as well
as the macroeconomic consequences of rural-urban migration, the role of demographic transition
played in the dynamic process of urbanization remains largely unexplored.
    While it is relatively cheap to raise children in the countryside than in urban areas, cities
are usually considered as a better location for children considering one'    s education and career
opportunities. The chief purpose of this paper is to establish an internal migration model that
incorporates such a locational quantity-quality trade-o¤ of children. That is, we inquire, when
Becker meets Harris-Todaro, whether the interplay of work-based rural-urban migration and fertility
decisions may in  uence the macroeconomy of developing countries in the presence of large migration
barriers and active population controls. In particular, our paper is devoted to addressing the
following questions. What are the main channels through which work-based rural-urban migration
and di¤erential fertility decisions interplay in the process of economic development? What are the
underlying macroeconomic and institutional factors driving such household decisions? What are
the macroeconomic consequences of such interactions and the locational quantity-quality trade-o¤?
    Based on merged data from Bernard, Bell and Cooper (2018), Penn World Table (PWT9.0),
and the World Development Indicators (WDI), we observe the following cross-country patterns of
internal migration and fertility, as shown in Figures 1a-1c.

     (Stylized Fact 1) Migration intensities (de...ned as total migrants as a ratio of total population
     aged 15 and above) are higher in less developed countries with lower initial relative income
     (relative to the U.S.).

     (Stylized Fact 2) Total fertility rates are higher in less developed countries with lower initial
     relative income.

     (Stylized Fact 3) In less developed countries, age at migration peak is younger, with many
     aged 22 or below.

Because the migration intensity data in Bernard, Bell and Cooper (2018) is based on census data
from sample countries over the period of 1996-2011, the span of our data analysis is set from 1996
to 2015. To measure development stage of various countries, we choose the U.S. as the benchmark
and compute initial relative income as the real GDP per capita of a country relative to that of the
U.S. in 1996. Figures 1(a) and 1(b) plot the patterns of migration intensity and the total fertility
rates of 1996 against initial relative income in 1996. While migration intensity decreases with the
relative income in 1996, with a correlation coe¢ cient of 0:0767, TFR declines more sharply in
initial relative income, with a correlation coe¢ cient of 0:5965. In Figure 1(c), we see that age
at migration peak is younger and rising as a country becomes more developed. For countries with

                                                  1
relative income at or below 20% of the U.S., ages at migration peak are mostly 25 or under, with
many at 22 or below.


         Figure 1: Initial Relative Income, Migration Intensity, and Total Fertility Rate

                                      (a) Migration Intensity




                                      (b) Total Fertility Rate




                                    (c) Age at Migration Peak




                                                 2
     These stylized facts suggest that migration and fertility decisions are both related to the stage
of development, with less advanced featuring higher fertility and more intensive internal migration
to urban areas at young ages. In other words, migration activity is an integral part of demographic
transition and economic development, thereby motivating the present paper. So what are the costs
and bene...ts associated with rural-urban migration? The major costs crucial for the interplay of
migration and fertility are pecuniary and time cost associated with migration, the opportunity cost
associated with lost rural earning and farm land use rights and the higher childrearing cost in ur-
ban areas. Such migration is bene...cial, however, because of better pay and job perspectives, as
well as better education and future for children and better urban amenities net of urban conges-
tions/pollution and its rising cost of leaving. Should the marginal bene...t exceed the marginal cost,
rural workers are expected to continue migrating to cities. Since both the accrued cost and the
opportunity cost of childrearing are high in urban areas, a consequence of such migration decision
is a reduction in childbearing in conjunction with an improved quality of living locationally.
     While the basic story mentioned above is simple and intuitive, to formalize it in a dynamic model
with fertility and locational choice by heterogenous agents is by no means straightforward. To enable
the analysis in a tractable and quanti...able manner, we thus impose various simplifying structures.
First, as shown in Stylized Fact 3, migrations in developing countries occur at young ages. We
thus assume that migration decision is made at the early stages of one'     s life. To avoid complicated
overlapping-generational transitions in the presence of heterogenous agents, we set up a one-period
lived non-overlapping generations framework with bequests, à la Aghion and Bolton (1997), under
which there is no within-generation consumption-saving trade-o¤ but a time-invariant fraction of
lifetime income is transferred across generations over time. We further assume that children inherit
the skill level and residency from parents and prohibit reverse migration from urban to rural. With
this simpli...ed structure, we are able to characterize the dynamic competitive migration equilibrium
even by allowing agents to have two-dimensional heterogeneities in skills (high or low) and in
fertility preferences (high or low) and by allowing the economy to be subject to various frictions
and population policies.
     We establish conditions to support a most plausible "mixed migration equilibrium"in the steady
state: Those high-skilled rural residents with low fertility preferences always desire to migrate to
cities, those low-skilled rural residents with high fertility preferences always stay in rural, and only
an endogenously determined fraction of those high-skilled with high fertility preferences or low-
skilled with low fertility preferences ends up moving. In a less developed economy under proper
regularity conditions, we show that the fraction of movers of those high-skilled with high fertility
preferences is lower than that of those low-skilled with low fertility preferences. The moving fraction
di¤erential shrinks when there is a tightened population policy that binds agents with high fertility
preferences.
     Just how important is the locational quantity-quality trade-o¤ of children for economic develop-
ment? To address this quantitative question, we calibrate our model economy to ...t the data from
China, which is particularly interesting because of its migration and population policies. These
policies include the household registration system (called hukou that imposes large barriers on
rural-urban migration), the di¤erential one-child policy (with stronger enforcement in cities and in


                                                   3
public sectors), and the rural land entitlement policy (that regulates the retention of its use rights
by migrants and hence a¤ects the incentive to migrate from rural to urban). These three policies
allow us to perform several interesting policy experiments and counterfactual analyses, to assess mi-
gration, fertility and macroeconomic consequences of migration, population control and rural land
entitlement policies. In all cases, we ...nd that the locational quantity-quality trade-o¤ of children
plays a crucial role for economic development where more rural-urban migration is accompanied by
lower fertility but higher overall per capita output. In response to changes in population control
policies, there is a negative association between overall per capita output and skill premium; in
response to changes in migration and land policies, however, such association turns to positive.
    More speci...cally, our ...ndings of completely removing population control are in line with the pure
fertility choice model of Liao (2013): Skill premium increases and fertility rebounds, especially the
fertility of those who were seriously a¤ected by population control policies. By allowing rural-urban
migration, our results further indicate that the increase in fertility is accompanied by lower migration
­especially a larger reduction in the high-skilled migration and thereby a lower overall output per
capita. Overall, relaxing urban population control to the rural level is better than entirely removing
population control as it induces more high-skilled migration, leading to higher urban output and
overall output per capita. Stricter population control policies in urban areas may not be ideal in
lowering fertility rates from a nationwide perspective because such a tightened fertility policy in
urban deters high-skilled workers with stronger fertility preferences from migrating to cities. This
is undesirable because had they migrated to urban areas and faced a higher child-rearing cost, they
would have naturally adjusted their fertility down. Moreover, we ...nd that urban sprawl control
policy such as eliminating urban bene...t to all rural migrants will raise urban bene...t as planned but
would severely deter the incentives for rural-urban migration, which is undesirable for advancing the
economy. Urban promotion policy such as providing full bene...t to all rural migrants would induce
more migration overall but su¤er "adverse-selection" by motivating much more low-skilled but less
high-skilled to migrate. Finally, with more generous rural land entitlement, migration incentives
are stronger. While rural per capita output is lower due to migrants'land entitlement and urban
per capita output decreases due to migration of more low-skilled workers, the aggregate per capita
output is higher due to urban wage premium ­a result that is possible because of the endogenous
population weight due to rural-urban migration.
    Summarizing, the main takeaway is that, when formulating policies for developing countries,
one shall not neglect policy impacts via migration and fertility responses. Ignoring the locational
quantity-quality trade-o¤ of children and overlooking such trade-o¤ may lead to nonnegligible biases
in assessing the consequences and e¤ectiveness of government policies.

Literature Review Previous works on reallocating abundant and over-employed labor from rural
agricultural sector to urban manufacturing sector can be traced back to the Lewis (1954). The
research focusing on rural-urban migration was pioneered by Todaro (1969) and Harris and Todaro
(1970). Since then, economists have attempted to understand the forces driving rural to urban
migration and the impacts of rural-urban migration on development process.
    There are some related studies examining the causes and consequences of rural-urban migration


                                                   4
using calibrated dynamic models. The pivotal study is by Lucas (2004) who proposes that human
capital accumulation in cities induces better earnings and hence migration from rural to urban areas.
Rural-urban migration ceases when the values of earnings in the two locations equalize. Laing, Park
and Wang (2005) build a dynamic search model to illustrate how reductions in urban labor market
frictions may yield higher wage and induce more rural-urban migration. By constructing a surplus
labor framework, Bond, Riezman and Wang (2016) ...nd sizable e¤ects of reductions in trade and
migration barriers on China'  s growth and urbanization. Liao, Wang, Wang and Yip (2017) study
the rural-urban migration in China with a focus on education-based migration and establish that the
contribution of education-based migration on urban output shares are comparable to that of work-
based migration. Garriga, Hedlund, Tang and Wang (2017) show that the housing boom in China
is essentially driven by urban TFP induced rural-urban migration, ampli...ed by migration barriers
reductions. Ngai, Pissarides and Wang (2019) illustrate how much the household registration system
in China has slowed down industrialization and urbanization in China. For a comprehensive review
of the literature of internal migration from a macro perspective, the reader is referred to Lagakos
(2020).
    To our best knowledge, this paper is the ...rst to examine rural-urban migration with endogenous
fertility choice within a dynamic general equilibrium framework. Not only are we able to infer
decision rules of migration for agents with heterogenous skills and preferences toward children, we
can also quantify how much migration and population policies may a¤ect rural-urban migration
and economic development.


2    The Model
As discussed in the introduction, migration intensities and total fertility rates are higher in less
developed countries with many migrating at young ages. Our model will be built upon these facts.
To allow for policy analysis, our model will incorporate a rich array of migration and fertility related
policies prevalent in developing countries.
    Consider an in...nite horizon model of one-period-lived agents and two geographical locations,
urban and rural. In rural areas, production is simply backyard farming, using land as an input.
There are two sectors in cities: a private sector (P ) and a public sector (S ) that contains government
agencies and public enterprises. While workers in the public sector all hold urban residency, the
private sector employees may not. Urban workers with urban residency are entitled with urban
bene...ts, whereas rural farmers are entitled with the use rights of rural land as often observed in
developing countries under various usage and zoning restrictions such as regulations imposed on
agricultural land.
    As agents make migration decisions within the one period of their lifetime, in any location
or sector, the beginning-of-the-period population and the actual-working population stocks are
di¤erent, with the di¤erences resulting from the net migration      ows of workers. To avoid confusion,
the number of workers actually working in the sector during a period after migration occurs is
distinguished by a superscript "+"    . We use the subscript t to index time and dismiss it whenever


                                                   5
it does not lead to confusion.
     Agents live for one period, and are heterogeneous in skill levels and fertility preferences. There
are two di¤erent skill levels, high (H ) and low (L), and two types of fertility preferences ( ), high
( = ) and low ( = ), with the high type in favor of having more children. Children inherit skills
and residency status from parents, but the preferences toward children are assumed to be redrawn
for every generation. Agents consume and give births to n children right before the end of their
life. They are altruistic, deriving utility from both the quantity and quality of children, owning one
unit of labor time and supplying labor inelastically throughout their life.
     In the following, we will ...rst describe the sectoral production in the economy, and study the
household optimization problems in urban and rural areas. Once we de...ne the value functions of
the agents, we then delineate how rural agents make migration decisions to urban sectors. Finally,
we discuss the evolution of workers and study the equilibrium of the economy.


2.1     Production
We begin with rural production, followed by the two sector production activities in urban areas.


2.1.1    Rural production

Rural land is constant over time at a level Q and its use rights are evenly distributed to rural
workers at the beginning of each period. Rural production uses land as inputs, requires workers
to stay on site to operate the production technology but does not require skills. Denote R as the
beginning-of-the-period farmers in rural areas and R+ as the mass of farmers residing on the rural
land during a period after migration occurs. For migrants moving to cities and leaving their land
behind, they retain their entitlement of land for 2 [0; 1] fraction of lifetime before losing it. The
use rights of the idle land will then be evenly reallocated to farmers staying in rural areas. Total
output in rural area is:
                                          X = zQ 1 ~ ;                                             (1)

where z > 0 is the farming technology and ~ (R R+ ) =R is the fraction of land left idle out
of total land. De...ne q Q=R as the beginning-of-the-period land per farmer. Rural workers'per
capita income is given by,

                                    X           (R       R+ ) (1    )
                               x       = zq 1 +                         ;                          (2)
                                    R+                    R+

where the ...rst term in the bracket times by q is the initially-distributed land, and the second term
times by q is the extra land obtained during the period from land reallocation.


2.1.2    Urban production

There are two types of ...rms in urban areas: public enterprises and private ...rms. Public enterprises
operate a linear technology, taking relatively high-skilled workers as inputs to produce output. The


                                                  6
technology is given by,
                                                           YS = AS S + ;                                                     (3)

where AS is the technology scaling factor of public enterprises, and S + is the number of high-skilled
workers hired by public enterprises.
   Unlike public enterprises, private ...rms hire both high- and low-skilled workers in production.
Denote P H + and P L+ as the quantity of high- and low-skilled workers hired by private ...rms The
production of private ...rms takes the following CES form:
                            h                                          i1
               YP = AP               P H+     + (1          ) P L+           ;        > 1,      2 (0; 1) ,           < 1;    (4)

where AP is the technology scaling factor of private ...rms, is the quality index of high-skilled
workers that captures the relative productivity of the high- to the low-skilled, is the share para-
meter, and 1= (1    ) is the elasticity of substitution between the high- and low-skilled workers in
production. Under competitive markets, the wage rates in public enterprises and private ...rms are:

                wS = AS ;                                                                                                    (5)
                         h                                                       i1   1                      1
                 H
                wP = AP                     P H+     + (1           ) P L+                      P H+             ;           (6)
                         h                                                       i1   1                              1
                 L
                wP = AP                     P H+     + (1           ) P L+                 (1    ) P L+                  :   (7)

It is straightforward to derive the wage ratio:

                                             H                                   (1    )
                                            wP                      P H+
                                             L
                                               =                                           ;                                 (8)
                                            wP   1                  P L+

which depends negatively on the employment ratio but positively on the quality of high-skilled
                                                       1
                     P H+                          1
workers. De...ne     P L+        1         . To ensure positive skill premium, equilibrium labor
                        max
market must be subject to the following restriction under which high-skilled workers earn at least
as much as low-skilled workers in the same sector:
                H+              H+
Condition 1 P   P L+
                         P
                         P L+ max
                                  .
    Finally, because workers in the S sector enjoy a higher level of the urban bene...t than those in
                                                                                 H < 1. This issue will
the P sector, there is a public-sector discount in the relative wage, i.e., wS =wP
be discussed further in the subsection 2.2.2.


2.2   Households
All agents live for one period and have perfect foresight. As mentioned previously, agents are born
to be di¤erent in their skill levels and preferences toward children and inherit the skill levels and
residency status from their parents. Below the lifetime of rural households is described ...rst, followed
by the description for urban households.




                                                                7
2.2.1       Rural agents

Due to its small magnitude in developing countries at the stage of relatively low urbanization,
reverse migration from urban to rural areas is ruled out in our model.1 For agents born in rural
areas, they choose whether to migrate to cities immediately after they were born. If the expected
value of staying in the rural area is higher than the expected value of migrating to cities, agents
will choose to stay in the rural area; vice versa. After the migration decision, agents work in the
chosen location throughout their lifetime. If the agent has moved to cities, urban residency may be
granted after a certain duration, that entitles the agent to enjoy urban bene...ts. Before the end of
life, agents give birth to children subject to the fertility quota or subsidy imposed by the government
­if there is any. After giving births to children, agents consume, incur child rearing costs, pay the
above-quota penalty or receive per child subsidy, and then exit the market. Figure 2 depicts the
timeline of a rural agent'  s life.

                                                Figure 2: Timeline




    Denote c as consumption and b as the bequest left for each child. The utility of a rural worker
staying in rural areas is:

                            uR (c; b; n; ) = min [ c; (1        ) nb] + n" ;     " 2 (0; 1) ;                        (9)

where 2 (0; 1) is the altruistic factor, which is proportional to the net income allocating to total
bequests; 2 f ; g, with 0 < < , captures an agent'       s preference toward children and measures
how one values children. is re-drawn at birth for every generation: With a probability , an agent
enjoys less from having children ( = ), and with a probability 1        , an agent enjoys more from
   1
       The evidence provided by Lucas (2004, Table 1) argues that the main trend of internal migration is from rural
to urban for a selected group of representative countries in the last half of the twentieth century. In addition, reverse
migration would not add any insights unless one allows for heterogeneous locational preferences or heterogeneous
sectoral productivities ­ without such heterogeneities, only net migration ows matter.


                                                           8
having children ( = ). As the agent is one-period lived, the Leontief setting in c and nb is meant
to capture the consumption-saving decision, with nb acting as total saving in o¤springs. Given the
one-period setting of the model, we do not connect b directly to the productivity of the child but
instead considered it as the cost of establishing good attributes of children ­ a quality dimension
under this bequest setting with b capturing investment in each child.
    Having children is costly. Assume that child rearing cost is 0R per child in rural areas. There
are two types of fertility policies under our consideration. One is related to direct population
control whereas another is to childrearing subsidy. For simplicity, both cases are modeled in the
quantity aspect, which enables us to use a single variable nR to capture either the fertility quota
under control or the minimum number of children quali...ed for childrearing subsidies. Under direct
population control, the government imposes an above-quota ...ne of R > 0 per child, so the total
penalty payment is (n nR ) R . Under childrearing subsidy, the government provides            R > 0
of per child subsidy, giving a rural worker a total subsidy of (n nR )       R . With an income x
from farming, the budget constraint of a rural worker under either scenario is then:

                                           0
                              c + nb + n   R   + max fn   nR ; 0g   R   = x:                     (10)

A rural agent's problem is thus to choose fc; b; ng to maximize lifetime utility (9) subject to the
budget constraint (10).


2.2.2   Urban agents

Similar to rural agents, urban agents derive utility from consumption (c), quality of children (b) and
number of children (n). Urban residents may also enjoy urban bene...ts (B ) such as urban amenities,
medical services, public transportation subsidies, allowances for the elderly and etc. However, only
residents with urban residency are quali...ed for these bene...ts, and at the same time they need to
pay an embarked tax to ...nance these bene...ts. For rural migrant workers arriving at the cities
without urban residency, they have a probability to obtain urban residency which entitles them
with urban bene...ts for fraction of their lifetime upon paying the urban embarked tax . As
migrant workers may start their career in cities with or without urban residency, and some migrant
workers may obtain urban residency later, we need two indicator functions I F and I T to indicate
the urban residency status of an urban worker:
              8
              < 1; if the agent holds urban residency when starting working,
       F
     I    =
              : 0; if the agent does not hold urban residency when starting working.
              8
              < 1; if the agent successfully obtains urban residency despite I F = 0 initially,
     IT =
              : 0; if the agent fails to obtain urban residency despite I F = 0 initially.

Depending on the status of urban residency, an urban worker enjoys (pays) urban bene...ts (taxes)
of B ( ), B ( ) or nothing.
    Let superscript U denote urban workers regardless of their urban residency status. An urban


                                                   9
worker has the following utility function:

            uU (c; b; n; B ; ) jI F ;I T = min [ c; (1              ) nb] + n" + I F + 1          IF IT    B:   (11)

Denote nU as the fertility quota or the minimum number of children to be eligible for urban child-
rearing subsidies for agents with urban residency. Two remarks are in order. First, as to be clari...ed
below, we will consider a nondegenerate case where the fertility quota are binding for some but not
all of the agents. Second, urban childcare is more expansive than rural whereas urban workers get
penalized more than rural when giving birth to above-quota number of children. Let 0        U be the
childrearing cost in urban areas, U be the urban above-quota penalty or per child subsidy. That
is, we restrict our attention to the case of 0     0
                                              U > R and U        R.
                        H    L
    Denote w 2 fwS ; wP ; wP g as workers'wage income from working in either the public sector or
the private sector by their skill levels. An urban worker's budget constraint is:

                                           0
                            c + nb + n     U   + IF + 1              I F I T max fn          nU ; 0g   U
                                       F                F       T
                            + 1      I + 1          I       I        max fn       nR ; 0g    R                  (12)
                       = w        IF + 1        IF IT                  w;
                                                                       ~

where w~ denotes urban net (of tax) wage that depends on the urban residency status. All urban
workers face the same child-rearing costs regardless of their residency status, albeit the bene...ts
and obligations are associated with one' s residency. So an urban worker with urban residency
   F       T           F      T
( I = 1; I = 0 or I = 0; I = 1 ) faces a budget constraint that can be rewritten as:

                                                0
                                 c + nb + n     U   + max fn            nU ; 0g   U   = w:
                                                                                        ~                       (13)

On the other hand, the budget constraint of an urban worker with rural residency ( I F ; I T = (0; 0))
is:
                            c + nb + n 0U + max fn    nR ; 0g R = w:                             (14)

    Before moving to the migration decision, we identify the link between fertility preference ( ) and
fertility constraint (nj ). Denote nj as the optimal fertility choice of an agent in location j (j = U; R).
We are interested in the nondegenerate case: Agents with high fertility preferences ( = ) will
have nj > nj in which the fertility constraint is binding; those with low fertility preferences ( = )
will have nj < nj and the fertility constraint is not binding. We summarize this relation by using
an indicator function I ( = ) below, where
                           8
                           < 1; for agents with high fertility preferences ( = ),
                    I =
                           : 0; for agents with low fertility preferences ( = ).


2.3   Rural-Urban Migration Decision
For workers born in rural areas, they decide whether to migrate to cities by comparing the value of
staying in rural areas to that of migrating to urban areas. Based on their endowed skill levels and
preferences toward children, their expected values of migrating to urban areas are di¤erent. For

                                                            10
high-skilled workers, they have a chance to work in the public sector that grants them with urban
residency immediately. If they fail to obtain a job in the public sector, they work as high-skilled
workers in the private sector with rural residency; after staying in cities for a certain duration, they
have a chance to obtain urban residency. Low-skilled workers are only competent for low-skilled
jobs in the private sector, and also have a chance to obtain urban residency. For those obtaining
urban residency successfully, they enjoy urban bene...ts and are obligated to regulations coming with
urban residency.
    In the following, we characterize rural workers' migration decision by ...rst de...ning the value
functions of staying in rural areas, working in the public sector and working in the urban private
sector for both high- and low-skilled workers. We will then establish the conditions under which a
rural worker decides to migrate to cities.


2.3.1   Value function of staying in rural areas

The value function for rural agents to stay in rural areas is independent of their skill levels:

                        V R ( ) = max uR (c; b; n; )
                                              c;b;n
                                        = max fmin [ c; (1                 ) nb] + n" g
                                              c;b;n
                                                               0
                          s:t:                c + nb + n       R   + max fn        nR ; 0g   R   = x:

To solve V R ( ), from the Leontief preference in c and nb, we substitute c = (1 ) nb into the budget
constraint, where it is now clear that the altruistic factor is the fraction of income allocated to
bequest. The maximization problem becomes:

                            V R ( ) = max (1                    ) nb + n"
                                                   b;n
                                          1               0
                                 s:t:         nb + n      R   + max fn        nR ; 0g   R   = x;

where " < 1. Denote as the Lagrangian multiplier associated with the budget constraint. The
...rst-order conditions for n and b are:
                                                 1
                             (1   ) b + " n" 1 =   b+ 0R+I    R ;                       (15)

                                              (1         )n =         n:                                (16)

Using (16) and (15) to substitute out = (1           ) with the fact that the marginal cost (MC) and
marginal bene...t (MB) from bequests exactly cancel out with each other under Leontief preferences,
we obtain a key expression for fertility decision:
                                     "                    h           i
                                                            0
                                     1 "
                                             =    (1    )   R + I   R   ;                        (17)
                                   n{z
                                   |    }       |          {z         }
                                    MB of fertility                  MC of fertility

where the left-hand-side and the right-hand-side of the above equation are the MB and MC from
having an extra children, respectively. With normality, an increase in the altruistic factor that raises
bequest should suppress fertility. As a result, we impose the following condition on :

                                                                11
Condition 2 < 1=2.
From (17), it is thus straightforward to derive:

Proposition 1. (Rural Fertility Choice) The optimal rural fertility rate ( nR ) is increasing with
preference for children ( ), decreasing with the altruistic factor ( ) or the unit childrearing cost
( 0R ), and independent of income ( x). Moreover, while an above-quota ...ne ( R > 0) discourages
fertility, a childrearing subsidy ( R < 0) encourages it.

Similar to quasi-linear preferences, a nice property associated with Leontief preferences is that the
optimal number of children nR is independent of agents' income and wealth. This enables us to
focus exclusively on the typically stronger substitution e¤ect.
    It is informative to plots the MB and the MC curves of fertility decision in Figure 3. Based on
the results in Proposition 1, the MB curve of agents with lies to the right of the MB curve of agents
with , meaning that agents with stronger fertility preferences will choose to have more children than
those with weaker preferences. As mentioned before, below we will focus on the relevant case where
the government'   s population policy is only binding for agents with stronger fertility preferences.
This is an interesting case to look at because agents with       choose nR j 6 nR whereas agents
with choose nR j > nR , by paying the above-quota penalty or receiving childrearing subsidy. To
guarantee that nR j > nR under = , we impose a condition derived from (17):2
                                                     1
                                                    1 "
                                 "
Condition 3 nj <                )[   0                    ;   j = R; U .
                           (1        j +I   j   ]
As a result, the case under our consideration features: nR j > nR                nR j , as drawn in Figure 3.


                           Figure 3: Determination of Fertility for Rural Workers




  2
      We note that Condition 3 is general and can apply to both locations, rural and urban.




                                                                   12
   We can solve nR analytically from (17) as:
                                           "                                  #    1
                                                                                  1 "
                                                            "
                                    nR =                        0                       :                        (18)
                                               (1       )       R   +I   R

The optimal bequest or children's quality b can then be solved from the budget constraint (10) as:

                                            x       0                    nR
                                b =                 R        I       1              R       :                    (19)
                                           nR                            nR

Under our setting, total bequest is a constant share of "disposable income" at the end of one'   s
lifetime after government transfers (...ne or subsidy) and childrearing spending (measured by x
n 0 R   max fn nR ; 0g R ). Thus, the quantity-quality trade-o¤ is obvious: Higher quantity of
children nR is associated with lower quality measured by b . Although this dimension of quantity-
quality trade-o¤ is not the emphasis of our paper, it can be combined with Proposition 1 to imply:

Proposition 2. (Rural Quality Investment Choice) Optimal investment in the quality of children
( b ) rises with income ( x) and is negatively associated with the quantity of children ( nR ). The
quantity-quality trade-o¤ is stronger in the presence of an above-quota ...ne ( R > 0) but weaker in
the presence of a childrearing subsidy ( R < 0).

That is, population controls tend to induce a stronger quantity-quality trade-o¤ in fertility choice
but childrearing incentives tend to weaken it.
   With nR and b being pinned down by (17) and (19), the value function V R ( ) is solved as:

                                                                          nR
               V R ( ) = (1     )    x     nR j     0
                                                    R       +I       1                      R   +   (nR j )" :
                                                                         nR j

2.3.2   Value functions of urban workers

We start with the urban private sector where main actions take place, followed by the urban public
sector. In all cases, fertility choice retains similar functional form to the rural case, with rural income
replaced by after tax wage (w    ~ ), childrearing cost updated to the urban levels 0   U and above-quota
penalized or subsidized to U . To save space, we shall not report these solutions but note that the
properties in Propositions 1 and 2 will be carried out for all urban workers of di¤erent types in
di¤erent sectors.

Value function of workers in the private sector
1. High-skilled workers
    For high-skilled rural migrants working in the private sector, after staying in urban areas for
(1    ) of their lifetime, they obtain urban residency with a probability (I F = 0, I T = 1). With
a probability (1      ), they fail to do so and hold rural residency throughout their life (I F = 0,
I T = 0). Denote V P;H ( ) as the value function of a high-skilled migrant worker in the private




                                                            13
sector. V P;H ( ), which can thus be written as:
                           8                                                          9
                           >
                           <                       U
                                          max u (c; b; n; ) jI F =0;I T =1            >
                                                                                      =
                P;H                       c;b;n
              V     ( )=
                           >
                           : s:t: c + nb + n 0 + max fn nU ; 0g                H      >
                                                                                      ;
                                                U                       U = wP
                                 8                                                    9
                                 >
                                 <                   U
                                              max u (c; b; n; ) jI F =0;I T =0        >
                                                                                      =
                       + (1    )               c;b;n                                    :
                                 >
                                 : s:t: c + nb + n 0 + max fn nR ; 0g               H >
                                                                                      ;
                                                      U                        R = wP

    Because urban workers' fertility decisions depend on urban residency, we denote separately
nF j and nI j as the number of children chosen by private sector workers with and without urban
residency (i.e., by formal and informal private sector workers, respectively). Following the same
steps as in the rural worker'
                            s optimization problem, we can solve:
                                       "                      # 1
                                                                1 "
                                                  "
                                nF j =
                                          (1    ) 0 U +I   U

and                                       "                                 #    1
                                                                                1 "
                                                       "
                                 nI j =                    0
                                              (1   )       U   +I       R

Recall nR j from (18) and that 0        0
                                  U > R and U        R . It is straightforward to show that the urban
fertility choices are always below the rural counterpart, with formal urban workers'fertility lower
than informal urban worker'   s:
Proposition 3. (Comparison of Fertility Choices) nF j               nI j < nR j :
   Substitute the solutions of the maximization problem into the value function above. V P;H ( ),
  = f ; g can be written as:
                          8          n                  h                      io 9
                          < (1     )   w H        n   j   0
                                                            + I  1     nU         =
                                         P          F     U          nF j    U
            V P;H ( ) =
                          :                    + (nF j )" + B                     ;
                                8          n            h                     io 9
                                < (1    ) wP  H   nI j    0
                                                            + I  1    nR         =
                                                          U          nI j   R
                      + (1    )                                                    :
                                :                   + (n j )"                    ;
                                                                    I



2. Low-skilled workers
   Denote V P;L ( ) as the value function for low-skilled migrant workers in urban private sector,
  = f ; g. By applying the same procedure for deriving V P;H ( ), we write V P;L ( ) as:
                           8         n                  h                       io 9
                           < (1    ) wP  L        nF j    0            nU          =
                                                          U +I    1 n j       U
             V P;L ( ) =                                               F
                           :                   + (nF j )" + B                      ;
                                8          n            h                      io 9
                                < (1    ) wP  L   nI j    0
                                                            + I   1   nR          =
                                                          U          nI j    R
                       + (1   )                                                     :
                                :                   + (nI j )"                    ;


                                                   14
Due to the absence of the income e¤ect, low-skilled migrant workers'fertility choices resemble those
of the high-skilled.

Value function of workers in the public sector
  In many countries, working in the public sector requires a higher quali...cation, e.g. at least holding
a high school diploma or passing certain government employee exams. We thus assume that only
high-skilled workers can work in the public sector. For rural high-skilled agents migrating to cities,
with a probability they are recruited as public workers and are granted with urban residency
immediately. They enjoy complete urban bene...ts and pay full urban taxes. With a probability
1     , they end up working in the private sector. A public sector worker has the following value
function (I F = 1):

                        V S ( ) = max fmin [ c; (1                ) nb] + n" + B g
                                    c;b;n

                                                0
                          s:t: c + nb + n       U   + max fn         nU ; 0g    U   = wS        :

By substituting in the number of children chosen and the investment in children quality, we obtain
a public sector worker's value function V S ( ), = f ; g:

                                                                          nU
         V S ( ) = (1     )    wS           nF j         0
                                                         U   +I     1                U      +       (nF j )" + B:
                                                                         nF j

2.3.3   Migration decisions

We are ready to discuss agents'migration decisions. Migration is costly. To simplify the analysis,
we assume that migration cost is in the form of utility. Depending on skill levels and preferences,
rural workers may have di¤erent ability to adapt to urban life. Hence, we assume that moving from
rural to urban areas takes a migration cost, 2 f L ; H g, which is measured in utils, for low- and
high-skilled agents, respectively. Should such migration cost in income-equivalent is proportional
to earnings, one would expect that H > L .
    Rural agents migrate to cities only if the expected value of migrating to urban areas is higher
than the value of staying in the rural. Since high-skilled migrant workers have a probability to
obtain a job in the public sector and a probability 1      to work in the private sector, high-skilled
rural workers will migrate if the following inequality holds true:

              VH ( )      V S ( ) + (1       ) V P;H ( )            H
                                                                         VR( )           0, for      2 f ; g:       (20)

For low-skilled rural workers, they can only work in the private sector after migrating to urban
areas. Hence, they will migrate to urban areas if the following inequality is met:

                        VL ( )      V P;L ( )        L
                                                              VR( )      0, for       2 f ; g:                      (21)

When the above two equations are held with equality, rural agents are indi¤erent between migrating
to urban areas and staying in rural areas. The migration decision thus depends on the relative
magnitudes of rural income (x, which is a function of z , q , R+ and ) and urban incomes (wS ,

                                                             15
wPH , w L ), the relative child-rearing costs in urban and rural areas ( 0 and 0 ), population policies
       P                                                                 R     U
(governed by nR , nU , R and U ), urban bene...ts (B ), urban tax ( ), and easiness of obtaining
urban residency and urban bene...ts ( , and ). De...ne an indicator function with I m = 1 if
rural-urban migration takes place, and I m = 0 otherwise. Then we have:
                                        8
                                        < 1; i¤ Vi ( ) 0; i = H; L;
                                  Im =                                                            (22)
                                        : 0; otherwise.

There are four types of agents in the model: type-fH; g, type-fH; g, type-fL; g and type-fL; g.
Agents of di¤erent types will have di¤erent migration decisions depending on their preferences to-
ward children and their income levels, and the model thus has several possible equilibrium outcomes.
As a result, the evolution of workers and the supply of urban amenities under each of these equilib-
rium outcomes will also di¤er, which we now turn to discuss.


3     Equilibrium
Prior to de...ning the equilibrium, we delineate the concept of a mixed migration equilibrium that
restricts our attention to a most plausible migration pattern, based on which we specify the evolution
of workers and the supply of urban amenities. A dynamic competitive migration equilibrium is
subsequently de...ned, followed by a steady-state migration equilibrium.


3.1   Mixed Migration Equilibrium
Generally speaking, high-skilled agents have higher motivation to migrate to cities than low-skilled
workers as skills are more rewarding in urban areas. For low-skilled workers, it is usually the case in
developing countries that wage incomes in cities are higher than the incomes from farming. However,
the costs of raising children in terms of housing, spacing and tuitions are usually higher in cities,
and agents who prefer to have more children may be more prone to stay in rural areas. Therefore,
we choose to con...ne our attention to a speci...c migration equilibrium: Type-fH; g workers always
choose to migrate to cities, type-fL; g always decide to stay in rural areas, whereas type-fH; g
and type-fL; g agents are indi¤erent between migrating and staying so that some of them stay
in rural areas while others migrate to cities. This is the most relevant case to study in developing
countries at the stage of relatively low urbanization.
     More precisely, denote H as the fraction of high-skilled workers with high fertility preference
(i.e., type-fH; g) being indi¤erent between migrating and staying but ending up moving to cities,
and (1      H ) as the fraction of them staying in their rural hometown. Similarly, denote L as the
fraction of the low-skilled workers with low fertility preference (i.e., type-fL; g) and indi¤erent
between migrating to cities and staying in rural areas, but ending up moving to cities, and (1       L)
as the fraction of them staying in rural areas. The migration patterns for high- and low-skilled
workers of the equilibrium that we focus on can be best summarized below:



                                                  16
                                          of workers        (1   ) of workers

                                                                 H   move
                               H          move
                                                            (1       H)   stay

                                          L   move
                               L                                 stay
                                     (1       L)   stay

The detailed equilibrium conditions and the de...nition of the migration equilibrium are relegated to
Section 3.4 below.
    Note that if 0 < H < 1 and 0 < L < 1, we have the mixed migration equilibrium
(MME) ­ "mixed" in the sense that both a positive fraction of high- and low-skilled workers
migrate to cities in the equilibrium. If H = 1 and 0 < L < 1, we have a skilled-based segregated
migration equilibrium (SME) : All high-skilled workers migrate, while low-skilled workers with
low fertility preference    are indi¤erent between migrating and staying, and low-skilled workers
with high fertility preference always stay. There is another fertility-based SME with H = 0
and 0 < L < 1: in this case, all agents with high fertility preference (type- ) stay in rural areas,
while low-skilled workers with preference are indi¤erent between migrating and staying, and high-
skilled workers with preference always move. In a special case with H = 1 and L = 0, we have a
pure skilled-based SME with all high-skilled workers migrating to cities and all low-skilled workers
remaining as farmers. In another polar case with H = 0 and L = 1, we have a pure fertility-based
SME with all workers with preference migrating to cities and all with preference remaining as
farmers. Di¤erent types of SMEs are readily summarized below:


                                                                 H          L

                              Pure skill-based SME               1          0
                              Skill-based SME                    1    2 (0; 1)
                              Fertility-based SME                0    2 (0; 1)
                              Pure fertility-based SME           0          1

We regard the last case as theoretically possible but not realistically likely ­given that the typical
observation is that cities are more attractive to high-skilled workers than farmland. For the sake of
brevity, we will thus leave it out from our theoretical analysis.


3.2   Evolution of Workers
As mentioned at the beginning of Section 2, agents are one-period lived and make migration deci-
sions within the period, and hence the beginning-of-the-period population and the actual-working
population stocks are di¤erent, with the di¤erences resulting from the in     ows of workers. Because
children inherit their parents'status of residency, if rural migrant workers do not successfully obtain
urban residency before exiting the market, in the next period their children will start life from rural

                                                       17
areas with rural residency. Similarly, if a worker starts her life in urban areas, she holds urban
residency bequeathed by her parents.
    Denote U as the beginning-of-the-period workers with urban residency, whereas P H and P L as
the beginning-of-the-period private sector high- and low-skilled workers, respectively. Denote S  ~F ,
P~ and P
  H       ~ as the new migrants who successfully obtain urban residency, working as public sector,
           L
  F        F
private sector high- and low-skilled workers, respectively. Denote P   ~ H and P~ L as the new comers
                                                                        I        I
working as private sector high- and low-skilled workers but failing to obtain urban residency. Denote
H and L as the beginning-of-the-period rural high- and rural low-skilled workers. The detailed
notations of population    ows are summarized in Table 1. Figure 4 provides the population        ows
chart in the model.

                                            [Insert Table 1 about here]



                                        Figure 4: Population Flow Chart




       The beginning-of-the-period population identity equations in urban and rural areas are:3

                                               U    = S + P H + P L;                                            (23)
                                               R = H + L:                                                       (24)

The actual-working populations in urban areas under the equilibrium we examine are:
                                   ~F = S +
                          S+ = S + S                          [ + (1   )      H]   H;                           (25)
                                                              |      {z             }
                                                   obtain urban residency immediately upon arrival
   3
       For urban workers who do not have urban residency, their children will hold rural residency at birth and start
                                                 H    L
their life in rural areas. As a result, we have PI = PI = 0.


                                                            18
                      ~H + P
         P H+ = P H + P    ~H
                        F    I

                 = P H + [ + (1           )    H   ] (1       ) H + [ + (1             )       H ] (1   ) (1    )H    (26)
                         |                    {z                 } |                             {z               }
                                 obtain urban residency                            still hold rural residency
                       H
                 = P       + [ + (1       )   H ] (1          ) H;


                                   ~F
                      P L+ = P L + P L  ~IL
                                       +P
                              = PL +                   L L            +             L (1         )L                   (27)
                                                     | {z }                    |       {z         }
                                          obtain urban residency          still hold rural residency
                                      L
                              = P +            L L;


where Z~ denotes the in ow of Z within the period. Total number of agents working in urban areas
after migration in ows is thus equal to:

                        U + = S + + P H + + P L+
                              = S + P H + P L + [ + (1                     )       H] H    +      LL                  (28)
                              = U + [ + (1                )    H] H   +        L L:


In a similar manner, we write down the actual-working populations in rural areas after migration
out  ows as:
                      R+ = H + + L+ = (1      ) (1   H ) H + (1     L ) L:                  (29)

As children inherit the skill levels (i.e., jobs) and residency status directly from parents and all
agents live for one period, the evolutions of workers in the public and the private sectors are:
                     h                       i     h                       i
              S0 =      nF j + (1     ) nF j S + nF j + (1        ) H nF j    H;                 (30)
               0
                     h                       i       h                       i
           PH =         nF j + (1     ) nF j PF H
                                                   + nF j + (1      ) H nF j (1      ) H;        (31)
               0
                     h                       i
            PL =        nF j + (1     ) nF j PF L
                                                  + L nF j L;                                    (32)

where Z 0 denotes the next period value of Z . The evolution equation for U can be written accordingly
follows:
                                                       0      0
                                        U 0 = S0 + P H + P L :                                    (33)

The evolution equations for rural high- and low-skilled workers and total rural workers with rural
residency can be written accordingly:
                    n                h                       i                          o
          H 0 = H (1        ) (1   ) nI j + (1      ) H nI j + (1     ) (1    H ) n R j   ;   (34)
                    n                                                o
          L0 = L (1        ) L nI j + (1       L ) nR j + (1   ) nR j ;                       (35)
          R0 = H 0 + L0 :                                                                                             (36)




                                                          19
3.3   Urban Bene...ts
Urban bene...ts, inclusive of urban amenities, such as parks, schools, museums, libraries, medical
services, childcare and old age allowances, and other public services, are assumed to be ...nanced by
urban embarked taxes. Total urban taxes collected by the government are:

                                      H    L
                       T   =     S + PF + PF + [ + (1       )   H]   H                             (37)
                               + f[ + (1      )   H ] (1   ) H+      L   Lg   :

We assume that the government provides the urban bene...ts B to all residents with urban status
based on an even distribution rule:
                                         B = B0 G;                                         (38)

where G is the per capita budget for amenities and bene...ts, and B0 is the government'
                                                                                      s technology
scaling factor in the provision of urban amenities and bene...ts. Assume that the government runs
a balanced budget in every period. Then periodic balanced government budget implies:
                                                  T
                                     G=                      :
                                              ~F + P
                                           U +S     ~H + P
                                                         ~L
                                                     F     F

3.4   Migration Equilibrium
                                                                            H ; wL
In equilibrium, all urban labor markets clear under the factor prices wS ; wP            given by (5),
                                                                                 P
(6) and (7):
                              S d = S + ; P H;d = P H + ; P L;d = P L+ ;                           (39)

where S d , P H;d and P L;d are the labor demands in speci...c sectors. Finally, rural labor market
clears under the rural farming income given by (2):

                                             Rd = R+ :                                             (40)

where Rd is the demand for rural labor.
   We de...ne the competitive equilibrium of the model below.

De...nition. A dynamic competitive migration equilibrium (DCME) of the model consists of
                                                                        H ; w L , such that
migration decisions, rural farming income x, and urban wage rates wS ; wP    P




  (i) (Optimization) given rural farming income x and urban wage rates wS ; wP    H ; w L , based on
                                                                                       P
      their residency status, agents choose numbers of children according to (17) and (19); further-
      more, rural high- and low-skilled agents make migration decisions according to (22);


 (ii) (Market clearing) rural farming income satis...es (2), urban wage rates           H ; wL
                                                                                  wS ; wP        satisfy
                                                                                             P
      (5), (6) and (7), and labor markets clear according to (39) and (40);




                                                  20
(iii) (Urban amenities) the amenities in urban areas are supplied according to (38);


 (iv) (Workers laws of motion) given the initial population H 0 ; L0 ; S 0 ; P H;0 ; P L;0 , high- and low-
      skilled workers in rural, urban public and urban private sectors evolve according to (30)-(36),
      with workers actually devoted to production given by (25)-(29).

   We next de...ne the balanced-growth equilibrium for the rest of our analysis.
De...nition. A balanced-growth migration equilibrium (BGME) of the model is a DCME
where the growth rate of population variables are constant as follows:
                                                Z0
                                                   = constant,
                                                Z
where Z = S; R; P H and P L .
   Along a balanced growth path, from (30)-(32), we get:
         S0        h                        i       h                                iH
               =       nF j + (1   ) nF j       +       nF j + (1       )   H nF j        ;                        (41)
         S                                                                            S
       PH
           0       h                        i       h                                                      i H
               =       nF j + (1   ) nF j       +       (1        ) nF j + (1    ) (1         )   H nF j       ;   (42)
       PH                                                                                                   PH
       PL
          0        h                        i                       L
               =       nF j + (1   ) nF j       +        L nF j        :                                           (43)
       PL                                                           PL
Thus, along a balanced growth path, we have a constant ratio of public sector workers to high-skilled
workers (S=H ) as well as constant ratios for workers of di¤erent skill types in urban private sector
(P H =H and P L =L). Next, from (34)-(35), we have constant growth rates of di¤erent skill-type
workers. These together with the fact that the growth rate of R is constant, we get a constant
ratio of high-skilled to low-skilled workers (H=L) from (36). This in turn implies that the ratio of
high-skilled to low-skilled workers in the urban private sector is constant (P H =P L ). Finally, from
(23), we can show that the growth rate of U , as well as its ratio to high-skilled workers are constant.
    We are now ready to establish the property of common growth and, most importantly, the
existence the properties of a mixed migration equilibrium.
Proposition 4. (Common Growth) At the BGME, the model exhibits common growth rate property:
                                                        Z0
                                                           = g,
                                                        Z
where Z = S; U; R; H; L; P H and P L .
   We now present the ...rst main ...nding that concerns the existence of a MME.
Theorem 1. (Mixed Migration Equilibrium) Under proper ranges of migration costs and urban-rural
income di¤ erentials, a mixed migration equilibrium arises along a balanced growth path. Moreover, a
better urban amenity, a larger childrearing subsidy, a lower urban-rural childrearing cost di¤ erential,
a lower urban fertility penalty, or a weakened rural land entitlement tends to result in a higher
fraction of type-fH; g and type-fL; g agents choosing to migrate from rural to urban.

                                                          21
While the formal proof is relegated to Appendix A.1, Theorem 1 is established by means of proof
by construction. To do so, we de...ne a general class of indi¤erence boundaries for the high-skilled
and low-skilled agents with type- facing a migration cost :

                    VH ( ; )         V S ( ) + (1         ) V P;H ( )        VR( )=0
                     VL ( ; )       V P;L ( )            VR( )=0

which are both linear and decreasing in the migration cost of migration. To begin, we use (20)
and (21) to identify conditions under which type-fH; g workers always choose to migrate to cities
whereas type-fL; g always decide to stay in rural areas, i.e., VH ; H > 0 > VL ; L . This
task is trivial because, for any fertility preference pair   ; , we can always adjust the migration
                         L   H
costs of migration         ;     for the two inequalities to hold. Basically this requires that L is
su¢ ciently high but H su¢ ciently low.
      The major task is therefore to check the indi¤erence boundaries of type-fH; g and type-fL; g
agents that may lead to interior solution so that VH ; H = 0 = VL ; L . To do so, we
...rst write all the costs (migration, childrearing and penalties or subsidies) in proportion to wage
incomes. Then it is convenient to de...ne urban-rural income di¤erentials measured by the ratios of
urban net wage to farmer'    s income:

                                w
                                ~PH( )                                       w
                                                                             ~PL( )
                                                         w
                                                         ~S ( )
                      &H ( )           ;   &S ( )               ;   &L ( )
                                   x                       x                    x
Straightforward examination of the value functions suggest that an increase in & H ( ) or & S ( )
tends to shift up the high-skilled indi¤erence boundary VH ; H = 0; whereas an increase
in & L ( ) tends to shift up the low-skilled indi¤erence boundary VL ; L = 0. Thus, with
proper urban-rural income di¤erentials, we can assure VH ; H = 0 = VL ; L under
which a fraction of both high-skilled and low-skilled workers ( H ; L ) 2 (0; 1) (0; 1) migrate
to cities. This proof by construction is illustrated by Figure 5, given L < H (which is for
illustrative purposes but inessential for the proof). What is important is that the parametric space
supporting a mixed migration equilibrium is dense and hence nonempty. By similar arguments, we
can perform comparative static analysis to establish that urban amenities and childrearing subsidies
serve as positive forces for migration (shifting up indi¤erence boundaries), whereas childrearing cost
di¤erentials, fertility penalties and rural land entitlement requirements as negative forces (shifting
down indi¤erence boundaries).




                                                    22
                            Figure 5: Indi¤erence Boundaries in MME




    From the indi¤erence boundaries, we get a novel locational quantity-quality tradeo¤ for rural-
urban migration, re   ected by the presence of an expected locational quality gain and an expected
fertility loss upon migrating to cities:

                                  (1    )         wS + (1              H
                                                                    ) wP        [ + (1        )   ]           x
               VH ( ; ) =
                                                       + [ + (1             )   ]B
                              |                                        {z                                         }
                                                     expected locational quality gain (+)
                                                 8                                                        9
                                                 <                  (nF j )"      (nR j )"                =
                              +(1       ")                                                                 ;
                                                 : + (1         ) [ (nF j )" + (1            ) (nI j )" ] ;
                                  |                                  {z                                   }
                                                           expected fertility loss (-)

and
                                                      L                            L
                 VL ( ; ) = (1           )           wP            + (1         ) wP     x +       B
                            |                                        {z                                       }
                                                   expected locational quality gain (+)
                                  +(1       ")    [ (nF j )" + (1        ) (nI j )" (nR j             )" ]:
                                   |                                  {z                                }
                                                          expected fertility loss (-)

Again, the formal proof is relegated to Appendix A.2, but this property is readily summarized in
the following.
Theorem 2. (Locational quantity-quality tradeo¤) At the BGME, the rural-to-urban migration
decision features a locational quantity-quality tradeo¤ between payo¤ s from locational quality and
fertility.

                                                           23
The intuition underlying Theorem 2 is not di¢ cult to get. Urban provides better job opportunities
and amenities but has higher childrearing costs, an urban migrant tends to reduce the number of
children but instead invest more in the quality of children, bring their children to better careers and
amenities.
    Just how important this locational quantity-quality trade-o¤ in Theorem 2 is and whether the
conditions required in Theorem 1 are met are, nonetheless, quantitative questions to which we now
turn.


4     Quantitative Analysis
In this section, we quantify our theoretical model, taking China as an example. It is an interesting
case to study due to China' s tight migration regulation and population control in the past decades.
These policies, the hukou regulation system, the reallocation of land entitlement and the one-child
policy, not only provide costs and bene...ts to decision-making but also interconnect to each other
to jointly shape individual' s choices on fertility and rural-urban migration. Our task is thus to
investigate and quantify how these policies in   uence the macroeconomic performance in China.
    Below we ...rst provide a brief overview of the three policies, while relegating the details to
Appendix B. We then calibrate our model to ...t the data from China during 1980-2007. Based
on the calibrated benchmark economy, various counterfactual policy experiments are conducted
to study their consequences for fertility decisions, patterns of rural-urban migration and economic
development in China.


4.1   Institutional Background
China' s migration control is based on the household registration system, hukou, implemented since
1950. Under the hukou regulation, permission is required for formal rural-urban migration and
annual quotas on migrants are controlled by the government. Therefore, labor markets become
locationally segmented. In addition, in cities, most social services are granted with urban hukou.
However, migrants may not automatically obtain urban hukou. While those joining the public sector
(via the channel of zhaogong and zhaogan ) obtain urban hukou immediately, some private-sector
migrants move without urban residency (temporary migrants) or will be granted with urban hukou
at a later date. Notably, there is another channel via attending college education (zhaosheng, as
studied in Liao, Wang, Wang and Yip 2017), which is not the focus of this paper.
    A migration-related policy is the reallocation of land entitlement. In rural areas, people are
bound to land and the distribution of land use rights is mainly based on the household size. Land,
however, is o¢ cially owned by village collectives (communal land). Since people do not have the
property right of land, land cannot be sold by those moving to urban and become idle land. After
several years, village collectives have the right to reallocate the use rights of land according to
changes in the household size. As a result, those moving to urban areas face a risk at losing their
land entitlement. Even with land tenure security reform that formally set the duration of land
contract at 30 years and land transfers are allowed, the transfer contracts are still largely informal

                                                  24
and the problem of land expropriation remains ­ the problem is indeed exacerbated due to urban
expansion and infrastructure development.
    China' s well-known one-child policy also interplays with the hukou system and a¤ects migration
decisions. As the one-child policy was implemented by local governments, the population control
turns out to be di¤erential across locations and sectors. For example, in rural areas, the penalties
on above-quota births could be about 10-20 percent of family income lasting for 3-14 years. Those
working in the public sector may lose the eligibility for promotion, be demoted or be forced to quit
their jobs. Rural-urban migrants who are granted with urban hukou follow the fertility restrictions
of their destinations, while temporary migrants are regulated by the rules of their original places.
As a result, those with high fertility preference may have lower incentive to migrate from rural to
urban areas and become more reluctant to work in the public sector. This subsequently creates an
interactive channel through which migration and fertility decisions are interconnected ­the channel
we explore in this paper.


4.2       Calibration
The period under examination is 1980-2007. That is, we focus on the period after China'economic
reform in 1980 but before the ...nancial tsunami. The majority of rural workers migrate to cities at
young ages. To calibrate the theoretical model, we assume that agents enter the economy at age 18,
remain economically active for 36 years, and exit the economy (or retire) at age 54.4 Thus, the model
period in the calibration is set at 36 years. We categorize those with senior high school degree or
above as high-skilled workers, and others as low-skilled workers. Besides, to better capture various
above-quota penalties implemented by local governments, we assume low-skilled workers bear the
basic locational above-quota ...nes ( U and R ), while high-skilled workers in di¤erent sectors and
                                                           H
locations bear the extra above-quota ...nes ( H , S and P ). The details of above-quota penalties
will be discussed later. In what follows, we ...rst summarize the parameters and variables that we
are going to calibrate and solve. Second, we describe the population ratios that are required for
calibration. Third, we discuss the procedure of determining the parameters and variables, either by
calibration or taken directly from the literature or data. Detailed information on data sources and
the methods we imputed our targets are relegated to Appendix C.
     There are 31 parameters and variables to be calibrated and determined, including (i) preference
parameters: the altruistic factor of savings in o¤spring , preference toward children          and ,
the utility concavity in the quantity of children ", and the migration costs for high- and low-
skilled workers, H and L ; (ii) the proportion of agents enjoying less from having children, ; (iii)
childrearing costs, above-quota penalties and fertility constraint parameters: 0       0
                                                                                  U , R, U , R, H ,
       H
  S , P , nU and nR ; (iv) parameters related to urban bene...ts and urban embarked tax:         , B0
and ; (v) production technology parameters: AS , AP , , , , z , , and q ; (vi) probabilities of
obtaining urban hukou and position in public sector, and ; and (vii) fractions of type-fH; g and
type-fL; g workers migrating to urban areas, H and L .
   4
       China is one of the countries that workers retire at early age. See Appendix C for more discussion on the pattern
of early retirement in China.


                                                            25
      There are two groups of population ratios that we need for calibration, including the begining-
                                                     PH
of-the-period population ( U        H S S
                               R , L , P , U and P L ) and workers that actually work within the period
    U    P H+    S+        R+                                   U
(U   + , P L+ , P H + and R ). We compute the ratio of R using population data by urban and rural

residence, and obtain an average of 0.4579 during 1980-2007. To compute the ratio of H               L , we need
information on rural workers' education level. As the data became available since 1985, we back
out the ratios in 1980-1984 using the growth rate of the H           L ratios from 1985 to 2007. The average
          H                                                S      S
of the L ratios is 0.1076 during 1980-2007. The P and U ratios are calculated using the data from
China Statistical Yearbook. We de...ne employees in state-owned units to be workers in public sector
                                                                                                                S
and employees in other units in cities and towns as urban private sectors. The average of the P
                                             S
ratio during 1980-2007 is 1.5235 and U          is 0.6094. The last begining-of-the-period population ratio
                     PH
we need is the P L ratio. To compute this ratio, we need workers'information on two dimensions:
employed sectors and education levels. As the suitable data is not abundant, we resort to the Urban
Household Survey (UHS). We ...rst distinguish private workers from those working in public sector.
Second, those who have already retired but re-entered the workforce are excluded. Then, using our
                                                                        H
de...nition of high-skilled workers, we obtain a series of the P       PL
                                                                           ratios during 1987-2007. Third, we
                  PH                                                                           H
back out the P L ratios for 1980-1986 based on the geometric growth rate of the P             PL
                                                                                                 ratios over the
                                                   PH
period of 1987-2007. The average ratio of P L during 1980-2007 is 0.8159.
      The second group of population ratios is workers that actually work within the period. The
                                U
...rst ratio that we need is U    + . Urban population (U ) is directly obtained from China Population

and Employment Statistics Yearbook 2010. The di¤erence between U and U + is the rural-urban
   oating population. As the term "mangliu "        , or the so-called "blind   ow", refers to massive migrants
   uxing from rural areas to cities, rural-urban migrants in fact are the majority of China'           s internal
migration. It is thus reasonable to assume that the entire            oating population in data is rural-urban
migrants. The         oating population data is taken from Department of Population and Employment
Statistics, National Bureau of Statistics of China. Using the data, we ...rst compute the ratios of
   oating to urban population. For those years without data, intrapolation is implemented. Then,
                                                                                     U                         U
the ratios of      oating to urban population are converted to the ratios of U        + and the average of U +

during 1980-2007 is 0.8764. To compute the workers that actually work in each sector, we need
to know the sectors that        oating population actually work in. However, the information is very
limited, especially for early years. According to the Rural-Urban Migrant Survey (RUMS), the
proportion of migrant workers employed as production workers, service workers, private enterprise
owners, or self-employed reached 93 percent in 2007, while 81 percent of them were employed in
private enterprises or self-employed. Based on this information, we can infer that roughly 7 percent
of migrants worked in the public sector in 2007, while at most 12 percent of migrants were private
business owners. As it was relatively in         exible for the public sector to hire migrants in early years
and our data period spans from 1980 to 2007, it is natural to see the 7 percent of migrants working
in the public sector as an upper bound. We thus choose to set 5 percent of the entire                      oating
population ending up with jobs in public sector, while 20 percent and 75 percent of the                    oating
population employed as high- and low-skilled workers at private sectors, respectively. With this
assumption, the begining-of-the-period population ratios and the population identity equations, we
                                           H+       +           +                     P H+
are able to compute the ratios of P            , S , and R
                                          P L+ P H +           R . The average of P L+ during 1980-2007 is


                                                       26
                               +                                               +
0.6348, the average of PS                                            R
                           H + becomes 3.0262, and the average of R is 0.9354.
                                                                                  5

      Now, we are ready to calibrate the model to data from China. The rural per capita income yR ,
which is simply equal to x in equation (2), is normalized to one during 1980-2007. In rural China,
land use rights are distributed based on family size and reallocated in every 5-10 years. Hence
the average duration for land reallocation is 7.5 years. Adjusted by the model period, we obtain
    = 0:2083. China Statistical Yearbook reports the average rural land per person. Thus q = 2:3315
(mou) during the period of 1980-2007. Then, the farming technology z can be computed from
equation (2) and equal to 0.4067.
      To pin down the parameters in urban production sectors, we need three income ratios from
              H
        wS wP                          yU
data, w  H , w L (skill premium) and y
                                        R
                                           (urban premium).6 We use the data in UHS to calculate the
         P    P
...rst two wage ratios and the data from China Statistical Yearbook to compute urban premium. For
the years without data, intrapolation is implemented to impute the corresponding values. Thus,
             wH               wS                  yU
we obtain wP   L = 1:3944, w H = 0:8814, and y
                                                   R
                                                     = 1:9641 for the averages of 1980-2007. We set
               P               P
    = 0:8333, which corresponds to an elasticity of substitution (EIS) between high- and low-skilled
workers to be 6. This value of the EIS between high- and low-skilled workers falls within the range
of the EIS estimates for East Asian countries.7 By setting the CES production share of high-skilled
                                                                     wH
workers      at 0.5, is calibrated to match the skill premium, wP      L , and is equal to 1.3608. The
                                                                       P
technological scaling factors of public sector and private ...rms, AS and AP , are jointly calibrated by
matching the urban premium y       U
                                 yR and wP
                                           wS
                                            H . AS and AP are equal to 2.0214 and 3.3287, respectively.

      Next, we turn to decide the four proportions or probabilities, , , H and L . First, we compute
    based on the survey data of family size preference by categorizing agents preferring less than or
equal to one child as -type agents, and those desiring more than one child as -type agents. We
obtain = 0:15.8 The rest three probabilities or proportions of migration ( , H and L ) are jointly
                                      H+      +
calibrated to match the ratios of P       , S , and 1 U
                                     P L+ P H +
                                                          U
                                                           + over 1980-2007. The calibrated values for

   , H and L are 0.2, 0.019 and 0.3576, respectively. The implied fraction of high-skilled movers is
16.6 percent, three times as high as that of low-skilled movers (5.36 percent). Thus, skill sorting in
our calibrated MME is consistent with Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014) who ...nd robustly urban
workers to have higher skills measured by years of schooling using data from 151 countries.
   5
       In Appendix D, sensitivity tests using di¤erent but reasonable assumptions on the fraction of oating populations
in di¤erent sectors are performed. By recalibrating the model and re-conducting all the policy experiments which
will be elaborated below, we ...nd that all policy experiments results on urbanization rates, fertility responses, skill
premium and urban premium are very robust.
   6                                                                                                      YS +YP
     Urban per capita income yU is de...ned as the average output per worker in urban areas, i.e., yU =     U+
                                                                                                                   , while
rural per capita income is simply yR = x = 1.
   7
     In the literature, the estimates for developed countries range from 1 to 3 (see, for example, Autor, Katz and
Krueger 1998;, Acemoglu 2003; and Ciccone and Peri 2005), while the estimated values for Asian economies are
larger, mostly falling between 2 and 7. For example, Toh and Tat (2012) estimated that the value for Singapore is
4.249. Te Velde and Morrissey (2004) used data from Singapore, Hong Kong, Korea, the Philippines and Thailand
and obtained a value of 2.78. The results in Gindling and Sun (2002) imply that the value in Taiwan is between 2.3
and 7.4.
   8
     See Appendix C for the detailed description on the survey data of family size preference.


                                                           27
     Regarding the parameters for the institution of the hukou system, and , we determine their
values from the literature. Prior to 1994, it was very di¢ cult for rural migrants to obtain urban
hukou. After 1994, rural migrants can get urban hukou, usually at a range of time for two to ...ve
years, via the blue-stamp system. We thus assume that = 0 prior to 1994 and = 2+5          2 = 3:5 years
for a migrant to obtain urban residency and hence to be quali...ed for urban bene...ts. Therefore,
the average , the fraction of lifetime that a migrant worker successfully obtained urban residency
to enjoy urban bene...ts, is 1 0+3    :5                                               9
                                     2 =36 = 0:4514 for the period of 1980 to 2007. As for , based
on ...eld interviews, only about 11 percent of the interviews from rural areas successfully obtained
urban residency, so we set at 0.11.10
     We now turn to determine the fertility constraints in rural and urban areas, nU and nR , and
the basic above-quota ...nes, R and U . According to Ebenstein (2010), the average fertility quota
per couple in urban and in rural China were one child and 1.6 children, respectively. Since our
theoretical framework is a unisex model, to link the data to our model, we follow the standard
method in the endogenous fertility literature to divide the fertility quota per family by two. We
thus set nU and nR to 0.5 and 0.8, respectively. The implementation of the one-child policy varied
across regions and sectors. The above-quota penalty could be not only in the form of monetary
...nes, but also in non-monetary forms. For example, workers in the public sector could lose jobs if
violating the fertility policy. As there is no perfect method to impute the total above-quota penalties
paid by parents, we assume that low-skilled workers bear the basic above-quota ...nes, R for rural
low-skilled workers and U for urban low-skilled workers. High-skilled workers bear extra sector-
                                                                        H
speci...c ...nes (on top of the basic ...nes), which are H , S and P for rural high-skilled workers,
urban employees in public sector and urban high-skilled worker in private sector, respectively. The
three extra ...nes born by high-skilled workers are discussed in the next paragraph. Here we focus
on the determination of the basic above-quota ...nes. Denote ~ R as the proportion of the basic
above-quota ...ne to a rural agent'  s wage and ~ U is the proportion to an urban agent'   s wage. Using
                                                                 ~               ~
the penalty data provided by Ebenstein (2010), we obtain R =1.5928 and U =1.6654.11
     The determinations of the two childrearing costs ( 0             0
                                                              U and R ) and the three extra above-quota
                                                        H
...nes born by high-skilled workers ( H , S , and P ) are summarized as follows. First, similar to
                                              0   0                  H
the basic above-quota ...nes, we de...ne ~ U , ~ R , ~ H , ~ S and ~ P as the proportions of childrearing
                                                               0
cost (or extra ...ne) to an agent's wage. Second, we set ~ U at 25 percent of an urban agent'    s income
                                                                                     0                 H
as it is a common value in urban China. Third, the rest four parameters ( R , H , S and ~ P )
                                               12                                  ~     ~   ~
are calibrated by matching four fertility targets nL         H           H 13 Thus, we have ~ 0 =0.4386,
                                                       R , nR , nS and nP .                    R
   9
     The period we examine is 1980-2007, and 1980-1994 roughly amounts to half of the examined period.
  10
     See Appendix C for more information on the determination for and .
  11
     In other words, the rate of total above-quota ...ne paid by rural low-skilled worker is ~ R ; the rate of total ...ne paid
by rural high-skilled worker is ~ R + ~ H ; an urban low-skilled worker pays the rate ~ U ; a worker in public sector bears
                                                                                               H
the rate ~ U + ~ S ; and an urban high-skilled worker in private sector bears the rate ~ U + ~ P .
  12
     See Appendix C for more literature discussion on urban child rearing cost.
  13
     The method we impute the fertility targets and the data sources are relegated to Appendix C. In the calibration,
                                                        ~F
for example, we compute a weighted fertility of P H and P H
                                                            to match nH
                                                                      P . Fertility in other sectors are conducted

accordingly. Besides, as our model is unisex, we match a half of the imputed fertility in the calibration.



                                                             28
~ =5.3123, ~ =2.1439 and ~ H =0.2382.
  H            S               P
    There are four preference parameters left (", , and ). The concavity in the utility function
for the number of children " is set at 0.1, which is roughly equal to the value used in Gobbi (2013).
For the altruistic factor , the Leontief preference implies that c = (1 )nb , and hence nb c
                                                                                              = 1 .
Therefore, 1      represents the fraction of income being spent on own consumption and is the
fraction of income for saving. With the information on rural per capita income and consumption
reported in China Statistical Yearbook, we compute a time series of and the average of becomes
0.2124 during 1980-2007. We thus set at 0.21. Preference parameters are not observable, so we
simply set at 0.1. The last preference parameter, , is jointly calibrated with the aforementioned
                                                      0              H
rural childrearing cost and the three extra ...nes ( ~ , ~ , ~ and ~ ). In addition to the four data
                                                    R   H    S       P
moments of fertility we described above, we also match nL    P in the joint calibration. The calibrated
   is 0.5346.
     We are left with the calibration for the urban embarked tax , urban bene...ts B , the government's
technology scaling factor in the provision of urban bene...ts B0 and the migration costs of rural type-
fH; g and type-fL; g agents, H and L . There is no perfect measure to proxy urban bene...ts.
As urban workers usually enjoy government provided pension bene...ts, we thus use urban pension
bene...ts to proxy B . To compute B , we use the pension replacement rate in China. It is multiplied
by the urban average income during the examined period and adjusted by the model period as well
as the average years that an urban worker enjoys after retirement. Thus, B is 0.9803. Following
Song, Storesletten, Wang and Zilibotti (2015), the urban social security tax is set at 20% of an
urban agent'  s income. The total social security taxes are collected to ...nance urban bene...ts. With
the technology that the government provides urban bene...ts, we are able to determine B0 , which
is 2.4863. Finally, H and L are calibrated using the indi¤erence equations for migration, (20)
and (21), and are equal to 0.4230 and 0.1539, respectively. This result indicates that high-skilled
workers who enjoy more from having children su¤er more from migrating to cities. The calibration
result is summarized in Table 2.

                                     [Insert Table 2 about here]

    In Table 3, we further report important ratios implied by the calibration results. Our results
indicate that private sector has much better technology than the public sector and the rural agricul-
tural sector. Among high-skilled rural workers, more than 15 percent of them decide to migrate to
cities, while about 95 percent of rural low-skilled workers choose to stay in countryside. Compared
with rural workers, the child-rearing costs for workers in the public sector and private high-skilled
workers are both higher. However, private low-skilled parents bear slightly lower child-rearing costs
than rural workers. This could be due to the higher implicit cost in rural areas, such as living far
away from schools or due to relatively higher child-rearing cost for rural high-skilled parents (an
argument by Cheung, 2018, for examining demographic transition and structural transformation in
the U.S. at the turn of the twentieth century). Regarding the above-quota penalty, workers in the
public sector were penalized the most heavily, followed by rural high-skilled workers, while rural
low-skilled workers were punished the least. The result is consistent with the reality. In fact, rural

                                                  29
high-skilled workers are more likely to be leaders in the village, and tend to hold positions desig-
nated by the government. The result indicates that no matter the working location was, workers
in the public sector were being seriously monitored by the government. Based on the calibrated
parameters, we now proceed to policy experiments.


                                      [Insert Table 3 about here]


4.3   Policy Experiments
Based on the benchmark model, we are now ready to conduct policy experiments. More speci...cally,
we want to investigate how the three types of policies, including (i) the population control polices, (ii)
the migration polices (or the hukou regulations), and (iii) the land entitlement reallocation policies,
a¤ect the joint decisions on rural-urban migration and fertility and the macroeconomic performance
of China. In line with the discussion in Section 3.1, we restrict our attention to a benchmark economy
with the most plausible migration pattern: Type-fH; g workers always migrate to cities, type-
fL; g workers always stay in the rural, whereas type-fH; g and type-fL; g agents are indi¤erent
between migrating and staying in rural areas. As some of our counterfactual experiments involve
large changes in the institutions that workers face, we may end up with corner solutions ( H = L =
0), or SMEs with pure skill-based or skill-based migration ( H = 1; L 2 [0; 1)) or pure fertility-
based or fertility-based migration ( H = 0; L 2 (0; 1]). The fertility responses, the population
ratios and the relative income levels are thus led by the asymmetric structure that only high-
skilled workers with high fertility preference (type-fH; g) and low-skilled workers with low fertility
preference (type-fL; g) respond to the counterfactual experiments.
    What follows below is a detailed discussion of the policy experiments. We are particularly inter-
ested in learning the migration patterns, the fertility behavior and other important macroeconomic
variables and ratios under di¤erent scenarios. To proceed, we ...rst compute the equilibrium of the
benchmark model based on the calibrated parameters. We then change the value of the relevant
parameter of the concerned experiment to compute the new equilibrium, and calculate the relative
changes to the benchmark model. The results on migration decisions and population ratios are
summarized in Table 4. To better compare the migration patterns across policies, in Table 4 we
provide the fraction of the high-skilled migrants among the total high-skilled rural workers, the
fraction of the low-skilled migrants among the total low-skilled rural workers, and the fraction of
all migrants among the total rural workers for each experiment. Table 5 reports the total fertility
rates. It is noteworthy that in the calibration we match a half of the total fertility rates. However,
to be comparable with data, the values reported in Table 5 have been multiplied by two. Finally,
the income levels and the relative income ratios are presented in Table 6.


                                      [Insert Table 4 about here]
                                      [Insert Table 5 about here]
                                      [Insert Table 6 about here]



                                                   30
1. Experiments on population policy
     Two experiments are conducted here, both considering scenarios with a relaxation of the one-
child policy. In the ...rst experiment, we consider a uniform fertility constraint in both the urban and
rural areas, with the constraint being set at 0.8 (nU = nR = 0:8) ­a value that was prevalent in rural
China in the benchmark model in a unisex setting.14 Urban fertility control is thus more relaxed
under this experiment. In this scenario, we ...nd that rural workers are more willing to migrate
to cities: Total rural migrants as a percentage of rural residents increases by 12.59 percent, with
the high-skilled workers with high fertility preferences responding much more to such relaxation,
therefore leading to a lower H + =L+ ratio in rural areas. As there are more high- than low-skilled
workers migrating to cities, P H + =P L+ increases, dragging down the wage for the high-skilled by 0.48
percent and slightly increasing the wage for the low-skilled by 0.44 percent. The skill premium thus
decreases by 0.92 percent. Interestingly and noteworthy, both urban and rural per capita income
increase. The former is due to a larger stock of high-skilled workers in urban areas, while the
later is because of land reallocation owing to fewer workers in rural areas. As the childrearing costs
increases with income levels, rural stayers and private sector low-skilled workers end up having fewer
children. For private high-skilled workers in urban areas, even though the urban fertility control is
relaxed, those workers who enjoy more from having children do not respond much to the policy by
increasing their fertility. This is because of the higher child-rearing costs in urban areas. As one
can observe from Table 5, the magnitude of the increases in the total fertility rates for public sector
and private high-skilled workers are much less than that of the decreases in the total fertility rates
for rural workers.
     In the second experiment, we consider a scenario where the population control is completely
lifted. Agents can have children up to their biological limit, which is set at 5.5 based on the total
fertility rates in the pre-population-control period in China.15 Total fertility rates increase both in
rural and urban areas, rising from the range of 1.18 and 2.21 in the benchmark model to the range
of 1.96 to 2.77. The increase in fertility is higher for rural high-skilled than rural low-skilled because
the staying type-fH; g workers respond more to the policy than type-fL; g workers do. Along
the line, rural-urban migration decreases by 2.74 percent, with the reduction in migration coming
from the high-skilled workers more ­ indeed all high-skilled workers with high fertility preference
(type-fH; g) would stay in rural areas and a fertility-based SME arises. As a result, there are
fewer high-skilled workers in urban areas, leading to a lower urban per capita output, a lower rural
per capita output because of more workers staying in rural areas, a slightly higher skill premium,
and a higher urban-rural income gap ( y     U
                                          yR ).

2. Experiments on migration policy
   We consider three scenarios for experiments on migration policy, including (i) migrants can never
obtain urban residency ( = 0), (ii) migrant workers are not eligible for urban bene...ts even if they
have obtained urban residency ( = 0 and therefore no tax payments), and (iii) migrant workers
obtaining urban residency enjoy full urban bene...ts as urban natives ( = 1 and pay full urban
 14
      Recall that the observed fertility rates are our normalized ...gures multiplied by two.
 15
      The biological fertility limit is set at 5.5 per family. Thus, in our experiment, the limit is 5.5/2=2.75 per worker.



                                                            31
earmarked tax ).
    In the ...rst and the second experiments, we encounter a corner solution ­ both type-fH; g
and type-fL; g workers decide to stay in the rural. With zero low-skilled migration, rural-urban
migration is simply composed by type-fH; g migration. As a result, the skill premium in urban
areas and the H + =L+ ratio in rural areas both decrease. Rural workers now are allocated with
less arable land because of more stayers in the rural, leading to a decrease of 4.07 percent in rural
per capita income. Furthermore, due to the relatively lower childrearing cost in the rural, fertility
rates of rural high- and low-skilled workers increase, with the rural high-skilled fertility increases
more because, among high-skilled workers, only the type-fH; g stay in rural areas, while the low-
skilled stayers comprise both preference types. The main di¤erences between the two counterfactual
experiments are only in the private high-skilled fertility and urban bene...ts. When migrants can
never obtain urban residency in the ...rst experiment, the private high-skilled fertility is purely
contributed by urban natives. However, in the second experiment where migrants are not eligible
for urban bene...ts but can obtain urban residency, the private high-skilled fertility is a weighted
average of urban natives and new comers of purely type-fH; g migrants. It is thus not surprising to
see that in the second experiment where migrants enjoy no urban bene...ts, the private high-skilled
workers have lower fertility.
    The third experiment conducts a scenario that migrant workers who obtain urban residency enjoy
full urban bene...ts as urban natives . Recall that in the calibration, urban bene...ts are ...nanced by
an urban social security tax, which is proportional to urban workers'income, and hence workers with
higher incomes bear a heavier burden. However, regardless of taxes paid, all urban natives enjoy
the same full urban bene...ts and all migrant workers who successfully obtain urban residency enjoy
the same urban bene...t of B . That is, urban low-skilled workers gain from such a scheme, while
urban high-skilled workers shoulder more "responsibility" in providing urban bene...ts. A policy of
granting full bene...ts to rural-urban migrants upon receiving urban residency is thus undoubtedly
much more attractive to low-skilled than to high-skilled migrants. Indeed, this is the result we ...nd
in the third experiment: The rural high-skilled workers who enjoy more from having children would
not move to cities ( H = 0) because of the foreseen tax burden and lower urban bene...ts enjoyed
when the low-skilled counterparts     ood into cities. In contrast, all rural low-skilled workers who
enjoy less from having children decide to migrate to cities ( L = 1) to gain the bene...ts. This leads
to an unusual scenario of pure fertility-based SME. In this case, the P H + =P L+ ratio decreases by
38.03 percent, resulting in an 8.3 percent increase in the skill premium. Because of the out          ow
of the low-skilled from the rural and the in    ow of the low-skilled to the urban, urban per capita
income decreases by 2.59 percent and rural per capita income increases by more than 8 percent,
shrinking the urban-rural income gap by nearly 10 percent. Moreover, rural fertility rates both
decrease as rural income levels increase. Our ...ndings are in line with the international migration
model of Azarnert (2019): Any migration policy inducing more migration         ows to a higher income
location (urban) is accompanied by lower fertility in that location.

3. Experiment on land system
   Finally, we turn our attention to land reallocation policy. The land left idle by migrant workers


                                                  32
appears to be a waste of productive resources in rural areas. To prevent the waste of productivity,
people may propose to redistribute the idle land to rural stayers as soon as possible. However,
land reallocation implies that rural-urban migrants would lose their land use rights. This implicit
cost discourages rural-urban migration. We therefore perform two counterfactual experiments to
investigate the macroeconomic e¤ects of land reallocation policies, including (i) an immediate land
reallocation policy, featuring zero land tenure security ( = 0); and (ii) a more secured land tenure
policy that guarantees 15 years of land tenure ( = 15     36 = 0:4167) ­ that is, compared with the
benchmark economy, the duration of land reallocation is doubled.
    As shown in Table 5, our results show that the e¤ects of land reallocation policies on total
fertility rates are relative minor compared to other experiments. However, in Table 4, we ...nd that
the immediate loss of the entitlement of rural land deters rural-urban migration: Rural high-skilled
workers who enjoy more from having children are not moving to cities anymore. The fraction of
the rural low-skilled movers also drops by 13.94 percent. Thus, similar to the experiment of no
population control, a fertility-based SME arises. Because of the relatively large decrease in the
low-skilled migration, the skill premium decreases by 0.56 percent, but urban per capita output still
increases by 0.17 percent as there are fewer lower income workers in urban areas.16 Despite more
stayers in rural areas, due to more e¢ cient use of land, rural per capita income increases by 0.47
percent, and the urban-rural income gap is narrowed by 0.3 percent.
    It is noteworthy that immediate land reallocation brings two opposing e¤ects on the overall
income level (y ) in the economy: the direct e¤ect to increase overall output per capita when land
is being utilized more e¢ ciently, and the migration discouragement e¤ect to depress overall output
per capita when there are more rural stayers. As rural per capita output is lower than urban per
capita output, keeping urban and rural per capita output constant, the average overall per capita
output will be lower if there are more workers in rural areas. The sum of the two opposite e¤ects of
immediate land reallocation on overall output per capita is therefore ambiguous. Our quantitative
results show that the migration discouragement e¤ect outweighs the direct e¤ect, and the overall
output per capita slightly decreases by 0.1 percent.17
    In contrast to the immediate land reallocation policy, a guaranteed land tenure of 15 years
promotes more migration for both the high- and the low-skilled, and slightly increases urban high-
skilled fertility and discourages urban low-skilled fertility as more high-skilled parents who enjoy
more from children and low-skilled workers enjoy less from children move to cities. Due to longer
idle duration of land, the rural per capita output is slightly depressed. The urban per capita output
is lowered because of more low-skilled workers in cities dragging down the average income levels,
resulting in a higher skill premium. Despite the slightly lower urban and rural per capita output,
  16
       The average H=L ratio is 0.1076 in 1980-2007, and rural high-skilled workers account for roughly 9.72 percent of
total rural population. The decreases in the migration of rural high- and low-skilled workers are 0.16 percent and 0.67
percent in this experiment, respectively.
                                              +     +       yU f U +H [ +(1            L
                                                                                ) H ]+ R           g+yR f H (1   )(1        L
                                                                                                                       H )+ R [   (1       L )+1    ]g
  17                                           U +yR R
       The overall output per capita is y = yU U + +R+ =         R  R                          L          R
                                                                                                        U +1                                             .
                                                                                                        R
                                                                                      H                                      L
Keeping yU and yR constant and yU > yR , when           H   and      L   are lower,   R
                                                                                          (1        )    H (yU   yR ) and    R         L   (yU     yR )
are both lower, leading to lower y .



                                                                33
the overall per capita output in the economy is still higher by 0.74 percent because of the migration
encouragement e¤ect.
    Our results on land policy echo that of Ngai, Pissarides and Wang (2019): A less secure land
tenure system is an obstacle to urbanization and industrialization in China. Our paper also cor-
roborates with the ...ndings of the occupational misallocation model by Gottlieb and Grobovs         ek
(2019) that is calibrated to Ethiopia: Relaxing a "use it or lose it" land policy raises overall per
capita income moderately. But di¤erent from their sorting approach, our land policy e¤ect on the
urban-rural productivity gap is reversed owing to two novel channels that work through the change
in arable land supply in rural and the skill composition (hence wage premium) in urban production.
Regarding the e¤ects of land policy on fertility rates, our results are in line with that of Almond,
Li and Zhang (2019): The e¤ects of land policies (or reforms) on overall fertility rates are relatively
small compared to the e¤ects of population policies on fertility rates.

4. Summary
     The above experiments all point out the presence of a locational quantity-quality trade-o¤ of
children: More migration is accompanied by a lower fertility but higher overall per capita output.
No population control leads to a higher fertility for both the high- and the low-skilled, accompanied
by lower migration ­ especially a larger reduction in the high-skilled migration and thereby a
lower overall output per capita. Relaxing urban population control to rural is better than entirely
removing population control as it induces more high-skilled migration, leading to higher urban
output and overall output per capita. Stricter population control policies in urban areas may not
be ideal in lowering fertility rates from a nationwide perspective because such a tightened fertility
policy in urban areas deters high-skilled workers with high fertility preferences from migrating to
cities. This is undesirable because had they migrated to urban areas and faced a higher child-
rearing cost, they would have naturally adjusted their fertility down. Urban sprawl control policy
such as eliminating urban bene...ts to all rural migrants will raise urban bene...ts enjoyed by workers
with urban residency as planned but would grant no incentive for rural-urban migration, which is
undesirable for advancing the economy. Urban promotion policy such as providing full bene...t to
all rural migrants would induce more migration overall but su¤er "adverse-selection"by motivating
much more low-skilled but less high-skilled workers to migrate. With more generous rural land
entitlement, migration incentives become stronger. Rural per capita output is lower due to more
idle land left behind by migrants while urban per capita output decreases due to the in      ux of more
low-skilled workers. Nonetheless, the overall per capita output is higher due to the urban wage
premium ­ a result that is possible because of the endogenous population weights by virtue of
rural-urban migration.
     To sum up, when formulating policies for developing countries, one shall not neglect policy
impacts via migration and fertility responses. Overlooking the locational quantity-quality trade-
o¤ of children may lead to nonnegligible biases in assessing the consequences and e¤ectiveness of
government policies.




                                                  34
5    Conclusions
We have constructed a dynamic competitive migration equilibrium framework with heterogeneous
agents in skills and fertility preferences to explore the macroeconomy consequences of the interplay
of migration and fertility decisions. We have established a locational quantity-quality trade-o¤ of
children and found conditions to support a mixed migration equilibrium. By calibrating the model
to ...t the data from China, we have identi...ed interesting interactions between fertility choices and
migration decisions in various counterfactual experiments with regard to changes in migration,
population control or rural land entitlement policies. We have shown that all such changes induce a
locational quantity-quality trade-o¤ of children in which more rural-urban migration is accompanied
by lower fertility but higher overall per capita output.
      Regarding policy implications, we have quanti...ed that relaxing urban population control to
rural is better than entirely removing population control, and stricter population control policies
in urban areas may not be ideal in lowering fertility rates from a nationwide perspective. We
have found that urban sprawl control may be undesirable for advancing the economy, and urban
promotion policy may su¤er adverse-selection by inducing more low-skilled to migrate. We have
also shown that, with more generous rural land entitlement, rural per capita output and urban per
capita output can both be lower but the overall per capita output of the nation can still rise as a
result of increased rural-urban migration. We have thus concluded that overlooking the locational
quantity-quality trade-o¤ of children may lead to nonnegligible biases in assessing the consequences
and e¤ectiveness of government policies.
      This paper is, to our best knowledge, the ...rst to examine the dynamic interplays of migration
and fertility decisions and their macroeconomic consequences. To ensure tractability and calibration
with limited data, we have simpli...ed the framework and restricted our attention to only a limited
number of issues. There are thus several possible avenues to extend the current work. For brevity, we
will discuss but two. First, our analysis is exclusively positive and hence possible to be generalized to
allow for normative analyses, such as to examine optimal taxation or subsidy related to urban labor
markets and migration, with endogenous provision of urban amenities and city government ...nancing
in a Tiebout equilibrium context as in Conley and Konishi (2002). Second, because the state of the
macroeconomy changes over time, it may be valuable to examine whether a migration policy or a
fertility policy may better advance the economy at di¤erent stages of economic development. Of
course, to conduct these tasks would lose the tractability of the model, which is beyond the scope
of the current paper.




                                                   35
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, 2003, "Cross-country inequality trends," The Economic Journal, 113, F121-
     F149.
 [2] Aghion P. and P. Bolton, 1997, "A theory of trickle-down growth and development," Review
     of Economic Studies, 64(2), pp. 151-172.
 [3] Almond, Douglas, Hongbin Li and Shuang Zhang, 2019, "Land reform and sex selection in
     China," Journal of Political Economy, 127(2), pp. 560-585.
 [4] Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger, 1998, "Computing inequality: Have
     computers changed the labor market?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), pp. 1169-
     1213.
 [5] Azarnert, Leonid, 2019, "Migration, congestion, and growth,"Macroeconomic Dynamics, 23(8),
     pp. 3035-3064.
 [6] Bernard, Aude, Martin Bell and Jim Cooper, 2018, "Internal migration and education: A cross-
     national comparison," Background Report to the 2019 Global Education Monitoring Report.
     Paris, France:UNESCO.
 [7] Bond, Eric, Raymond Riezman and Ping Wang, 2016, "Urbanization and economic develop-
     ment: A tale of two barriers," Working Paper.
 [8] Cheung, T, 2018, "Schooling, skill demand and di¤erential fertility in the process of structural
     transformation," IEAS Working Paper.
 [9] Ciccone, Antonio and Giovanni Peri, 2005, "Long-run substitutability between more and less
     educated workers: Evidence from U.S. states, 1950-1990," The Review of Economics and Sta-
     tistics, 87(4), pp. 652-663.
[10] Conley, John P. and Hideo Konishi, 2002, "Migration-proof Tiebout equilibrium: Existence
     and asymptotic e¢ ciency," Journal of Public Economics, 86 (2), pp. 243-262.
[11] Ebenstein, Avraham, 2010, "The `   missing girls'of China and the unintended consequences of
     the one child policy," Journal of Human Resources, 45(1), pp. 87-115.
[12] Garriga, C., Aaron Hedlund, Yang Tang and Ping Wang, 2017, "Rural-urban migration, struc-
     tural transformation, and housing markets in China,"Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Work-
     ing Paper 2014-028A.
[13] Gindling, T.H. and Way Sun, 2002, "Higher education planning and the wages of workers with
     higher education in Taiwan," Economics of Education Review, 21(2), pp. 153-169.
[14] Gobbi, Paula E., 2013, "A model of voluntary childlessness," Journal of Population Economics,
     26(3), pp. 963-982.
[15] Gollin, Douglas, David Lagakos and Michael E. Waugh, 2014, "The agricultural productivity
     gap," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129 (2), pp. 939-993.
[16] Gottlieb, Charles, and Jan Grobovsek, 2019, "Communal land and agricultural productivity,"
     Journal of Development Economics, 138, pp. 135-152.
[17] Harris, John R. and Michael P. Todaro, 1970, "Migration, unemployment and development: A
     two-sector analysis," The American Economic Review, 60(1), pp. 126-142.

                                                 36
[18] Lagakos, David, 2020, "Urban-rural gaps in the developing world: Does internal migration o¤er
     opportunities?" Journal of Economic perspectives, 34(3), pp. 172-192.

[19] Laing, D., Park, C. and Wang, P. 2005. "A modi...ed Harris-Todaro model of rural-urban mi-
     gration for China,"in Critical Issues in China'
                                                   s Growth and Development in Honor of Gregory
     Chow (edited by F. Kwan and E. Yu), Ashgate Publishing Limited, 245-264.

[20] Lewis, W. Arthur, 1954, "Economic development with unlimited supplies of labour," The
     Manchester School, 22(2), pp. 139­191.

[21] Liao, Pei-Ju, 2013, "The one-child policy: A macroeconomic analysis," Journal of Development
     Economics, 101, pp. 49-62.

[22] Liao, Pei-Ju, Ping Wang, Yin-Chi Wang and Chong Kee Yip, 2017, "Educational choice, rural-
     urban migration and economic development," NBER Working Paper No. 23939.

[23] Lucas, Robert E., 2004, "Life earnings and rural-urban migration," Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, 112(S1), pp. S29­S59.

[24] Ngai, L. R., C.A. Pissarides, and J. Wang, 2019, "China's mobility barriers and employment
     allocations," Journal of the European Economic Association, 17(5), pp. 1617-1653.

[25] Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, Yikai Wang and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2015, "Sharing high growth
     across generations: pensions and demographic transition in China," American Economic Jour-
     nal: Macroeconomics, 7(2), pp. 1­  39.

[26] Te Velde, Dirk and Oliver Morrissey, 2004, "Foreign direct investment, skills and wage inequal-
     ity in East Asia," Journal of the Asia Paci...c Economy, 9(3), pp. 348-369.

[27] Todaro, Michael P., 1969, "A model of labor migration and urban unemployment in less
     developed countries," The American Economic Review 59, pp. 138-148.

[28] Toh, Ruby and Hui Weng Tat, 2012, "Trade liberalization, labor demand shifts and earnings
     inequality in Singapore," Review of Urban and Regional Development Studies, 24(3), pp. 65-82.




                                                37
                               Table 1: Notation of Population Flow

Notation   Explanation
Beginning-of-the-period Population
   U       Total urban workers with urban residency
   R       Total rural workers with rural residency
   H       Rural high-skilled workers with rural residency
    L      Rural low-skilled workers with rural residency
    S      Public sector high-skilled workers with urban residency
  P  H     Private sector high-skilled workers with urban residency
   P L     Private sector low-skilled workers with urban residency
Within-the-period Population
  U+       Total workers working in urban areas
  R  +     Total workers working in rural areas
  H+       High-skilled workers working in rural areas
  L +      Low-skilled workers working in rural areas
   ~F
   S       Migrant workers in public sector with urban residency
  P~FH     Migrant high-skilled workers in private sector with urban residency
  P~IH     Migrant high-skilled workers in private sector without urban residency
   ~F
   P L     Migrant low-skilled workers in private sector with urban residency
   ~IL
   P       Migrant low-skilled workers in private sector without urban residency
Fraction and Probability
           Fraction of rural population enjoying less from having children
  H        Fraction of rural high-skilled workers enjoying more from children and migrating to cities
   L       Fraction of rural low-skilled workers enjoying less from children and migrating to cities
           Probability of high-skilled migrants to obtain a job in the public sector
           Probability of obtaining urban residency
   µ       Fraction of lifetime that migrants enjoy urban benefits
                                                                                  Table 2: Calibration
Parameters    Values    Target    Value of target   Explanation/Data source
Production
     z        0.4067                                Solved by equation (2)
     q        2.3315                                Average land per person (unit: mou) from China Statistical Yearbook
              0.2083                                Average land reallocation time is around 5-10 years and adjusted by the model period
                            yU
    AS        2.0214        yR            1.9641    AS and AP are jointly solved
                            wS
    AP        3.3287        wH
                                          0.8814    AS and AP are jointly solved
                             P
              0.8333                                Elasticity of substitution between high- and low-skilled workers is 6
                 0.5                                Preset
                            wH
                             P                              wH
                                                             P
              1.3608        wL
                                          1.3944    Match   wL
                                                                 which is taken from UHS
                             P                               P
Preferences
                   0.15                               The fraction of rural families preferring less than or equal to one child in 1980s
                    0.1                               Preset
                0.5346         nL           0.9859    ,   ~0, ~ ~         ~H
                                 P                         R H , S and P are jointly solved
                    0.1                               Preset and close to Gobbi (2013)
                   0.21                               1 -  matches the average consumption rates as a percentage of disposable income in rural area
    B0          2.4863          B           0.9803 Solved by equation (38)
   H            0.4230                                Solved by the migration indifference equation (20)
    L           0.1539                                Solved by the migration indifference equation (21)
Probabilities/Duration of time
                              S+
                    0.2     PH +
                                            3.0262     , H and L are jointly solved
     µ          0.4514                                Average duration to obtain urban hukou via the blue-stamp system; See Appendix C
                   0.11                               About 11 percent of rural-urban migrants successfully obtained urban residency; See Appendix C
                    0.2                               Song, Storesletten, Wang and Zilibotti (2015)
Fraction of workers migrate
                            PH +
    H             0.019      PL +
                                            0.6348     , H and L are jointly solved
                               U
    L           0.3576     1- U +           0.1236     , H and L are jointly solved
Fertility related
    n¯R             0.8                               A half of average rural fertility constraint in Ebenstein (2010)
    n
    ¯U              0.5                               A half of average urban fertility constraint in Ebenstein (2010)
     ~0            0.25                               Preset and in the range of the values reported in the literature; See Appendix C
      U
     ~0         0.4386         n L          1.1046      , ~0, ~ ~         ~H
       R                         R                         R H , S and P are jointly solved
    R~          1.5928                                Computed from the data provided by Ebenstein (2010)
     ~U         1.6654                                Computed from the data provided by Ebenstein (2010)
Extra penalty for high-skilled workers to have extra children
     ~H         5.3123         nH           0.6929    ,   ~0, ~ ~         ~H
                                R                          R H , S and P are jointly solved
     ~S         2.1439         nS           0.5900    ,   ~0, 
                                                           R
                                                              ~H , ~S and ~ H are jointly solved
                                                                           P
     ~ H        0.2382          H           0.6728    ,    0
                                                          ~ , ~ ~         ~H
      P                        nP                          R H , S and P are jointly solved
                                                          Table 3: Model Implications

              Ratio               Value                   Explanation
              Total Factor Productivity
                AP /AS           1.6467                   Private relative to public sector
                AP /z            8.1849                   Private relative to rural agricultural sector
              Fraction of Moving
                 + (1 -  )H 0.1661                        Fraction of rural high-skilled workers moving to cities
                 L               0.0536                   Fraction of rural low-skilled workers moving to cities
              Child-rearing Cost
                  ~ 0 wS
                   U
                  ~ 0 yR
                  
                                           1.1523         Public relative to rural worker
                    R
                  ~ 0 wH
                   U P
                   ~ 0 yR                  1.3074         Private high-skilled relative to rural worker
                    R
                  ~
                  U 0 wL
                        P
                  ~ 0 yR
                  
                                           0.9376         Private low-skilled relative to rural worker
                    R
              Penalty on Above-quota Birth
                  (  ~U +  ~S )wS
                     ~
                  (R +H )yR~               1.1152         Public relative to rural high-skilled worker
                  (  ~U +  ~ H )wH
                             P   P
                   (  ~R +  ~H )yR         0.6323         Private high-skilled relative to rural high-skilled worker
                   ~U wL
                         P
                    ~R yR                  1.7198         Private low-skilled relative to rural low-skilled worker
                  (  ~U +  ~S )wS
                        ~
                       R yR
                                           4.8345         Public relative to rural low-skilled worker




                      Table 4: Policy Experiments ­ Migration Decision and Population Ratios

                                                               Fraction of      Fraction of
                                                                                                 U+          PH +      S+        U       H+       S+
                                         H        L        H movers L movers      movers      (U + +R+ )     PL+      PH +
                                                                                                                              1- U +     L+       H+

Benchmark Economy                       0.0190   0.3576     0.1661    0.0536      0.0646      0.3584       0.6348    3.0262   0.1236    0.0948   3.4836
Population Policy
   Uniform population constraint        0.1076 0.3636      0.2415     0.0545     0.0727       0.3640       0.6710    2.8622   0.1370    0.0864   3.8495
   (% change)                                              45.35%     1.68%      12.59%       1.56%         5.69%    -5.42%   10.87%    -8.95%   10.50%
   No population control                0.0000 0.3561      0.1500     0.0534     0.0628       0.3572       0.6272    3.0640   0.1206    0.0967   3.4138
   (% change)                                              -9.71%     -0.42%     -2.74%       -0.34%       -1.21%     1.25%   -2.41%    1.91%    -2.01%
Migration Policy
   No urban residency                   0.0000   0.0000     0.1500     0.0000     0.0146      0.3241        0.9342   3.0640    0.0308   0.0915   3.4138
   (% change)                                               -9.71%   -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%        47.16%   1.25%    -75.04%   -3.53%   -2.01%
   No urban benefits                    0.0000   0.0000     0.1500     0.0000     0.0146      0.3241        0.9342   3.0640    0.0308   0.0915   3.4138
   (% change)                                               -9.71%   -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%        47.16%   1.25%    -75.04%   -3.53%   -2.01%
   Full urban benefits                  0.0000   1.0000     0.1500     0.1500     0.1500      0.4170        0.3934   3.0640    0.2467   0.1076   3.4138
   (% change)                                               -9.71%   179.62%     132.29%      16.35%       -38.03%   1.25%     99.65%   13.49%   -2.01%
Land Policy
   Immediate loss of land entitlement   0.0000 0.3078      0.1500     0.0462      0.0563      0.3527       0.6565    3.0640 0.1094      0.0959   3.4138
   (% change)                                              -9.71%    -13.94%     -12.88%      -1.59%        3.41%     1.25% -11.47%     1.14%    -2.01%
   15 years of guaranteed land tenure   0.1094   0.4377    0.2430     0.0656      0.0829      0.3710       0.6291    2.8590 0.1533      0.0872   3.8578
   (% change)                                              46.28%    22.38%      28.35%       3.50%        -0.90%    -5.52% 24.01%      -8.05%   10.74%
                Table 5: Policy Experiments ­ Total Fertility Rates

                                                           Total Fertility Rates
                                           Rural H    Rural L Public Private H           Private L
Benchmark Economy                           1.3858     2.2091     1.1799     1.3456       1.9718
Population Policy
   Uniform population constraint               1.3321 2.1923 1.1807             1.3544    1.9610
   (% change)                                  -3.87% -0.76% 0.06%               0.65%    -0.55%
   No population control                       2.7691 2.6981 2.2690             1.9608    2.7597
   (% change)                                  99.82% 22.13% 92.30% 45.72%                39.95%
Migration Policy
   No urban residency                          1.4457 2.3011 1.1798             1.4097    1.9773
   (% change)                                   4.32%     4.16% -0.01%           4.76%     0.28%
   No urban benefits                           1.4605 2.3011 1.1798             1.3933    1.9773
   (% change)                                   5.39%     4.16% -0.01%           3.55%     0.28%
   Full urban benefits                         1.2812 2.0551 1.1798             1.2780    1.9188
   (% change)                                  -7.55% -6.97% -0.01%             -5.03%    -2.69%
Land Policy
   Immediate loss of land entitlement 1.3881 2.1960 1.1798                      1.3497    1.9765
   (% change)                                   0.17% -0.59% -0.01%              0.30%     0.24%
   15 years of guaranteed land tenure 1.3428 2.2163 1.1807                      1.3460    1.9568
   (% change)                                  -3.10% 0.32% 0.07%                0.03%    -0.76%
Note: In the numerical analysis, we match a half of total fertility rates. To be comparable
with total fertility rates in data, the fertility values reported in the table have been multiplied
by 2.
Table 6: Policy Experiments ­ Urban and Rural per capita Income, Income Ratios and Urban Benefit

                                                                                  Income Ratios
                                                                             yU        wS         wH
                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                       Urban
                                                  y       yU        yR       yR        wH         wL
                                                                                        P          P   benefit
        Benchmark Economy                       1.3455   1.9641   1.0000   1.9641    0.8814   1.3944   0.9803
        Population Policy
           Uniform population constraint        1.3566   1.9673   1.0070   1.9536 0.8856      1.3816   0.9794
           (% change)                           0.82%    0.17%    0.70%    -0.53% 0.49%       -0.92%   -0.09%
           No population control                1.3431   1.9634   0.9985   1.9664 0.8804      1.3972   0.9805
           (% change)                           -0.18%   -0.04%   -0.15%   0.12% -0.11%       0.20%    0.02%
        Migration Policy
           No urban residency                   1.2945   1.9935   0.9593   2.0781    0.9096   1.3075 0.9884
           (% change)                           -3.79%   1.50%    -4.07%   5.80%     3.21%    -6.24% 0.83%
           No urban benefits                    1.2945   1.9935   0.9593   2.0781    0.9096   1.3075 0.9870
           (% change)                           -3.79%   1.50%    -4.07%   5.80%     3.21%    -6.24% 0.69%
           Full urban benefits                  1.4278   1.9132   1.0806   1.7705    0.8416   1.5102 0.9713
           (% change)                           6.12%    -2.59%   8.07%    -9.86%    -4.52%   8.30% -0.91%
        Land Policy
           Immediate loss of land entitlement   1.3442   1.9674   1.0047   1.9582    0.8840   1.3867   0.9812
           (% change)                           -0.10%   0.17%    0.47%    -0.30%    0.29%    -0.56%   0.10%
           15 years of guaranteed land tenure   1.3555   1.9615   0.9982   1.9651    0.8807   1.3965   0.9782
           (% change)                           0.74%    -0.13%   -0.18%   0.05%     -0.08%   0.15%    -0.21%
         Note: yU is urban per capita output and yR is rural per capita output, while y refers to overall per
         capita output.
Appendix (Parts B, C and D Are Not Intended for Publication)
This Appendix provides supplementary information for this paper. Four parts are included: The ...rst
part presents mathematical proofs; the second part discusses the institutional background for the
regulations on the hukou system, land reallocation and fertility in China; data sources and detailed
calibration procedures are summarized in the third part; ...nally, the results of the sensitivity and
robustness tests are relegated to the last part.


A. Mathematical Appendix

A.1 Proof of Theorem 1 (Existence of MME)
Consider the locus VH ; H = 0 where the fertility loss and the quality gain of migration
balance o¤. Suppose we reduce the fertility loss by lowering from to . We then compare the
expected fertility loss between VH ; H = 0 and VH ; H :
                              H                          H
                VH        ;              VH          ;
                                         "                                    "                      "            "
          = (1       ")           nF j        + (1nF j       )
                                                           + (1     ) nI j                                nR j
                        n         "              h           "                                           "i             "o
                (1 ")        nF j    + (1      )      nF j     + (1    ) nI j                                    nR j
                8                                                  9
                <   nF j
                           "
                                    nF j
                                           "
                                             + (1      ) nI j
                                                                 " =
          /
                : + n j " + (1           ) nI j
                                                   "
                                                        nR j
                                                               "   ;
                         F
                 8           "    h           "                     "i 9
                 <    nF j             nF j      + (1      ) nI j      =
                                          "                               "              "
                  :           +   nF j        + (1           ) nI j               nR j           ;

          < 0

because   >    and
                                 8                                                            9
                               @ <                                                  ) (nM ) ] =
                                                 "                    "                      "
                                         (nU )               [ (nU ) + (1
                                                                                                < 0;
                              @ :        + (nU ) + (1    "
                                                                       ) (nI j)"     (nR )" ;

by Proposition 3. This yields VH ; H > VH ; H = 0 so that the locus VH ; H lies
above VH ; H = 0. So VH ; L = 0 lies on the right of VH ; H = 0 as in Figure 5.
Likewise for the location comparison for the loci VL ; L = 0 and VL ; L in Figure 5.
    For the location of the loci VL ; L = 0 and VH ; H = 0 in Figure 5, we can explain
as follows. Consider the loci VH ; H = 0 and VL ; H . Comparing the expected fertility




                                                                   i
                                              H                                            H
loss between            VH            ;              = 0 and                VL       ;          :
                              H                                    H
              VH         ;                        VL          ;
                                                     "                                      "                                  "                        "
   = (1            ")                 nF j               + (1           )           nF j        + (1              ) nI j                     nR j
                               h                         "                                  "                      "i
              (1        ")                    nF j           + (1           ) nI j                       nR j
                                  "                                "                                  "                            "                                "           "
   /                nF j                                 nF j          + (1              ) nI j            +            nF j           + (1             ) nI j           nR j
               h                          "                                     "                    "i
                        nF j                  + (1            ) nI j                     nR j
                               "                                   "                                 "
   =                nF j                                 nF j          + (1           ) nI j
          |                                                {z                                             }
                                                                                                              h                "                                    "           "i
                                      "                                     "                   "
          +             nF j              + (1               ) nI j                  nR j                              nF j            + (1         ) nI j               nR j
   < 0;

because       >         and
                                                      @
                                                        [ (nF j )" + (1                         ) (nI j )"             (nR j )" ] < 0;
                                                     @
by Proposition 3. So the former has a larger fertility loss than the latter. Next, we compare the
expected locational quality gain:
                                                                          H                                                                                                 H
                   (1         )               wS + (1                  ) wP           [ + (1               )       ]          x + [ + (1                        )   ]B
                                                          L                                   L                                        H
                         (1               )              wP                 + (1            )wP           x +            B
                                                                           H                    L                         L
          = (1                )                 wS + (1                 ) wP                   wP + (1                 ) wP
                        (1            )        (1                 ) + (1                    )B
                                                                           H                L
          = (1                )                 wS + (1                 ) wP               wP + (1                       ) [B           (1          )       ]
          > 0:

So the former has a larger locational quality gain than the latter.
   Given that VH ; H = 0 has both a larger fertility loss and a larger locational quality
gain than VL ; H . Two possible cases emerge. Firstly, if VL ; H < 0, then the locus
  VL ; L = 0 lies below the locus VH ; H = 0. This is the situation shown in Figure 5
where H > L . Secondly, if VL ; H > 0, then the locus VL ; L = 0 lies above the locus
  VH ; H = 0 and we have L > H . In either case, the parametric space supporting a mixed
migration equilibrium is dense and hence nonempty.




                                                                                                ii
A.2 Proof of Theorem 2 (Locational quantity-quality tradeo¤)
Writing out the indi¤erence boundaries, we have:

      VH ( ; )            V S ( ) + (1                      ) V P;H ( )                          VR( )
                                                                                                            nU
                  =           (1            )       wS                    nF j              0
                                                                                            U   + 1                      U       +        (nF j )" + B
                                                                                                          nF j
                                                8                         h                               h                                   ii 9
                                                < (1                 )         H
                                                                              wP                  nF j       0
                                                                                                                 + 1             nU               =
                                                                                                             U                  nF j           U
                         + (1           )
                                                :                                  + (nF j ) + B         "                                            ;
                                                            8                    h          h                                                      ii 9
                                                            < (1               ) wP H  nI j   0                                  nR                   =
                                                                                              U + 1                             nI j           R
                         + (1           ) (1            )
                                                            :                                         + (nI j )  "                                   ;

                                                                                                   nR
                                  (1        )       x        nR j              0
                                                                               R   + 1                       R           +     (nR j )"                :
                                                                                                  nR j

Using the optimal fertility condition (17), we obtain:

       VH ( ; ) =            [(1            ) (wS                ) + (1             ") (nF j )" + B ]
                         + (1               )      (1            )         H
                                                                          wP                    + (1     ") (nF j )" + B
                         + (1               ) (1         ) (1                    H
                                                                              ) wP + (1                ") (nI j )"
                                  (1        ) x + (1                     ") (nR j )"

                             (1         )           wS + (1                      H
                                                                              ) wP              [ + (1       )       ]         x
                     =
                                                         + [ + (1                       )       ]B
                         |                                                         {z                                              }
                                                      expected locational quality gain (+)
                         +(1           ") f           (nF j )" + (1        ) [ (nF j )" +                    (1              ) (nI j )" ]          (nR j )" g:
                          |                                                                       {z                                                        }
                                                                                   expected fertility loss (-)

Likewise, we have:

                 VL ( ; ) = V P;L ( )                                          VR( )
                                                                           L                                 L
                                       = (1             )                 wP                    + (1      ) wP       x +           B
                                         |                                                        {z                                           }
                                                                      expected locational quality gain (+)
                                                +(1         ")       [ (nF j )" + (1        ) (nI j )" (nR j                           )" ]:
                                                 |                                               {z                                      }
                                                                               expected fertility loss (-)

So the indi¤erence boundaries can be decomposed into two terms: an expected locational quality
gain versus an expected fertility loss.
    For the expected locational quality gain, it is straightforward to show that it is positive. Given
that urban amenities B are non-rival and non-excludable, whereas is the individual embarked tax,
we get B > . Also, since migration cost is a fraction of wage incomes, so the overall locational
gain must be positive. For the expected fertility loss, Proposition 3 implies that it is negative. As
a result, we obtain a locational quantity-quality tradeo¤ for the migration decision.



                                                                                iii
B. Institutional Background in China

B.1 The Hukou System
In the 1950s, China implemented an unique hukou system to solve the serious problem of rural-
urban labor migration. The hukou system required everyone to register in one and only one place
of his/her residence. A formal rural-urban migration required both appropriate documents and a
migration permit (quota) issued by the government. The regular channels of rural-urban migration
included recruitment by a state-owned enterprise (zhaogong ), enrolment in an institution of higher
education (zhaosheng ), promotion to a senior administrative job (zhaogan ), and displacement due to
state-initiated land expropriation (zhengdi ). Because the government tightly controlled the annual
migration quotas and the hukou registration could not be changed freely, the hukou system formed
a dual structure with no labor mobility but urban-rural distinctions.
    The hukou system not only restricted internal migration itself, but also integrated with social
and economic controls. In rural areas, adults were bound to the land. They were belonged to
communes and had to participate in agricultural production to obtain food rations for their house-
holds. For urban residents, work units were the primary administrative units to assign most social
services. For example, a work unit determined grain rations, education for children, health bene...ts,
and purchasing house. The above controls were e¤ective because, in the pre-reform period, local
governments predominated the distribution of daily necessities. Few of them were traded in the
market. Besides, there were few urban jobs outside the state-owned enterprises. Therefore, it was
di¢ cult to survive outside one' s hukou registration place without a work unit and a formal urban
hukou.
    Since 1980s, due to the economic reform, the growing market-oriented economy demanded more
cheap labor. It became easier for people to ...nd city jobs in private sectors and survive outside
their hukou registration place. In addition, the economic reform also forced the government to relax
the administrative control, such as the abolition of food rations and the commune system. These
factors increased rural-urban migration and resulted in a signi...cant temporary migration (  oating
population, who stayed outside their hukou registration place). The noticeable mobility forced the
government to have its hukou regulation reforms. For example, temporary residence certi...cate
was introduced to all urban areas in 1985 and extended to rural areas in 1995; local governments
allowed "self-supplied food grain" urban hukou ; and the "blue-stamp" urban hukou was conducted
in the 1990s. Finally, in 2014, the central government announced to gradually implement uni...ed
urban-rural household registration system.


B.2 Land Reallocation and Migration
As mentioned in Section B.1, rural adults were bound to lands and were belonged to communes.
Because rural production could not be freely traded in the market, rural people had low incentives
to work. To motivate rural production, household responsibility system (HRS) was introduced to
replace the rural commune system in the early 1980s. Under the HRS, village collectives o¢ cially
owned the land and distributed the use rights to households. Households only had ...xed-term
contracts to use land for production activities. Besides, the government gave each household a quota
of goods to produce. Households received compensation for the quota. Above-quota production
could be sold in the market at unregulated prices. This system motivated households to work harder
and successfully increased rural production in a short period of time.
    The distribution of land use rights was mainly based on population size within a household.


                                                  iv
After several years, village collectives had the right to reallocate land according to changes of
household size. Therefore, the land rights for rural households were incomplete and the land tenure
arrangement interacted with rural-urban migration decisions in the following ways. First, rural-
urban migration resulted in a risk of land expropriation in the next land reallocation because
rural-urban migration decreased household size, especially permanent migration. Second, it was
unclear if households had the rights to rent the land they obtained or to transfer the contract.
Since households did not have the property right of land, land could not be sold when households
migrated to cities and might become idle land. This represented the opportunity cost of rural-urban
migration.
    To strengthen land tenure security, the Land Management Law and the Rural Land Contracting
Law (RLCL) were implemented in 1998 and 2002, respectively. These laws focused on three reforms:
(i) The duration of land contract should be 30 years; (ii) Large scale of land reallocations are not
allowed. Only small-scale adjustments with clear conditions are agreed; (iii) Land transfer between
households is permitted. However, despite the above land reforms, previous studies show that
households remained facing the risk of land reallocation.18 On one hand, land expropriation is
exacerbated due to urban expansion and infrastructure development. On the other hand, although
land transfers are allowed after the reforms and the transfers do not a¤ect the underlying contracts
with the village collectives, the transfer market for land is still immature. Transfer contracts remain
informal and are usually made with relatives.


B.3 The One-child Policy and Migration
In the early 1970s, China introduced the "Later, Longer, and Fewer" family planning program
to lower the fast population growth. However, the program did not successfully reach the ideal
population growth rate. To quickly achieve the goal, the central government implemented the
well-known one-child policy in 1979. The strict one-child policy successfully lowered China'       s total
fertility rate to be less than two. However, when the one-child generation grew up, it was realized
that the fast decline in fertility will result in a fast demographic change, shortage of labor force, and
rapid population aging in the near future.19 Thus, the one-child policy was eventually abolished in
2015.
    The principle of the one-child policy restricted each couple to have only one child. The policy was
introduced by the central government but the implementation was conducted by local governments.
Thus, the detailed rules di¤ered between provinces, areas, and ethnic groups. In some provinces and
ethnic minorities, more than one child was permitted under some special conditions. In principle,
the implementation contained bene...ts for one-child families and penalties on the above-quota birth.
The bene...ts and subsidies that one-child families could obtain included child allowance, priority
access to schools, employments, health care, and housing. In rural areas, one-child families could
even enjoy tax credit and receive more land. In contrast, the penalties on above-quota births
would be 10-20 percent of family income lasting for 3-14 years. In particular, if parents worked in
public sectors, which included the government sector and the state-owned enterprises, they would
not eligible for promotion, be demoted or be forced to quit their jobs. Moreover, the above-quota
children were not allowed to attend public schools.
  18
       For example, Deininger and Jin (2009) ...nd that about 1/3 households out of their sample experienced land
reallocations during 2002-2004. Tao and Xu (2007) ...nd similar evidence.
  19
     Liao (2013) employs a general-equilibrium model to study the long-run macroeconomic e¤ects of imposing the
one-child policy in China.


                                                         v
    The one-child policy also interacted with the hukou system and had impacts on migration
decisions. Permanent migrants (formal rural-urban migration) had to follow the fertility policies of
their destination cities but usually a transition period was allowed. The transition period ranged
from two to ...ve years. The rules in some cities were even stricter. For example, if the wife had not
been pregnant when a couple obtained Beijing hukou, the certi...cate for having a second child they
received in rural areas would be withdrawn. In contrast, fertility decisions of temporary migrants
of course were restricted by their original places. However, the family planning o¢ cials who were
responsible for temporary migrants' fertility had di¢ culty on tracking where the migrants move
to. Thus, the growing amount of temporary migrants increased the di¢ culty of implementing the
one-child policy in China.


C. Data for Calibration
     Retirement age
     The statutory retirement age in China is relatively young compared to other countries. The
     normal retirement age has been set at 60 years for men, 50 years for blue collar women and
     55 years for white collar women in China since the 1950s. It is possible to claim a pension
     bene...t from the age of 55 for men and 50 for women if the individual engaged in physical
     work in certain industries or posts (OECD, 2019).

     Population
     High-skilled workers refer to those whose education level are senior high school or above.
     Those below senior high school level are classi...ed as low-skilled workers.

        ­ Urban and rural population (U and R)
          The data of urban and rural population is directly obtained from China Population and
          Employment Statistics Yearbook 2010. We compute the urban-rural population ratios
          (U
           R ) for the years of 1980-2007. The average from 1980 to 2007 is 0.4579.
        ­ Rural high- and low-skilled population (H and L)
          China Rural Statistical Yearbook 1987-2008 report the statistics of rural workers' edu-
          cational attainment. Using our de...nition of high-skilled workers, we thus compute the
          rural high-to-low-skilled ratio ( H
                                            L ) for the years from 1985 to 2007. However, the data
          before 1985 is not available. We back out the ratios for 1980-1984 by the following steps.
          First, we compute the annual growth rate of the rural high-to-low-skilled ratio from 1985
          to 2007 and the geometric average is 3.728 percent. Second, with the rural high-to-low-
          skilled ratio in 1985 and the average annual growth rate, we are able to calculate the
          rural high-to-low-skilled ratio from 1980 to 1984. The average of H L during 1980-2007 is
          then equal to 0.1076.
        ­ Urban public and private employment (S and P )
          The number of urban employments by sectors is available in China Statistical Yearbook.
          We de...ne state-owned units as urban public sector and others (including collective-
          owned units, cooperative units, joint ownership units, limited liability corporations, share
          holding corporations Ltd., private enterprises, units with funds from Hong Kong, Macao
          and Taiwan, foreign funded units, and self-employed individuals) to be urban private
                                                                                      S
          sectors. Then we obtain the urban public-private employment ratio ( P         ) for the years
          of 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995-2007. For the years without data (1981-1984, 1986-1989, and

                                                  vi
  1991-1994), we use linear interpolation to back out the corresponding urban public-
                                                S
  private employment ratios. The average of P      during 1980-2007 is 1.5235. In addition,
  we also use the number of urban employments by sectors to compute the public-urban
                     S
  population ratio, U  . According to the de...nition in our model, U = S + P . We thus
  use the number of employment in state-owned units as the numerator and the sum
                                                                                         S
  of employment in state-owned units and other units as the denominator to obtain U        .
  Similarly, the years without data are backed up by linear interpolation. The average of
  S
  U during 1980-2007 is 0.6094.
­ Urban private high- and low-skilled population (P H and P L )
  Urban Household Survey (UHS) provides the number of urban workers on two dimensions:
  workers'employment types and their education levels. We thus use UHS to compute the
                                                H
  private high- to low-skilled worker ratio ( P
                                              PL
                                                  ) with the following steps. First, we de...ne
  workers in other economic units, private entrepreneurs in cities and towns, employees in
  private businesses and other employments as private sectors, while those who already
  retired but re-entered the labor force are excluded. Second, given our de...nition of high-
  skilled workers, we compute the number of high-skilled and low-skilled workers in private
  sectors and the ratio of high- to low-skilled workers for 1987-2007. Third, for the years
                                                                         H
  without data (1980-1986), we calculate the annual growth rate of P    PL
                                                                           from 1987 to 2007
  and have the geometric average growth rate. Then, linear interpolation is implemented
  to obtain the ratio of high- to low-skilled workers during 1980-1986. Finally, we obtain
                   H
  the average of PPL
                      during 1980-2007, which is 0.8159.
­ Urban population (U ) and the number of workers actually work in urban areas (U + )
  Urban population (U ) is directly obtained from China Population and Employment Sta-
  tistics Yearbook 2010. The di¤erence between U and U + is rural-urban        oating popula-
  tion. As rural-urban migrants was the majority in China'   s internal migration, we assume
  the entire   oating population reported in data is the rural-urban migrants. Using the
    oating population of 1982, 1987, 1990, 1995, 2000 and 2005 provided by Department
  of Population and Employment Statistics, National Bureau of Statistics of China (2008,
  appendix table 1), we ...rst calculate the corresponding ratios of  oating to urban popula-
  tion. Second, linear interpolation is implemented to compute the ratios for the years that
  the data is not available. For the year of 1980 and 1981, we calculate the two ratios based
  on the year of 1982 and the geometric average on annual growth rate of      oating-to-urban
  population ratio during 1982-1987. Similarly, the ratios of 2006 and 2007 are computed
  based on the year of 2005 and the geometric average on annual growth rate of         oating-
  to-urban population ratio during 2000-2005. Now we have a series of         oating-to-urban
  population ratio from 1980 to 2007. Third, the       oating-to-urban population ratios are
                 U                        U
  converted to U  + and  the average  of  U+
                                             during 1980-2007  is 0.8764.
­ Workers that actually work in urban areas (P H + ; P L+ ; and S + )
  To compute the workers that actually work in each sector, we need to know the       oating
  population working in each sector. Unfortunately, the data is not observed. Using the
  Rural-Urban Migrant Survey (RUMS), Li (2010) estimates that the proportion of migrant
  workers employed as production workers, service workers, private enterprise owners, or
  self-employed reached 93 percent in 2007, while 81 percent of them were employed in
  private enterprises or self-employed. Based on this information, we can infer that roughly
  7 percent of migrants worked in the public sector in 2007, while at most 12 percent of
  migrants were private business owners. As it was relatively in      exible for the public

                                         vii
    sector to hire migrants in early years and our data period spans from 1980 to 2007, it is
    natural to see the 7 percent of migrants working in the public sector as an upper bound.
    We thus assume that 5 percent of the entire     oating population ended up with jobs in
    public sector, 20 percent worked as high-skilled workers in private sectors and the rest
    (75 percent) found jobs as private low-skilled workers. Then we are able to compute
                                                      H+         +
    the workers that actually work in urban areas ( PP L+
                                                          and PSH + ) by the above population
    ratios and the population identity below:

                                       P H+         P H + =U +
                                               =               = 0:6348;
                                       P L+         P L+ =U +
                                        S+           S + =U +
                                               =               = 3:0262;
                                       P H+         P H + =U +

    where

                     P H+            PH    ~H
                                           P      P~H U      PH U                      U
                               = [      + F + I ] + =                + 0:2(1             );
                      U+              U     U       U U       U U+                    U+
                     P L+            PL P  ~L P   ~L U      PL U                      U
                               =   [    + F + I ] + =               + 0:75(1             );
                      U+             U     U      U U        U U+                     U+
                       S+            S   ~F U
                                         S           S U               U
                               =   [ +       ]    =        + 0:05(1       );
                      U+             U   U U+        U U+             U+
                      PH                S      P H =P L
                               =   (1     )(            );
                       U                U 1 + P H =P L
                       PL               S         1
                               =   (1     )(            ):
                       U                U 1 + P H =P L

  ­ Workers that actually work in rural areas (R+ )
    To obtain the RR                                                                       ~
                    + , the following population identities are applied. First, we de...ne U =
    ~F + P
    S     ~ +P
           H    ~ +P
                 L     ~ +P
                         H    ~ and thus we have R = R U
                                L                    +           ~ and + =
                                                                        R       1
                                                                                  ~ . Similarly,
           F     F       I      I                                       R         U
                                                                                         1    R
                                          U          U          1                             ~
                                                                                              U       U+
    in urban areas, we know that          U+
                                               =   U +U~   =      ~
                                                                  U
                                                                      . Rearrange to obtain   U   =   U    1.
                                                               1+ U
                 ~
                 U       ~ U
                         U         +
    Therefore,   R   =   U R   = (UU    1) U
                                           R . Finally, we have:

                                       R       1                      1
                                           =       ~
                                                       =            1
                                       R +
                                             1     U       1    ( U=U +    1) U
                                                                              R
                                                   R

                        U      U                                                             R
    With the ratios of U + and R mentioned above, we have the average of                     R+
                                                                                                  = 1:069 or
    R +
    R = 0:9354 during 1980-2007.

Rural land

  ­ Duration of land reallocation ( )
    According to Article 27 of Notes to Law of the People'    s Republic of China on Land
    Contract in Rural Areas (Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo nong cun tu di cheng bao fa shi
    yi) implemented in 2003, the duration of land reallocation in general should be between
    5 to 10 years. To have a representative value of the duration, we thus take the average
    and adjust by the model period to obtain = (5+10) 36
                                                         =2
                                                            = 0:2083.

                                                viii
  ­ Land per person (q )
    The data of average land per person is taken from China Statistical Yearbook 1987-2007
    and Area of Land Managed by Rural Households in National Data provided by National
    Bureau of Statistics of China. Average land per person includes two items: area of
    cultivated land under management by rural households and hilly area under management
    by rural households. The average of 1980-2007 is 2.3315 mou per person.

Wages

  ­ Rural per capita income (yR )
    It is normalized to one during 1980-2007.
  ­ Urban wages (wS , wP   H , and w L )
                                    P
    Similar to the number of urban workers, UHS also provides information on workers'
    income. We thus use UHS to compute urban income in each sector with the following
    steps. First, we de...ne workers in other economic units, private entrepreneurs in cities and
    towns, employees in private businesses and other employments as private sectors, while
    those working in state-owned units and collective economic units in cities and towns
    are classi...ed as public sectors. We exclude those who already retired but re-entered
    the labor market. Second, we only consider wage-related income to be a worker'        s wage
    here. Third, given our de...nition of high-skilled workers, we are able to compute the
    average wage of high-skilled workers from 1987 to 2007. Similarly, the average wage
    of low-skilled workers
                       H
                              from 1987 to 2007 are calculated. Then we obtain a series of
                      wP
    skill premium ( wL ) during 1987-2007. Fourth, for the years without data (1980-1986),
                       P
    we calculate the annual growth rate of skill premium from 1987 to 2007 and have the
    geometric average growth rate. Interpolation is implemented to obtain the skill premium
    during 1980-1986. Thus the average skill premium during 1980-2007 is 1.3944. Finally,
    using the de...nition of public sectors, we obtain the average wage of workers in public
                                             wS
    sector during 1987-2007. A series of w     H during 1987-2007 is computed. Based on the
                                               P
                                                                      wS
     data of 1987 and the geometric average growth rate, we obtain     H
                                                                      wP
                                                                           for the period between
                                         wS
     1980-1986. Therefore, the average    H
                                         wP
                                               during 1980-2007 is 0.8814.
  ­ Urban premium ( y   U
                       yR )
    Table 10-2 in China Statistical Yearbook 2011 reported disposable income per capita in
    urban and rural areas for 1978, 1980, 1985, and 1990-2007. We obtain urban and rural
    real per capita income by considering price changes (the base year is 1978). Then, urban
    premium (the ratio of urban-rural real per capita income) of 1980, 1985 and 1990-2007
    are obtained. For the years without data (1981-1984 and 1986-1989), linear interpolation
    is applied to compute the corresponding urban and rural real per capita income. Then,
    the urban premium is computed accordingly. With the entire series, we then compute
    the average of urban premium from 1980 to 2007, which is 1.9641.

Altruistic factor ( )
                                                                              c
We adopt Leontief preference in the theoretical model and obtain the relation nb = 1 . This
                    1
implies that = c +1 . To calibrate , we use the information on average rural per capita
                  nb
income and consumption in China Statistical Yearbook. The rural consumption-income ratio
is obtained by average consumption expenditure minus average expenditure on educational

                                              ix
and recreational activities and other expenditure over average rural income. The rural saving-
income ratio is average rural income minus average consumption expenditure over average
rural income. All are in per capita term. With the series of the rural consumption-income
ratio and the rural saving-income ratio, we are able to compute the consumption-saving ratio
  c
( nb ) and obtain a series of during 1980-2007. The average of from 1980 to 2007 becomes
0.2124.

Imputed fertility (nL    H    L    H
                    R , nR , nP , nP , and nS )
For calibration, we need the fertility of parent with di¤erent skill types and working in di¤erent
sectors. Unfortunately, the corresponding data is not available. We thus adopt the total
fertility rates by education levels in Retherford, Choe, Chen, Li, and Cui (2005) to be the base
and use population distribution of education level in rural, urban, or public sector as a weight
to compute a weighted fertility for each type. The population distributions of education level in
rural areas are obtained from China Rural Statistical Yearbook 1987-1995 and 1997-2008. The
population distributions of education level in urban areas are from China Population Statistics
Yearbook 1988, 10 Percent Sampling Tabulation on the 1990 Population Census of the People'       s
Republic of China, 1995 China 1% Population Sample Survey, and The Tabulation on the 2000
Population Census of the People'     s Republic of China. For those who work in public sector,
census data is not available. We thus use the information of public-sector workers'education
levels in UHS to compute the distribution. The de...nition of public sector is the same as that in
calculating wS (those working in state-owned units and collective economic units in cities and
towns). Speci...cally, to be consistent with the assumption in our theoretical model, we only
consider those whose education level are senior high school or above when nS is computed.
The imputed fertility in various years are reported in Table C.1.

                               [Insert Table C.1 about here]

Our quantitative analysis studies the period of 1980-2007. However, the last total fertility
rate that Retherford, Choe, Chen, Li, and Cui (2005) reported is that of 1996-2000. Thus,
our imputed fertility also ends in 1996-2000. Besides, in our theoretical framework, we assume
there is only one parent in a household. We therefore match a half of the imputed fertility in
Table C.1 in the calibration.

Basic above-quota penalty (    R   and   U)
Because the above-quota penalty could be non-monetary and there is no suitable measurement
to measure the overall above-quota penalty, we assume low-skilled workers bear the basic
above-quota ...ne R in rural areas and U in urban areas. De...ne ~ R to be the proportion of
basic above-quota ...ne to a rural agent' s wage and ~ U is the proportion of basic above-quota
...ne to an urban agent. Then, we use the information provided by Ebenstein (2010) to impute
~ and ~ by the following steps. First, Ebenstein (2010) provides above-quota ...ne rates and
   R       U
fertility policies for provinces in China during 1979-2000. If the fertility policy of a province
in a year is equal to one, the province in that year is classi...ed as urban areas; otherwise,
a province is de...ned to be rural areas if its fertility policy is greater than one. Following
this classi...cation, we have two subgroups: rural and urban groups. Second, we compute the
simple average of the above-quota ...nes in the urban group to obtain ~ U = 1:6654. Similarly,
the simple average of the above-quota ...nes in the rural group is ~ R = 1:5928.


                                              x
                                                                        0
Urban child rearing cost as a percentage of urban per capita income ( ~ U )
As there is no nationwide survey on urban child rearing cost in China during the period of 1980-
2007, we are forced to rely on estimates and surveys for selected cities in China. According to
Ye and Ding (1998), the total raising cost of a child from age 0 to 16 accounts for 34 percent
and 20 percent of family income for Ximen and Beijing during 1995-1996, respectively. Zhang
(2000) reports that for Zhengzhou in 1998, 56 percent of households spent less than 30 percent
                                              0
of family income on child. We therefore set ~ U at 25 percent, a value falling within the range
of the ...gures reported by Ye and Ding (1998) and Zhang (2000).

Proportion of rural households enjoying less from having children ( )
Table 1 in Hermalin and Liu (1990) provides percent distribution of family size preferences in
surveys in selected areas of China with various years. We de...ne people who desire less than
or just one child as -type agents and focus on rural or suburban areas. Then, the proportion
of rural households enjoying less from having children is around 15.37%. Besides, Table 19
in Scharping (2003) also reports surveys on family size preferences for 1980-1997. Following
the same de...nition of -type agents and focus on rural or suburban areas, we obtain 15.29%.
Based on these two results, we set = 0:15.

Probability of obtaining urban residency ( ) and the fraction of lifetime to enjoy urban ben-
e...ts/pay urban embarked tax ( )
Regarding the parameters for the institution of the hukou system, and , we resort to the
literature. Prior to 1994, it was very di¢ cult for rural migrants to obtain urban hukou. The
blue-stamp system, implemented in 1994, opened the door to rural migrants. According to
Liu (2005), it took two to ...ve years for rural migrants to get urban hukou via the blue-print
system. We therefore compute based on this information. Assume that rural migrants who
worked in urban private sector were not quali...ed for urban bene...ts prior to 1994 because
they could not obtain urban hukou, i.e. = 0 prior to 1994. After 1994, due to the relaxation
of the blue-print system, it took an average of 2+52 = 3:5 years for a migrant to obtain urban
residency and hence to be quali...ed for urban bene...ts. The period we examine is 1980-2007,
and 1980-1994 roughly amounts to half of the examined period. Therefore, the average ,
the fraction of lifetime that a migrant worker successfully obtained urban residency to enjoy
urban bene...ts, is 1 0+3  :5
                         2 =36 = 0:4514 for the period of 1980 to 2007. As for , according to
Wu and Treiman (2004), only about 11 percent of the interviews from rural areas successfully
obtained urban residency. We thus set at 0.11.

Urban bene...t (B )
There is no perfect measure to proxy urban bene...t. We thus use retirement bene...t to represent
urban bene...t. The retirement bene...t is the sum of pension he or she receives during the
years that a retired agent is still alive. During the periods that we study, the life expectancy
was about 75 years and the average retirement age was 53 years old. Besides, the average
replacement rate (for all retirees) in China's pension system from 1980-1995 was about 81.67%,
as reported in Table 2 of West (1999). Therefore, we obtain the urban bene...t using the
replacement rate multiplied by urban per capita income (model value) and the number of alive
years after retirement. The urban bene...t is adjusted by the model period and B = 0:9803.




                                            xi
D. Sensitivity and Robustness Tests
In Section 4.2, to compute workers that actually work in each sector, we have assumed that 5
percent of the entire   oating population ended up with jobs in public sector, 20 percent worked as
high-skilled workers in private sectors, and the rest (75 percent) found jobs as private low-skilled
workers. In this appendix we provide the sensitivity and robustness tests for this assumption.
    Recall that the ratios of the stocks of the sectoral speci...c within-the-period workers change as
the assumption on the fractions of    oating population in each sector change. As we have targeted
the ratios of the stocks of the within-the-period workers in calibration, altering the assumption
means that we have to recalibrate the model. For easy communication, in the following, we will call
the calibration in the main text the "benchmark calibration."
    Denote 'S , 'H         L
                   P and 'P as the fractions of the    oating population ending up working as public
sector, private sector high- and private sector low-skilled workers, where 'S + 'H        L
                                                                                    P + 'P = 1. Based
                                                                              H        L
on the data in Li (2010), we consider four plausible assumptions on 'S , 'P and 'P : (1) 'S = 5%,
'H                 L                         H                 L
  P = 22% and 'P = 73%; (2) 'S = 5%, 'P = 18% and 'P = 77%; (3) 'S = 7%, 'P = 20% and
                                                                                          H
  L                             H                L
'P = 73%; and (4) 'S = 3%, 'P = 20% and 'P = 77%. The ...rst two robustness tests ...x 'S at the
value in the benchmark calibration while alter 'H          L
                                                  P and 'P by 2 percent, and the later two robustness
tests ...x 'P at 20% as in the benchmark calibration, adjusting 'S and 'L
            H
                                                                             P by 2 percent. Table D.1
reports the summary of the calibrated parameters and variables under the four assumptions. Table
D.2 shows the relative productivity, relative child rearing costs and relative above-quota penalties,
fractions of moving, population ratios, total fertility rates and income ratios for the four robustness
tests. Table D.3 presents the policy experiment results under the four assumptions. For easy
comparison, we provide in each table the values of the benchmark calibration.

                                    [Insert Table D.1 about here]
                                    [Insert Table D.2 about here]
                                    [Insert Table D.3 about here]

    Not surprisingly, the probability of being recruited as public workers and the fractions of work-
ers migrating to cities H and L change as the assumption on the fractions of    oating population in
each sector change; so do the ratios of the within-the-period worker stocks. As we have targeted the
same urbanization rates, fertility rates, income ratios and fraction of newly moved, the benchmark
calibration and the four robustness tests display very similar relative productivity, relative child
rearing costs and relative above-quota penalties, and the same model implied urbanization rates,
fertility rates, fraction of moving, population ratios and income ratios.
    Next we move to the results of the policy experiments under the four di¤erent assumptions.
As shown in Table D.3, rural and urban per capita output, relative income ratios such as urban
wage premium and skill premium all exhibit the same direction of movements as what is observed
in the policy experiments of the benchmark calibration. The variable that we have mixed signs is
the overall output per capita under the experiment of immediate reallocation of land. As being
discussed in Section 4.3, this is a result from endogenous fractions of migration: If the migration
discouragement e¤ect of more workers staying in rural areas outweighs the direct e¤ect of the
increases in both the rural and urban per capita output, the overall output per capita will decrease,
and vice versa. To sum up, our results are quite robust.




                                                  xii
References
[1] Deininger, Klaus and Songqing Jin, 2009, "Securing property rights in transition: Lessons from
   implementation of China'  s rural land contracting law," Journal of Economic Behavior and Or-
   ganization, 70(1-2), pp. 22-38.

[2] Ebenstein, Avraham, 2010, "The `   missing girls' of China and the unintended consequences of
   the one child policy," Journal of Human Resources, 45(1), pp. 87­ 115.

[3] Hermalin, Albert I. and Xian Liu, 1990, "Gauging the validity of responses to questions on
   family size preferences in China," Population and Development Review, 16(2), pp. 337-354.

[4] Li, Shi, 2010, "The economic situation of rural migrant workers in China," China Perspectives,
   [Online], DOI : https://doi.org/10.4000/chinaperspectives.5332.

[5] Liao, Pei-Ju, 2013, "The one-child policy: A macroeconomic analysis," Journal of Development
   Economics, 101, pp. 49-62.

[6] Liu, Zhiqiang, 2005, "Institution and inequality: the hukou system in China," Journal of Com-
   parative Economics, 33(1), pp. 133­ 157.

[7] OECD, 2019, Pensions at a Glance 2019: OECD and G20 Indicators, OECD Publishing, Paris,
   https://doi.org/10.1787/b6d3dcfc-en.

[8] Retherford, Robert, Minja Kim Choe, Jiajian Chen, Xiru Li and Hongyan Cui, 2005, "How far
   has fertility in China really declined?" Population and Development Review, 31(1), pp. 57­84.

[9] Scharping, Thomas, 2003, Birth Control in China 1949-2000: Population Policy and Demo-
   graphic Development, Routledge.

[10] Tao, Ran and Zhigang Xu, 2007, "Urbanization, rural land system and social security for
   migrants in China," Journal of Development Studies, 43(7), pp. 1301-1320.

[11] West, Loraine A., 1999, "Pension reform in China: Preparing for the future," The Journal of
   Development Studies, 35(3), pp. 153-183.

[12] Wu, Xiaogang and Donald J. Treiman, 2004, "The household registration system and social
   strati...cation in China: 1955­1996," Demography, 41, pp. 363­384.

[13] Ye, W. Z. and Y. Ding, 1998, "The cost of child care in Xiamen Special Economic Zonein
   China," Population and Economics, No.6, pp.24-57 (in Chinese).

[14] Zhang, Y.-Z., 2000, " A Survey on the cost of raising children aged 0-16 in Zhengzhou City,"
   Marketing Research, No.6, pp. 35-37 and 55 (in Chinese).




                                               xiii
                     Table C.1: Imputed Fertility
Period   1981-1985   1986-1990     1991-1995        1996-2000   Average

 nL
  R       3.0154       2.5287        1.8003          1.4921     2.2091
  H
 nR       1.7965       1.6545        1.0777          1.0145     1.3858
 nL
  P       2.4576       2.3464        1.6868          1.3965     1.9718
 nH
  P       1.7839       1.5721        1.0526          0.9739     1.3456
 nS          -         1.5344        1.0426          0.9628     1.1799
                                                                      Table D.1: Robustness Tests for Calibration

                                                            Robustness 1                        Robustness 2                        Robustness 3                        Robustness 4
Parameters    Benchmark      Target     Target     S = 5%, P  H = 22%,  L = 73%
                                                                         P             S = 5%, P  H = 18%,  L = 77%
                                                                                                             P             S = 7%, P  H = 20%,  L = 73%
                                                                                                                                                 P             S = 3%, P  H = 20%,  L = 77%
                                                                                                                                                                                     P
                                        value     Parameter value   Affected target   Parameter value   Affected target   Parameter value   Affected target   Parameter value Affected target
Production
    z            0.4067                                0.4067                             0.4067                              0.4067                              0.4067
    q            2.3315                                2.3315                             2.3315                              2.3315                              2.3315
                 0.2083                                0.2083                             0.2083                              0.2083                              0.2083
                               yU
   AS            2.0214        yR      1.9641          2.0198                             2.0231                              2.0205                              2.0224
                               wS
   AP            3.3287        wH
                                       0.8814          3.3189                             3.3385                              3.3243                              3.3330
                                P
                 0.8333                                0.8333                             0.8333                              0.8333                              0.8333
                   0.5                                   0.5                                0.5                                 0.5                                 0.5
                               wH
                                P
                 1.3608        wL
                                       1.3944          1.3670                             1.3547                              1.3632                              1.3585
                                P
Preferences
                   0.15                                  0.15                              0.15                                0.15                                0.15
                    0.1                                   0.1                               0.1                                 0.1                                 0.1
                  0.5346         nL
                                  P      0.9859         0.5336                            0.5356                              0.5338                              0.5354
                    0.1                                   0.1                               0.1                                 0.1                                 0.1
                   0.21          B       0.9803          0.21                              0.21                                0.21                                0.21
    B0            2.4863                                2.4882                            2.4844                              2.4869                              2.4858
   H              0.4230                                0.4104                            0.4376                              0.4706                              0.3670
    L             0.1539                                0.1533                            0.1537                              0.1534                              0.1536
Probabilities/Duration of time
                                 S+
                    0.2         PH +
                                         3.0262         0.1852          2.9848            0.2174            3.0686            0.2593            3.0400            0.1304           3.0123
     µ            0.4514                                0.4514                            0.4514                              0.4514                              0.4514
                   0.11                                  0.11                              0.11                                0.11                                0.11
                    0.2                                   0.2                               0.2                                 0.2                                 0.2
Fraction of workers migrate
                                PH +
    H             0.0190        PL+
                                         0.6348         0.0346          0.6493            0.0033            0.6206            0.0346            0.6405            0.0033           0.6293
                                   U
    L             0.3576       1- U +    0.1236         0.3481                            0.3672                              0.3481                              0.3672
Fertility related
    n¯R             0.8                                   0.8                               0.8                                 0.8                                 0.8
    n
    ¯U              0.5                                   0.5                               0.5                                 0.5                                 0.5
     ~0            0.25                                  0.25                              0.25                                0.25                                0.25
      U
     ~0           0.4386         nL      1.1046         0.4376                            0.4396                              0.4378                              0.4394
      R                           R
     ~R           1.5928                                1.5928                            1.5928                              1.5928                              1.5928
     ~U           1.6654                                1.6654                            1.6654                              1.6654                              1.6654
Extra penalty for high-skilled workers to have extra children
     ~H           5.3123        nHR      0.6929         5.2045                            5.4219                              5.3238                              5.2945
    S~            2.1439         nS      0.5900         2.1406                            2.1463                              2.1216                              2.1696
     ~H           0.2382        nH       0.6728         0.2319                            0.2447                              0.2381                              0.2371
      P                           P
                                                   Table D.2: Robustness Tests for Model Implications

Ratio                Benchmark          Robustness 1             Robustness 2              Robustness 3              Robustness 4
                                         H = 22%,  L = 73%  = 5%,  H = 18%,  L = 77%  = 7%,  H = 20%,  L = 73%  = 3%,  H = 20%,  L = 77%
                                 S = 5%, P           P     S      P           P      S      P           P      S      P           P
Total Factor Productivity
  AP /AS             1.6467               1.6432                        1.6502                      1.6453               1.6480
  AP /z              8.1849               8.1608                        8.2090                      8.1742               8.1955
Fraction of Moving
   + (1 -  )H        0.1661               0.1794                        0.1528                      0.1794               0.1528
   L                 0.0536               0.0522                        0.0551                      0.0522               0.0551
Child-rearing Cost
  ~ 0 wS
   U
  ~ 0 yR              1.1523              1.1540                        1.1506                      1.1539               1.1507
    R
  ~ 0 wH
   U P
   ~ 0 yR             1.3074              1.3093                        1.3055                      1.3092               1.3056
    R
  ~ 0 wL
   U P
  ~ 0 yR              0.9376              0.9390                        0.9362                      0.9389               0.9363
    R
Penalty on Above-quota Birth
  (  ~U +  ~S )wS
  (  ~R +  ~H )yR     1.1152              1.1310                        1.0993                      1.1063               1.1261
  (  ~U +  ~ H )wH
            P    P
   (  ~R +  ~H )yR    0.6323              0.6397                        0.6250                      0.6309               0.6338
   ~U wL
         P
    ~R yR             1.7198              1.7184                        1.7212                      1.7190               1.7206
     ~
  (U +     ~S )wS
        ~R yR         4.8345              4.8264                        4.8415                      4.8039               4.8694
                        Table D.2 - continued: Robustness Tests for Model Implications


Calibration                                           Fraction of   Fraction of
                                                                                             U+         PH +      S+         U          H+    S+
                                 H        L       H movers L movers   movers              (U + +R+ )    PL +     PH +
                                                                                                                          1- U +        L+    H+

Benchmark                      0.0190 0.3576       0.1661      0.0536        0.0646         0.3584     0.6348   3.0262    0.1236    0.0948   3.4836
Robustness Tests
S = 5%, P  H = 22%,  L = 73%   0.0346 0.3481       0.1794      0.0522        0.0646         0.3584     0.6493 2.9848      0.1236    0.0932 3.5401
                    P
           H
S = 5%, P = 18%, P   L = 77%   0.0033 0.3672       0.1528      0.0551        0.0646         0.3584     0.6206 3.0686      0.1236    0.0965 3.4290
           H         L
S = 7%, P = 20%, P = 73%       0.0346 0.3481       0.1794      0.0522        0.0646         0.3584     0.6405 3.0400      0.1236    0.0932 3.5563
S = 3%, P  H = 20%,  L = 77%   0.0033 0.3672       0.1528      0.0551        0.0646         0.3584     0.6293 3.0123      0.1236    0.0965 3.4133
                    P




                        Table D.2 - continued: Robustness Tests for Model Implications

Calibration                                 Total Fertility Rates                                                       Income Ratios
                                                                                                                  yU         wS         wH
                                                                                                                                         P
                                                                                                                                             Urban
                               Rural H   RuralL   Public    PrivateH    PrivateL      y        yU        yR       yR         wH         wL
                                                                                                                              P          P   benefit
Benchmark                      1.3858    2.2091   1.1799    1.3456      1.9718     1.3455    1.9641    1.0000   1.9641     0.8814   1.3944   0.9803
Robustness Tests
S = 5%, P  H = 22%,  L = 73%   1.3858    2.2091   1.1799    1.3456      1.9718     1.3455 1.9641 1.0000 1.9641 0.8814 1.3944                 0.9803
                    P
           H
S = 5%, P = 18%, P   L = 77%   1.3858    2.2091   1.1799    1.3456      1.9718     1.3455 1.9641 1.0000 1.9641 0.8814 1.3944                 0.9803
           H         L
S = 7%, P = 20%, P = 73%       1.3858    2.2091   1.1799    1.3456      1.9718     1.3455 1.9641 1.0000 1.9641 0.8814 1.3944                 0.9803
S = 3%, P  H = 20%,  L = 77%   1.3858    2.2091   1.1799    1.3456      1.9718     1.3455 1.9641 1.0000 1.9641 0.8814 1.3944                 0.9803
                    P
                                                                                Table D.3: Robustness Tests for Policy Experiments
                                                          Fraction of      Fraction of                                                                           Total Fertility Rates                                                     Income Ratios
                                                                                            U+         PH +      S+        U      H+       S+                                                                                         yU        wS         wH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Urban
                                     H        L       H movers L movers     movers       (U + +R+ )    PL+      PH +
                                                                                                                        1- U +    L+       H+      Rural H   Rural L   Public    Private H   Private L     y       yU        yR       yR        wH         wL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P          P   benefit
Population Policy
   Uniform population constraint
    Benchmark                       0.1076 0.3636     0.2415      0.0545    0.0727       0.3640       0.6710   2.8622   0.1370  0.0864    3.8495   1.3321    2.1923    1.1807     1.3544     1.9610      1.3566   1.9673   1.0070   1.9536    0.8856   1.3816   0.9794
    (% change)                                        45.35%      1.68%     12.59%       1.56%        5.69%    -5.42%   10.87% -8.95%     10.50%   -3.87%    -0.76%    0.06%      0.65%      -0.55%      0.82%    0.17%    0.70%    -0.53%    0.49%    -0.92%   -0.09%
   S = 5%, P    H = 22%,  L = 73%
                          P         0.1181   0.3542   0.2504      0.0531    0.0723       0.3637       0.6840   2.8301   0.1364 0.0852     3.8928   1.3343    2.1931    1.1806     1.3538     1.9614      1.3560   1.9672   1.0067   1.9541    0.8854   1.3824   0.9795
    (% change)                                        39.56%      1.76%     11.96%       1.48%        5.34%    -5.18%   10.33% -8.56%      9.97%   -3.72%    -0.73%    0.06%      0.61%      -0.53%      0.78%    0.16%    0.67%    -0.51%    0.45%    -0.86%   -0.08%
   S = 5%, P    H = 18%,  L = 77%
                          P         0.0983   0.3729   0.2336      0.0559    0.0732       0.3643       0.6585   2.8940   0.1378 0.0874     3.8130   1.3296    2.1912    1.1808     1.3551     1.9605      1.3573   1.9676   1.0075   1.9530    0.8860   1.3807   0.9794
    (% change)                                        52.82%      1.57%     13.36%       1.65%        6.11%    -5.69%   11.52% -9.45%     11.20%   -4.06%    -0.81%    0.07%      0.70%      -0.58%      0.87%    0.18%    0.75%    -0.57%    0.53%    -0.98%   -0.09%
                H
   S = 7%, P = 20%, P     L = 73%   0.1518   0.3529   0.2790      0.0529    0.0749       0.3655       0.6867   2.8480   0.1406 0.0819     4.0835   1.3175    2.1876    1.1812     1.3565     1.9587      1.3596   1.9683   1.0090   1.9508    0.8867   1.3783   0.9793
    (% change)                                        55.53%      1.38%     16.00%       1.98%        7.21%    -6.32%   13.75% -12.07%    14.83%   -4.93%    -0.98%    0.11%      0.81%      -0.67%      1.04%    0.21%    0.90%    -0.68%    0.61%    -1.15%   -0.09%
   S = 3%, P    H = 20%,  L = 77%
                          P         0.0635   0.3732   0.2040      0.0560    0.0704       0.3624       0.6549   2.8856   0.1332 0.0908     3.6409   1.3476    2.1972    1.1803     1.3520     1.9637      1.3534   1.9664   1.0050   1.9566    0.8845   1.3852   0.9796
    (% change)                                        33.46%      1.64%      8.96%       1.11%        4.06%    -4.21%   7.76%   -5.95%     6.67%   -2.75%    -0.54%    0.03%      0.47%      -0.41%      0.58%    0.11%    0.50%    -0.38%    0.35%    -0.66%   -0.07%
   No population control
    Benchmark                       0.0000 0.3561      0.1500    0.0534     0.0628       0.3572       0.6272   3.0640   0.1206   0.0967   3.4138    2.7691 2.6981      2.2690     1.9608     2.7597      1.3431 1.9634     0.9985   1.9664    0.8804   1.3972   0.9805
    (% change)                                         -9.71%    -0.42%     -2.74%       -0.34%       -1.21%   1.25%    -2.41%   1.91%    -2.01%   99.82% 22.13%       92.30%     45.72%     39.95%      -0.18% -0.04%     -0.15%   0.12%     -0.11%   0.20%    0.02%
   S = 5%, P    H = 22%,  L = 73%
                          P         0.0000   0.3451    0.1500    0.0518     0.0613       0.3562       0.6351   3.0545   0.1181   0.0965   3.4111    2.7694 2.7029      2.2680     1.9564     2.7628      1.3411 1.9628     0.9972   1.9683    0.8797   1.3996   0.9806
    (% change)                                        -16.40%    -0.85%     -5.05%       -0.62%       -2.19%   2.33%    -4.45%   3.54%    -3.64%   99.84% 22.35%       92.21%     45.39%     40.11%      -0.33% -0.07%     -0.28%   0.21%     -0.19%   0.37%    0.04%
   S = 5%, P    H = 18%,  L = 77%
                          P         0.0000   0.3669    0.1500    0.0550     0.0643       0.3582       0.6193   3.0752   0.1231   0.0968   3.4168    2.7698 2.6933      2.2697     1.9654     2.7567      1.3451 1.9640     0.9997   1.9645    0.8812   1.3949   0.9803
    (% change)                                         -1.86%    -0.06%     -0.48%       -0.06%       -0.21%   0.21%    -0.42%   0.33%    -0.35%   99.87% 21.92%       92.36%     46.06%     39.80%      -0.03% -0.01%     -0.03%   0.02%     -0.02%   0.04%    0.00%
                H
   S = 7%, P = 20%, P     L = 73%   0.0000 0.3462      0.1500    0.0519     0.0615       0.3563       0.6270   3.1025   0.1183   0.0965   3.4242    2.7940 2.7024      2.2609     1.9589     2.7622      1.3413 1.9628     0.9973   1.9681    0.8797   1.3994   0.9806
    (% change)                                        -16.40%    -0.54%     -4.82%       -0.60%       -2.10%   2.06%    -4.25%   3.55%    -3.71%   101.62% 22.33%      91.61%     45.58%     40.08%      -0.31% -0.06%     -0.27%   0.20%     -0.19%   0.35%    0.03%
   S = 3%, P    H = 20%,  L = 77%
                          P         0.0000   0.3668    0.1500    0.0550     0.0643       0.3582       0.6279   3.0197   0.1230   0.0968   3.4015    2.7410 2.6935      2.2781     1.9626     2.7567      1.3451 1.9640     0.9997   1.9645    0.8812   1.3949   0.9803
    (% change)                                         -1.86%    -0.10%     -0.50%       -0.06%       -0.22%   0.24%    -0.44%   0.33%    -0.35%   97.79% 21.93%       93.07%     45.85%     39.80%      -0.03% -0.01%     -0.03%   0.02%     -0.02%   0.04%    0.00%
                                                                        Table D.3 - continued: Robustness Tests for Policy Experiments

                                                          Fraction of       Fraction of                                                                             Total Fertility Rates                                                    Income Ratios
                                                                                             U+          PH +      S+        U       H+       S+                                                                                        yU        wS         wH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Urban
                                     H        L       H movers   L movers    movers       (U + +R+ )     PL +     PH +
                                                                                                                          1- U +     L+       H+      Rural H   Rural L   Public   Private H   Private L     y       yU        yR       yR        wH         wL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P          P   benefit
Migration Policy
   No urban residency
    Benchmark                       0.0000   0.0000    0.1500      0.0000     0.0146      0.3241       0.9342    3.0640    0.0308   0.0915   3.4138   1.4457    2.3011    1.1798    1.4097      1.9773     1.2945   1.9935   0.9593   2.0781    0.9096   1.3075   0.9884
    (% change)                                         -9.71%    -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%       47.16%    1.25%    -75.04%   -3.53%   -2.01%   4.32%     4.16%     -0.01%    4.76%       0.28%      -3.79%   1.50%    -4.07%   5.80%     3.21%    -6.24%   0.83%
    S = 5%, P   H = 22%,  L = 73%
                         P          0.0000   0.0000    0.1500      0.0000     0.0146      0.3241       0.9364    3.0545    0.0308   0.0915   3.4111   1.4536    2.3015    1.1797    1.4068      1.9786     1.2941   1.9922   0.9593   2.0768    0.9079   1.3119   0.9884
    (% change)                                        -16.40%    -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%       44.21%    2.33%    -75.04%   -1.82%   -3.64%   4.89%     4.18%     -0.02%    4.55%       0.34%      -3.83%   1.43%    -4.07%   5.74%     3.01%    -5.92%   0.83%
                H
    S = 5%, P = 18%, P    L = 77%   0.0000   0.0000    0.1500      0.0000     0.0146      0.3241       0.9317    3.0752    0.0308   0.0915   3.4168   1.4381    2.3007    1.1799    1.4126      1.9762     1.2949   1.9947   0.9593   2.0794    0.9113   1.3031   0.9884
    (% change)                                         -1.86%    -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%       50.12%    0.21%    -75.04%   -5.19%   -0.35%   3.77%     4.15%     0.00%     4.98%       0.22%      -3.77%   1.56%    -4.07%   5.87%     3.40%    -6.55%   0.83%
    S = 7%, P   H = 20%,  L = 73%
                         P          0.0000   0.0000    0.1500      0.0000     0.0146      0.3241       0.9255    3.1025    0.0308   0.0915   3.4242   1.4536    2.3015    1.1795    1.4059      1.9787     1.2941   1.9923   0.9593   2.0768    0.9083   1.3114   0.9882
    (% change)                                        -16.40%    -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%       44.50%    2.06%    -75.04%   -1.82%   -3.71%   4.90%     4.18%     -0.03%    4.48%       0.35%      -3.82%   1.43%    -4.07%   5.74%     3.05%    -5.95%   0.81%
    S = 3%, P   H = 20%,  L = 77%
                         P          0.0000   0.0000    0.1500      0.0000     0.0146      0.3241       0.9445    3.0197    0.0308   0.0915   3.4015   1.4368    2.3007    1.1799    1.4140      1.9757     1.2949   1.9947   0.9593   2.0794    0.9111   1.3032   0.9886
    (% change)                                         -1.86%    -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%       50.09%    0.24%    -75.04%   -5.19%   -0.35%   3.68%     4.15%     0.00%     5.08%       0.20%      -3.76%   1.56%    -4.07%   5.87%     3.37%    -6.54%   0.85%
   No urban benefits
    Benchmark                       0.0000   0.0000    0.1500      0.0000     0.0146      0.3241       0.9342    3.0640    0.0308   0.0915   3.4138   1.4605    2.3011    1.1798    1.3933      1.9773     1.2945   1.9935   0.9593   2.0781    0.9096   1.3075   0.9870
    (% change)                                         -9.71%    -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%       47.16%    1.25%    -75.04%   -3.53%   -2.01%   5.39%     4.16%     -0.01%    3.54%       0.28%      -3.79%   1.50%    -4.07%   5.80%     3.21%    -6.24%   0.69%
    S = 5%, P   H = 22%,  L = 73%
                         P          0.0000   0.0000    0.1500      0.0000     0.0146      0.3241       0.9364    3.0545    0.0308   0.0915   3.4111   1.4688    2.3015    1.1797    1.3901      1.9786     1.2941   1.9922   0.9593   2.0768    0.9079   1.3119   0.9871
    (% change)                                        -16.40%    -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%       44.21%    2.33%    -75.04%   -1.82%   -3.64%   5.99%     4.18%     -0.02%    3.31%       0.34%      -3.83%   1.43%    -4.07%   5.74%     3.01%    -5.92%   0.69%
                H
    S = 5%, P = 18%, P    L = 77%   0.0000   0.0000    0.1500      0.0000     0.0146      0.3241       0.9317    3.0752    0.0308   0.0915   3.4168   1.4526    2.3007    1.1799    1.3965      1.9762     1.2949   1.9947   0.9593   2.0794    0.9113   1.3031   0.9870
    (% change)                                         -1.86%    -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%       50.12%    0.21%    -75.04%   -5.19%   -0.35%   4.82%     4.15%     0.00%     3.78%       0.22%      -3.77%   1.56%    -4.07%   5.87%     3.40%    -6.55%   0.69%
    S = 7%, P   H = 20%,  L = 73%
                         P          0.0000   0.0000    0.1500      0.0000     0.0146      0.3241       0.9255    3.1025    0.0308   0.0915   3.4242   1.4676    2.3015    1.1795    1.3907      1.9787     1.2941   1.9923   0.9593   2.0768    0.9083   1.3114   0.9869
    (% change)                                        -16.40%    -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%       44.50%    2.06%    -75.04%   -1.82%   -3.71%   5.91%     4.18%     -0.03%    3.35%       0.35%      -3.82%   1.43%    -4.07%   5.74%     3.05%    -5.95%   0.68%
    S = 3%, P   H = 20%,  L = 77%
                         P          0.0000   0.0000    0.1500      0.0000     0.0146      0.3241       0.9445    3.0197    0.0308   0.0915   3.4015   1.4527    2.3007    1.1799    1.3961      1.9757     1.2949   1.9947   0.9593   2.0794    0.9111   1.3032   0.9871
    (% change)                                         -1.86%    -100.00%    -77.43%      -9.57%       50.09%    0.24%    -75.04%   -5.19%   -0.35%   4.83%     4.15%     0.00%     3.75%       0.20%      -3.76%   1.56%    -4.07%   5.87%     3.37%    -6.54%   0.70%
   Full urban benefits
    Benchmark                       0.0000   1.0000    0.1500     0.1500      0.1500      0.4170        0.3934   3.0640   0.2467    0.1076 3.4138     1.2812    2.0551    1.1798    1.2780     1.9188      1.4278   1.9132   1.0806   1.7705    0.8416   1.5102   0.9713
    (% change)                                         -9.71%    179.62%     132.29%      16.35%       -38.03%   1.25%    99.65%    13.49% -2.01%     -7.55%    -6.97%    -0.01%    -5.03%     -2.69%      6.12%    -2.59%   8.06%    -9.86%    -4.52%   8.30%    -0.91%
    S = 5%, P   H = 22%,  L = 73%
                         P          0.0000   1.0000    0.1500     0.1500      0.1500      0.4170        0.3943   3.0545   0.2467    0.1076 3.4111     1.2885    2.0554    1.1797    1.2753     1.9206      1.4271   1.9114   1.0806   1.7687    0.8402   1.5153   0.9713
    (% change)                                        -16.40%    187.28%     132.29%      16.35%       -39.27%   2.33%    99.65%    15.50% -3.64%     -7.02%    -6.96%    -0.02%    -5.22%     -2.60%      6.06%    -2.68%   8.06%    -9.95%    -4.67%   8.67%    -0.92%
                H
    S = 5%, P = 18%, P    L = 77%   0.0000   1.0000    0.1500     0.1500      0.1500      0.4170        0.3923   3.0752   0.2467    0.1076 3.4168     1.2742    2.0547    1.1799    1.2806     1.9171      1.4286   1.9151   1.0806   1.7721    0.8430   1.5052   0.9714
    (% change)                                         -1.86%    172.35%     132.29%      16.35%       -36.78%   0.21%    99.65%    11.54% -0.35%     -8.06%    -6.99%    0.00%     -4.83%     -2.77%      6.17%    -2.50%   8.06%    -9.77%    -4.36%   7.94%    -0.91%
    S = 7%, P   H = 20%,  L = 73%
                         P          0.0000   1.0000    0.1500     0.1500      0.1500      0.4170        0.3897   3.1025   0.2467    0.1076 3.4242     1.2872    2.0554    1.1795    1.2753     1.9197      1.4272   1.9116   1.0806   1.7690    0.8401   1.5148   0.9714
    (% change)                                        -16.40%    187.28%     132.29%      16.35%       -39.15%   2.06%    99.65%    15.50% -3.71%     -7.11%    -6.96%    -0.03%    -5.23%     -2.64%      6.07%    -2.67%   8.06%    -9.94%    -4.68%   8.63%    -0.91%
    S = 3%, P   H = 20%,  L = 77%
                         P          0.0000   1.0000    0.1500     0.1500      0.1500      0.4170        0.3977   3.0197   0.2467    0.1076 3.4015     1.2744    2.0547    1.1799    1.2809     1.9177      1.4285   1.9149   1.0806   1.7720    0.8432   1.5052   0.9713
    (% change)                                         -1.86%    172.35%     132.29%      16.35%       -36.80%   0.24%    99.65%    11.54% -0.35%     -8.04%    -6.99%    0.00%     -4.81%     -2.74%      6.17%    -2.50%   8.06%    -9.78%    -4.33%   7.95%    -0.92%
                                                                      Table D.3 - continued: Robustness Tests for Policy Experiments
                                                            Fraction of      Fraction of                                                                          Total Fertility Rates                                                    Income Ratios
                                                                                              U+         PH +      S+        U      H+      S+                                                                                        yU        wS         wH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Urban
                                       H        L       H movers L movers     movers       (U + +R+ )    PL+      PH +
                                                                                                                          1- U +    L+      H+      Rural H   Rural L   Public   Private H   Private L     y       yU       yR        yR        wH         wL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P          P   benefit
Land Policy
   Immediate loss of land entitlement
    Benchmark                         0.0000   0.3078    0.1500     0.0462     0.0563      0.3527       0.6565   3.0640    0.1094 0.0959   3.4138   1.3881    2.1960    1.1798    1.3497      1.9765     1.3442   1.9674   1.0047   1.9582    0.8840   1.3867   0.9812
    (% change)                                           -9.71%    -13.94%    -12.88%      -1.59%       3.41%    1.25%    -11.47% 1.14%    -2.01%    0.17%    -0.59%    -0.01%    0.30%       0.24%      -0.10%   0.17%    0.47%    -0.30%    0.29%    -0.56%   0.10%
                H           L
    S = 5%, P = 22%, P = 73% 0.0000            0.2983    0.1500     0.0447     0.0550      0.3518       0.6641   3.0545    0.1072 0.0958   3.4111   1.3981    2.1994    1.1797    1.3479      1.9784     1.3423   1.9668   1.0033   1.9602    0.8831   1.3892   0.9814
    (% change)                                          -16.40%    -14.31%    -14.88%      -1.84%       2.28%    2.33%    -13.28% 2.77%    -3.64%    0.89%    -0.44%    -0.02%    0.17%       0.33%      -0.24%   0.14%    0.33%    -0.20%    0.20%    -0.37%   0.12%
    S = 5%, P   H = 18%,  L = 77%
                            P         0.0000   0.3171    0.1500     0.0476     0.0575      0.3536       0.6488   3.0752    0.1116 0.0961   3.4168   1.3785    2.1928    1.1799    1.3515      1.9747     1.3462   1.9681   1.0060   1.9563    0.8848   1.3841   0.9811
    (% change)                                           -1.86%    -13.63%    -10.92%      -1.35%       4.55%    0.21%     -9.71% -0.46%   -0.35%   -0.52%    -0.74%     0.00%    0.43%       0.15%       0.05%   0.20%    0.60%    -0.40%    0.39%    -0.74%   0.08%
    S = 7%, P   H = 20%,  L = 73%
                            P         0.0000   0.2991    0.1500     0.0449     0.0551      0.3519       0.6558   3.1025    0.1074 0.0958   3.4242   1.3967    2.1991    1.1795    1.3482      1.9781     1.3424   1.9668   1.0035   1.9600    0.8832   1.3889   0.9813
    (% change)                                          -16.40%    -14.08%    -14.71%      -1.82%       2.40%    2.06%    -13.13% 2.79%    -3.71%    0.79%    -0.45%    -0.03%    0.19%       0.32%      -0.23%   0.14%    0.35%    -0.21%    0.21%    -0.39%   0.11%
                H           L
    S = 3%, P = 20%, P = 77% 0.0000            0.3172    0.1500     0.0476     0.0575      0.3536       0.6577   3.0197    0.1116 0.0961   3.4015   1.3787    2.1927    1.1799    1.3514      1.9747     1.3462   1.9681   1.0061   1.9562    0.8848   1.3842   0.9811
    (% change)                                           -1.86%    -13.62%    -10.91%      -1.35%       4.52%    0.24%     -9.69% -0.46%   -0.35%   -0.51%    -0.74%     0.00%    0.43%       0.15%       0.05%   0.20%    0.61%    -0.40%    0.39%    -0.73%   0.09%
   15 years of guaranteed land tenure
    Benchmark                         0.1094   0.4377   0.2430     0.0656     0.0829       0.3710       0.6291   2.8590   0.1533   0.0872 3.8578    1.3428    2.2163    1.1807    1.3460     1.9568      1.3555   1.9615 0.9982     1.9651    0.8807   1.3965   0.9782
    (% change)                                          46.28%     22.38%     28.35%       3.50%        -0.90%   -5.52%   24.01%   -8.05% 10.74%    -3.10%    0.32%     0.07%     0.03%      -0.76%      0.74%    -0.13% -0.18%     0.05%     -0.08%   0.15%    -0.21%
                H           L
    S = 5%, P = 22%, P = 73% 0.1263            0.4280   0.2573     0.0642     0.0830       0.3710       0.6439   2.8160   0.1534   0.0854 3.9309    1.3409    2.2161    1.1807    1.3461     1.9567      1.3556   1.9616 0.9982     1.9651    0.8807   1.3964   0.9782
    (% change)                                          43.43%     22.95%     28.48%       3.52%        -0.84%   -5.66%   24.11%   -8.34% 11.04%    -3.24%    0.32%     0.06%     0.04%      -0.77%      0.75%    -0.13% -0.18%     0.05%     -0.07%   0.14%    -0.22%
    S = 5%, P   H = 18%,  L = 77%
                            P         0.0926   0.4472   0.2287     0.0671     0.0828       0.3709       0.6146   2.9039   0.1531   0.0890 3.7877    1.3447    2.2165    1.1808    1.3458     1.9569      1.3554   1.9614 0.9981     1.9652    0.8806   1.3967   0.9782
    (% change)                                          49.65%     21.80%     28.20%       3.49%        -0.97%   -5.37%   23.89%   -7.79% 10.46%    -2.96%    0.33%     0.07%     0.01%      -0.76%      0.73%    -0.14% -0.19%     0.05%     -0.09%   0.16%    -0.21%
    S = 7%, P   H = 20%,  L = 73%
                            P         0.1253   0.4251   0.2565     0.0638     0.0825       0.3707       0.6332   2.8890   0.1526   0.0855 3.9517    1.3448    2.2168    1.1809    1.3455     1.9578      1.3551   1.9615 0.9979     1.9656    0.8805   1.3971   0.9783
    (% change)                                          42.94%     22.11%     27.74%       3.43%        -1.13%   -4.97%   23.50%   -8.27% 11.12%    -2.96%    0.35%     0.09%     -0.01%     -0.71%      0.71%    -0.13% -0.21%     0.08%     -0.10%   0.19%    -0.20%
                H           L
    S = 3%, P = 20%, P = 77% 0.0939            0.4508   0.2298     0.0676     0.0834       0.3713       0.6255   2.8257   0.1540   0.0889 3.7676    1.3402    2.2156    1.1804    1.3465     1.9556      1.3561   1.9615 0.9985     1.9645    0.8809   1.3959   0.9778
    (% change)                                          50.38%     22.76%     29.12%       3.60%        -0.61%   -6.20%   24.63%   -7.87% 10.38%    -3.29%    0.29%     0.04%     0.06%      -0.82%      0.78%    -0.13% -0.15%     0.02%     -0.05%   0.10%    -0.25%
