                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   RACIAL DISPARITIES IN MOTOR VEHICLE SEARCHES CANNOT BE JUSTIFIED
                             BY EFFICIENCY

                                     Benjamin Feigenberg
                                        Conrad Miller

                                      Working Paper 27761
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27761


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We thank Ian Ayres, Felipe Goncalves, Peter Hull, Jonathan Leonard, David Levine, Dan
O'Flaherty, Steven Rivkin, Evan Rose, Yotam Shem-Tov, and seminar participants at USC,
University of Illinois, Chicago, the Online Economics of Crime seminar, the Online Economics
of Racism seminar, and NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments. We thank researchers at
the Stanford Open Policing Project for providing data on Texas Highway Patrol stops. We thank
the Fisher Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics at Haas for providing computing
resources. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Benjamin Feigenberg and Conrad Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Racial Disparities in Motor Vehicle Searches Cannot Be Justified by Efficiency
Benjamin Feigenberg and Conrad Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 27761
August 2020
JEL No. J15,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

During traffic stops, police search black and Hispanic motorists more often than white motorists,
yet those searches are equally or less likely to yield contraband. We ask whether equalizing
search rates by motorist race would reduce contraband yield. We use unique administrative data
from Texas to isolate variation in search behavior across highway patrol troopers and find that,
across troopers, search rates are unrelated to the proportion of searches that yield contraband. Our
results imply that, in partial equilibrium, troopers can equalize search rates across racial groups,
maintain the status quo search rate, and increase contraband yield.


Benjamin Feigenberg
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Chicago
University Hall room 706
601 South Morgan Street
Chicago, IL 60607
bfeigenb@uic.edu

Conrad Miller
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
ccmiller@berkeley.edu
I    Introduction
During routine traffic stops, black and Hispanic motorists are more likely to be searched for con-
traband by police than white motorists (Pierson et al., 2019). These disparities invite allegations
that police engage in racial profiling, using race as one factor when deciding whether to search
someone. Many regard the practice as unjust: perceived profiling undermines trust in police (Epp
et al., 2014) and racial disparities in search rates likely contribute to racial differences in arrests
and exposure to police use of force (Fryer, 2019). However, equalizing search rates by race may
reduce the effectiveness of policing if race is an informative predictor of criminal behavior (Persico,
2002).
    In this paper we evaluate whether racial profiling in fact poses an equity-efficiency trade-off.
The answer has important practical implications; recent legal scholarship argues that profiling is
not legally permissible in the absence of "legitimate law-enforcement-related necessity" (Tiwara,
2019). Researchers have found that the percentage of searches that yield contraband--known as
the hit rate --among black and Hispanic motorists is typically equal to or lower than the hit rate for
white motorists (e.g., Pierson et al., 2019). Some argue that this pattern indicates equal or lower
rates of offending among black and Hispanic motorists (Harcourt, 2004). This reasoning suggests
that equalizing search rates across motorist racial groups would not decrease overall contraband
yield.
    This argument implicitly assumes that equalizing search rates across motorist racial groups
would not change group-specific hit rates. However, this assumption fails to hold if troopers face
diminishing returns to search. If racial profiling is (accurate) statistical discrimination applied by
police to maximize the proportion of their searches that yield contraband, then the hit rate for
the marginal black or Hispanic motorist--the last black or Hispanic motorist deemed suspicious
enough to be searched--will be equal to that for the marginal white motorist. This logic motivates
the Becker (1957, 1993) outcome test : to evaluate whether police are on the efficient frontier, test
whether marginal hit rates are equal across motorist racial groups. If troopers face diminishing
returns to search, the hit rate for the average and marginal search may differ significantly, and
comparisons of average hit rates between motorist racial groups may be uninformative--the well-
known inframarginality problem (Ayres, 2002).
    We test for an equity-efficiency trade-off using data on traffic stops for speeding violations
conducted by Texas Highway Patrol troopers. To examine whether equalizing search rates across
motorist racial groups would reduce contraband yield, we exploit variation in search behavior across
troopers. In our setting, the identity of the trooper conducting a speeding stop is plausibly ex-
ogenous conditional on the location and time of the stop. We measure variation across troopers
in the rate at which they search motorists--their search rate. Across troopers, we estimate the
relationship between search rates and the percentage of stops that yield contraband (the uncondi-
tional hit rate), where we calculate these rates separately by motorist racial group. Strikingly, this
relationship is approximately linear within each motorist group, implying approximately constant
returns to search across troopers. In other words, troopers who search motorists twice as often

                                                  2
find contraband twice as often. We show that, under conditions consistent with our setting, this
result implies that there is no inframarginality problem because average and marginal hit rates are
similar. Among motorists searched with positive probability, troopers appear unable to distinguish
between those who are more or less likely to carry contraband. Our findings imply that it is feasible
for troopers to (1) search all motorist racial groups at the same rate, (2) maintain the status quo
overall search rate, and (3) increase contraband yield.
   Our analysis proceeds in four steps. First, we summarize racial disparities in search rates
and hit rates. A unique feature of the data is that they contain identifying information on stopped
motorists, which allows us to (a) track motorists across multiple stops and to (b) merge in additional
data on motorist characteristics, including criminal history and neighborhood income. Conditional
on stop location and time, we find that black and Hispanic motorists are about 170% and 70%
more likely to be searched than white motorists. However, searches of these motorists are about
15% and 30% less likely to yield contraband. Controlling for stop history, criminal history and
neighborhood income reduces the black-white and Hispanic-white disparities in search rates by
about 50% and 35%. The residual black-white difference in search rates is similar in magnitude to
the increase in search likelihood associated with multiple previous non-drug arrests and half of the
increase associated with a prior drug arrest. Among stopped motorists with no arrest record at the
end of our sample period, black and Hispanic motorists are about 200% and 80% more likely to
be searched than white motorists. We investigate whether these stark racial disparities in search
rates, even among motorists who do not engage in crime, are a necessary feature of contraband
yield maximization.
   Second, we introduce a simple model of trooper search behavior to frame our analysis. We
build on Anwar and Fang (2006), where troopers decide whether to search a stopped motorist
using a noisy signal for the motorist's guilt. Prior research assumes that troopers can strictly rank
motorists by contraband risk and hence face strictly diminishing returns to search. This implies
that troopers equalizing marginal hit rates across groups leads to an equity-efficiency trade-off.
By contrast, we allow signals to be coarse in the sense that, among those motorists searched with
positive probability, troopers are unable to distinguish between those who are more or less likely
to carry contraband. In this case, the returns to search are constant, and equalizing hit rates at
the margin no longer implies an equity-efficiency trade-off.
   Third, we use between-trooper variation in search behavior to trace out the relationship between
trooper search rates and unconditional hit rates--the between-trooper search productivity curve
(SPC) --separately by motorist group. Our identifying assumption is that, conditional on the
location and time of a stop, the identity of the trooper conducting the stop is as good as random.
For a speeding violation at a given time of the week and on a given stretch of highway, the identity
of the trooper making the stop will vary due to week-to-week variation in shift schedules and to
within-shift variation in exact trooper location. We show that troopers vary substantially in the
rate at which they search motorists following speeding stops. While motorists are searched in
about 1% of stops, search rates range across troopers from 0% at the 10th percentile to 3% at


                                                  3
the 90th percentile. Conditional on the location and time of the stop, motorists with different
characteristics are stopped by troopers with similar search rates. We find that the between-trooper
SPC is approximately linear for each motorist group. The slopes of groups-specific SPCs--which
give the between-trooper returns to search--are similar for black and white motorists, while the
returns to search are lower for Hispanic motorists.
   The key threat to our approach is that, conditional on our measures of stop location and time,
troopers vary in the composition of motorists they stop. This variation may exist because our
location and time measures are not sufficiently granular or because, in the same environment,
troopers vary in the motorists they decide to stop.
   We address this concern using several approaches. We show that baseline SPC estimates do
not change if we use more granular location and time measures and control directly for observable
motorist characteristics. Baseline SPC estimates are also invariant to removing troopers that
stop motorists with unusual observable characteristics from the analysis. We also corroborate our
baseline SPC estimates using two alternative research designs. First, we find similar patterns when
we rely only on within-motorist variation in outcomes among motorists stopped multiple times.
Second, we compare stop outcomes on opposite sides of trooper patrol area borders in a spatial
regression discontinuity (RD) design. Along the same highway route, the composition of troopers
making traffic stops changes sharply across patrol area borders. We use this feature to validate
trooper search rates as measures of the causal effect of trooper assignment on search likelihood and
to confirm that average and marginal hit rates are approximately equal.
   Fourth, we examine whether troopers themselves face constant marginal returns to search. The
linear between-trooper SPCs we identify suggest that there is no equity-efficiency trade-off in our
setting. However, search rate equalization across motorist racial groups requires that individual
troopers change their search behavior. Determining what would happen in this scenario requires
knowledge of the within-trooper SPC: the within-trooper relationship between search rates and
contraband yield. The between-trooper SPC and average within-trooper SPC may differ if, for
example, troopers that are better at screening also search motorists at higher rates. The two SPCs
are identical if trooper screening ability and search propensity are independent.
   We show suggestive evidence that the between-trooper and average within-trooper SPC are
similar. Estimating the within-trooper SPC is complicated by the fact that within-trooper variation
in search rates in part derives from changes in trooper screening ability and motorist composition.
We instrument for trooper search rates using variation over time in coworker search rates, which
we show is largely unrelated to observable variation in motorist characteristics. The within-trooper
SPC slope we estimate is statistically indistinguishable from the between-trooper slope, though the
within-trooper estimate is imprecise. We conclude that, in partial equilibrium, racial profiling does
not present an equity-efficiency trade-off. Moreover, we present suggestive evidence that motorist
racial group-specific deterrence effects are negligible at the margin, implying that predicted changes
in search productivity are unlikely to be offset by changes in contraband carrying behavior.
   Previous researchers have argued that disparate policing behavior is driven by racial bias (e.g.,


                                                  4
Pierson et al., 2019), and this channel offers one potential explanation for our findings. We examine
how search patterns vary with several proxies for trooper preferences and beliefs: trooper race
(Anwar and Fang, 2006; Close and Mason, 2007; Antonovics and Knight, 2009; West, 2018), local
political preferences (Cohen and Yang, 2019), and citation behavior (Goncalves and Mello, 2018).
We find that all trooper racial groups are more likely to search black and Hispanic motorists than
white motorists, but the black-white disparity is smaller for black troopers. The black-white search
disparity is also substantially larger in counties with higher Republican vote shares in the 2016
presidential election. While we find no clear link between black-white disparities in search and
citation rates, in counties where troopers cite Hispanic motorists more often, troopers are also
more likely to search Hispanic motorists.
    Related Literature.--Our paper relates closely to a series of papers testing whether racial differ-
ences in search rates reflect racial bias or are driven by some combination of statistical discrimination
and omitted variables. Research in this literature applies the reasoning of the Becker (1957, 1993)
outcome test. Implementing this test in practice is made difficult by the inframarginality problem.
    Two seminal papers develop tests of racial bias that attempt to circumvent the inframarginality
problem. Both papers document large racial disparities in search rates and similar or lower hit
rates for black and Hispanic motorists, but conclude there is no evidence of racial bias against black
motorists. Knowles et al. (2001) develop an equilibrium model where troopers decide whether or
not to search motorists and motorists decide whether or not to carry contraband. They show that
if troopers are not racially biased, all motorists must carry contraband with equal probability in
equilibrium. In their model there is no inframarginality problem because there is no difference
between hit rates for the marginal and average searched motorists. While we find that marginal
and average hit rates are similar empirically, there are at least two features of our setting that are
inconsistent with the Knowles et al. (2001) framework. First, troopers vary systematically in their
hit rates, implying variation in screening ability. Second, we find little evidence that motorists
respond to variation in search risk by adjusting contraband carrying rates, at least in the range of
search rates we observe.
    Anwar and Fang (2006) argue that if troopers are not racially biased, the ranking of search
and hit rates by white and black troopers should be unaffected by the motorist's race. In their
framework, if rankings differ by the motorist's race, then either white or black troopers are biased
(or both), though the approach cannot be used to detect absolute racial bias. Applying the Anwar
and Fang (2006) test to our data, we do not find evidence of relative bias among black, white, and
Hispanic troopers.1
    More recently, Arnold et al. (2018) and Marx (2020) use variation in behavior among decision-
makers to address inframarginality. Arnold et al. (2018) use the quasi-random assignment of defen-
dants to bail judges with varying release tendencies to test whether the rates of pretrial misconduct
differ for marginal black and white defendants. A key assumption for their approach is strict mono-
   1
     Simoiu et al. (2017) address the inframarginality problem by jointly estimating decision thresholds and risk
distributions parametrically.



                                                       5
tonicity --that bail judges share the same ranking of defendants by misconduct risk. Under strict
monotonicity--an assumption that does not hold in our setting--our results would imply that Texas
state troopers exhibit racial bias against Hispanic, but not black, motorists in the Becker (1957,
1993) sense, yet troopers search black motorists more often than white motorists with no associated
efficiency gains. This highlights a limitation of the Becker (1957, 1993) outcome test: when the
returns to search are constant, equalized marginal hit rates do not imply an equity-efficiency trade-
off.2 Marx (2020) applies a logic similar to that of Arnold et al. (2018) to the policing context. He
uses search and hit rates for each combination of motorist race and trooper race to bound marginal
hit rates for each motorist racial group. He finds suggestive evidence of bias against Hispanic mo-
torists. We require a weaker condition than strict monotonicity to construct our counterfactuals:
that the between-trooper SPC and average within-trooper SPC are equal. This condition is implied
by the skill-independence condition of Chan et al. (2020) and the average monotonicity condition
of Frandsen et al. (2020).
    Methodologically, we build on Arnold et al. (2020) and Chan et al. (2020), who do not assume
monotonicity and identify variation in both preferences and screening ability across decision-makers
facing similar cases. Arnold et al. (2020) use the quasi-random assignment of defendants to judges
to study racial disparities and discrimination in pretrial release rates in New York City courts.
They first show how to non-parametrically identify racial discrimination, which they define as
racial differences in pretrial release rates conditional on pretrial misconduct risk. The authors
then use the relationship between judge release rates and their share of released defendants who
commit pretrial misconduct to estimate a structural model of judge behavior. They conclude that
discrimination is driven by both racial bias and statistical discrimination and judges vary in both
degree of bias and screening ability. Chan et al. (2020) exploit the quasi-random assignment of
patients to physicians to study the relationship between a physician's share of patients diagnosed
with pneumonia and their share of patients who leave with undiagnosed pneumonia. They estimate
a structural model to recover the distribution of diagnostic skill and preferences across physicians.
A common feature of these two papers and ours is that they use between-agent variation in behavior
to make inferences about policy counterfactuals that require within-agent changes in behavior. A
key distinction is that we do not aim to identify the distribution of trooper preferences and screening
ability. Instead, we are focused on whether racial profiling poses an equity-efficiency trade-off in
the aggregate.
    A second branch of the economics literature on racial profiling considers whether profiling is
justified, either on efficiency or ethical grounds. Several papers make the point that, even if troopers
are profiling as a form of unbiased statistical discrimination to maximize the rate at which their
searches yield contraband, profiling may not be efficient if it affects whether motorists decide to
carry contraband in the first place (Persico, 2002; Dominitz and Knowles, 2006). If the social goal
of policing is to reduce crime (rather than maximize the rate at which contraband is found), then
   2
      Our findings are consistent with MacDonald and Fagan (2019) who study a New York Police Department policy
that increased search and frisk rates during civilian stops in specific locations, particularly of black and Hispanic
civilians. They find that this increase in search and frisk rates did not correspond with a change in the hit rate.


                                                         6
efficient trooper behavior requires that they search motorist groups such that marginal deterrence
effects are equalized across groups. We provide suggestive evidence that deterrence effects are
limited in our setting, and so efficiency can be assessed on the basis of contraband yield.
     More broadly, our paper contributes to a large literature examining racial disparities in the
criminal justice system. Blacks and Hispanics are charged with more severe offenses (Rehavi and
Starr, 2014; Goncalves and Mello, 2018), are more likely to be denied bail (Arnold et al., 2018) and
convicted of a crime (Anwar et al., 2012), and are issued longer incarceration sentences (Rehavi
and Starr, 2014). Racial disparities in search rates are an order of magnitude larger than those
documented in other criminal justice contexts. Traffic stops are also the most common interaction
between police and the public, accounting for 41% of police contacts in 2015 (Davis et al., 2018).


II     Context and Data
We study the search behavior of highway patrol troopers. In Texas, the primary responsibility
of highway patrol troopers is to enforce state traffic laws on highways and state roads, but they
have authority to enforce state criminal law throughout the state. During a typical shift, troopers
conduct an average of eight traffic stops. When conducting each traffic stop, a trooper will give
either a warning or citation for the original traffic violation. Troopers may also decide to further
investigate if they suspect that a motorist may be carrying contraband, such as illicit drugs or
weapons. As part of their investigation, troopers may search the motorist or vehicle for contraband.
Below, we describe the legal standard pertaining to the use of race as a factor in trooper decisions
to search a motorist or vehicle. We then describe the combination of three datasets that we use
to characterize patterns in search rates and outcomes by motorist racial group: (1) administrative
data on traffic stops conducted by the Texas Highway Patrol, (2) administrative data on individual
criminal histories in Texas, and (3) commercial address history data.

II.A     Legal Framework
Whether police officers can legally use race as a factor in deciding to engage in routine activities, such
as vehicle and motorist searches, remains controversial. In an early review of the relevant case law,
Knowles et al. (2001) concludes that the legality of racial profiling is complex and context-specific.
Legal scholars have also noted that constitutional challenges to racial profiling have largely been
unsuccessful, often requiring plaintiffs to show evidence of "discriminatory purpose" (i.e., racial
animus) underpinning the profiling behavior being challenged. An alternative avenue for redress
is offered by Legal Code 34 U.S.C. § 12601 (Section 12601), which authorizes the Department of
Justice to pursue cases against police departments engaged in unconstitutional practices. Indeed,
the Department of Justice has historically taken action against a number of police departments
for racially-targeted stops of pedestrians and motorists on this basis (Anderson, 2020), although
documented transgressions in these departments were particularly egregious, including false arrests,
illegal searches, and excessive use of force. In any case, Section 12601 cannot be used by private


                                                    7
individuals seeking legal remedy for mistreatment, and its use by the Department of Justice is
discretionary; since 2017, no new Section 12601 investigations have been initiated.
   Recent legal scholarship, including Tiwara (2019), has challenged the legality of racial profiling
on the basis of disparate impact liability arising under the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets
Act of 1968. Under this framework, a practice that has a disparate impact on minorities "may be
permissible only if the police can demonstrate that it has a legitimate law-enforcement-related
necessity for the use of the practice at issue" (Tiwara, 2019). In our context, evidence that state
troopers search black and Hispanic motorists more frequently than white motorists without any
associated efficiency gain would likely constitute a discriminatory practice on this basis.

II.B       Traffic Stop Data
The primary data source we use is a comprehensive dataset of 16 million traffic stops of motor
vehicles conducted by the Texas Highway Patrol between 2009 and 2015. For each stop, the data
include the date, time, location (including GPS coordinates), motorist's race and ethnicity, mo-
torist's gender, information on the motor vehicle (including make, model, and year), the associated
violation(s)3 , whether a search was conducted, the rationale for each search, whether contraband
was found, and the ID number of the trooper who conducted the stop. These data are similar to
those used in earlier studies of racial profiling (see Anwar and Fang, 2006). A unique feature of the
Texas data is that they include the motorist's full name and address. This identifying information
allows us to augment the data in three ways: (1) we match multiple traffic stops to the same mo-
torist, (2) we merge in criminal histories for each motorist using data described below, and (3) we
use each motorist's address to identify their neighborhood (Census block group) median income.
   The data only cover motorists who are stopped and not all motorists who could potentially
be stopped. This constraint will be particularly relevant when we study variation across troopers
in their search behavior because troopers may also vary in whom they decide to stop. If the
composition of stopped motorists varies across troopers in ways that we cannot observe in the
data, this will complicate our interpretation of between-trooper differences in search behavior.
Due to this concern, we focus our analysis on what Epp et al. (2014) and Baumgartner et al.
(2018) classify as safety stops, which they distinguish from investigatory stops. The goal of their
classification is to distinguish stops by the trooper's motivation for the stop. In safety stops the
trooper's motivation for conducting the stop is the traffic violation itself and not the characteristics
of the motorist or vehicle. By contrast, in investigatory stops, troopers use minor traffic offenses
as a pretext for pulling motorists over and potentially searching them or their vehicles. Troopers
use more discretion in deciding whether to conduct an investigatory stop, and hence there is more
potential for motorist characteristics to vary across troopers for these stops.
   Our data do not identify the trooper's reason for the stop directly, but we infer this from the
traffic or criminal violation(s) associated with the stop. To proxy for safety stops, we limit the
   3
       The data include both stops that result in warnings and citations.




                                                           8
sample to stops that include a speeding violation.4 This includes 61% of all stops. Consistent with
our interpretation of speeding stops as predominantly safety stops, we show in Appendix B that
variation across troopers in cited speeds is limited. In addition, in Section IV we measure and
account for variation in the composition of stopped motorists across troopers.
    We also limit our analysis to stops where the motorist has a Texas address and where the mo-
torist is black, Hispanic, or white. A prior investigation found that Texas state troopers incorrectly
recorded many Hispanic drivers as white (Collister, 2015). Following Pierson et al. (2019), we
recategorize motorists as Hispanic if they have a surname such that at least 75% of people with
that surname identify as Hispanic in the 2010 Census.5
    Finally, to reduce variation in stop location across troopers, we limit our analysis to stops made
on state and interstate highways. This restriction excludes stops made on farm-to-market roads,
ranch-to-market roads, county roads, and city streets, which account for about 26% of stops but
have far fewer stops per road than state and interstate highways. Appendix Table A1 summarizes
the number of observations we drop with each sample restriction. After applying these restrictions,
our sample includes 4,931,332 stops.
    We divide motorists into four categories based on their history of previous traffic stops.6 We
assign all motorists who have not had a previous stop to the first category. Motorists with a prior
stop but no prior search are assigned to the second category. Motorists with a prior search but
no prior search that yielded contraband are assigned to the third category. Motorists with a prior
search that yielded contraband are assigned to the fourth category.
    In our setting, there are four types of searches: consent, probable cause, incident to arrest, and
inventory. Inventory searches are searches that occur after a vehicle is ordered impounded. In these
instances, police are free to search the inventoried vehicle subject to departmental search policy.
Incident to arrest searches are searches that occur following an arrest. After an arrest, troopers
can search the arrested individual for contraband and, under broad conditions, search the vehicle.
Alternatively, troopers have the right to conduct a search if they have probable cause to believe a
law has been broken. Last, in a consent search, a trooper conducts a search only after receiving
permission from the motorist to do so. In our data, 84% of searches are consent and probable
cause searches. When contraband is discovered following a search, the motorist may be arrested
on charges related to the contraband discovered.
    4
      To proxy for safety stops, Baumgartner et al. (2018) use stops where the trooper's stated reason for the stop is a
speed limit violation, stop light or sign violation, other moving violation, or driving while intoxicated. They classify
stops as investigatory if the stated reason is an equipment violation (e.g., broken taillight), a regulatory or paperwork
violation (e.g., expired registration or license), seat belt violation, or if the stop results from a trooper looking for a
particular individual (e.g., as part of a criminal investigation).
    5
      For the subsample of motorists with arrest records, the correlation between this constructed measure of Hispanic
ethnicity and the measure included in Texas administrative criminal history data is 0.74 (0.75 for males and 0.70 for
females).
    6
      Stop histories are constructed using all stops, not just those meeting our sample criteria.




                                                            9
II.C       Criminal History Data
We construct motorist criminal histories using data from the Texas Computerized Criminal History
System. These data are maintained by the Texas Department of Public Safety. State troopers have
access to these same data when conducting stops. The data track state felony and misdemeanor
criminal charges from arrest through sentencing up to 2015.7 Agencies are required to report
data for all offenses that are Class B misdemeanors or greater, including all offenses that would
potentially lead to a confinement sentence. The data include information on each criminal charge,
including the original arrest charge, date of arrest, final court charge, charge disposition, and, if the
charge results in conviction, the final sentence. The data include arrest charges that are ultimately
dropped. We use these data to create summary measures of each motorist's criminal history at the
time they are stopped. The data also include an individual's full name, address, race and ethnicity,
gender, and a unique individual ID.
   We construct two criminal history indices, one based on all drug offense arrests and another
for non-drug offense arrests. For the drug offense index, we divide motorists into three categories.
The first category is motorists with no prior drug-related arrests. Among motorists with any prior
drug-related arrest, the median number of prior drug-related arrests is one. We assign remaining
motorists to the second and third criminal history categories if their number of prior drug-related
arrests is one and greater than one, respectively. We construct an analogous index for non-drug
offense arrests. Among motorists with any prior non-drug offense arrest, the median number of
prior non-drug offense arrests is two.

II.D       Address History Data
One shortcoming of the traffic stop data is that it does not include a unique motorist ID. The
problem this presents is that for two traffic stops with the same associated motorist name but
different addresses, we do not know whether these stops correspond to the same person. The
criminal history data includes an individual identifier and allows us to construct a partial address
history for a given person. But the addresses we observe in those data only correspond to the
points in time when that person is arrested, if they have any criminal history at all.
   To facilitate matching traffic stops and criminal history to a given motorist, we use commercial
data on address history from Infogroup. These data are similar to address history data used in
prior research, including Diamond et al. (2019) and Phillips (forthcoming). For each individual,
the data include their full name and street addresses at which the individual lived with estimated
dates of residence. The data extract we use includes the addresses histories for all individuals in
the database with a Texas residence between 2005 and 2016.
   We merge traffic stops and criminal history to individuals using full name and address, incor-
porating address history data to account for address changes. The data merge is described in more
detail in Appendix A.
   7
       The share of arrest records with an available sentencing record falls after 2013.



                                                            10
II.E     Descriptive Statistics
We present descriptive statistics for our merged dataset in Table I. We report descriptive statistics
for all stops and subset the data by motorist race. We do the same for all stops that lead to
searches. The motorist is female in 36% of stops, white in 55% of stops, Hispanic in 35.9% of stops,
and black in 9.1% of stops.8 For about 43% of stops, the motorist has been stopped previously. For
about 1.2% of stops, the motorist has been stopped and searched previously, and for about 30% of
those stops, the motorist has also been found with contraband in a previous search. For about 9%
of stops, the motorist has a previous non-drug arrest, and in about 3% of stops the motorist has a
previous drug arrest. Troopers search motorists in 1.06% of stops and find contraband in 0.34% of
stops.

                                          [Table 1 about here.]

   Black motorists are slightly less likely than white motorists to have been stopped in the past,
but they are more likely to have been searched in the past. They are also more likely to have an
arrest history. Consistent with past research on racial profiling (see Pierson et al., 2019), black
motorists are nearly three times more likely to be searched than white motorists (corresponding
search rates are 2.202% and 0.755%). For Hispanic motorists, stop history, criminal history, and
search rates generally fall between white and black motorists. Hispanic and black motorists reside
in neighborhoods with similar median incomes, while median neighborhood incomes for white
motorists are higher.
   Compared to all stopped motorists, searched motorists are about 18 percentage points more
likely to be male and come from neighborhoods with median incomes that are 13 log points lower.
Searched motorists are more than seven times more likely to have been searched previously, three
times more likely to have a previous arrest unrelated to drugs, and six times more likely to have a
previous drug-related arrest.
   In Appendix B we summarize the joint determinants of search in a series of logistic regressions.
Conditional on stop location and time, black and Hispanic motorists are about 170% and 68% more
likely to be searched than white motorists. Conditioning further on motorist neighborhood income,
expected neighborhood income given vehicle type, criminal history, and stop history reduces black-
white and Hispanic-white odds ratios to 1.86 and 1.44. This rich set of controls can statistically
account for about half of the black-white and 35% of the Hispanic-white disparities in search rates
we estimate by conditioning on only stop time and location. The residual black-white difference
in search rates is similar in magnitude to the increase in search likelihood associated with multiple
previous non-drug arrests and half of the increase associated with a prior drug arrest.
   The percentage of searches that yield contraband (the hit rate) is 31.9%. The hit rate for white
motorists (37.4%) exceeds the hit rate for black motorists (34.0%), which exceeds the hit rate
for Hispanic motorists (25.9%). This ranking is consistent with past research on racial profiling
   8
    For comparison, in 2010 the age 15 and above Texas population was 51% female, 49% non-Hispanic white, 34%
Hispanic, and 12% non-Hispanic black.


                                                     11
(see Pierson et al., 2019). In Appendix B we summarize the joint determinants of contraband
yield among searches. Conditional on stop location and time, searches of black and Hispanic
motorists are about 15% and 30% less likely to yield contraband than searches of white motorists.
Conditioning further on both motorist income proxies, criminal history, and stop history attenuates
these differences to about 10% and 25%.9
    Appendix Table B1 describes the distributions search types, contraband types, and arrest out-
comes. Black motorists are more likely to be subject to probable cause searches, and less likely to
be subject to consent and inventory searches. Drugs make up 51.8% of contraband found, weapons
make up 3.8%, and currency makes up 0.6%. In the remaining 44% of cases, contraband is char-
acterized as "Other", a category that includes drug paraphernalia and open containers of alcohol.
Across motorist racial groups, the most salient difference is that black motorists are about four and
two percentage points more likely to be found with drugs and weapons than the pooled average, and
are less likely to be found with "Other" contraband. We find that only 24.5% of stops that yield
contraband lead to an arrest, similar to the rate documented in North Carolina by Baumgartner et
al. (2018). This percentage is similar across motorist racial groups. The severity of arrest charges,
as proxied by the average incarceration sentence associated with conviction, is also similar across
groups.


III       A Model of Trooper Search Behavior
We model trooper search behavior using a modified version of the model developed in Anwar and
Fang (2006). Troopers decide whether to search a stopped motorist using a noisy signal for the
motorist's guilt. The modification we make is to allow this signal to be coarse over some range so
that troopers are unable to distinguish between more or less suspicious motorists in this range.
    We begin with a continuum of motorists. We first consider the behavior of a single trooper
and later consider heterogeneity in trooper preferences and screening ability. Suppose fraction 
of motorists carry contraband. For each stopped motorist i, the trooper observes a noisy signal
for the motorist's guilt, i  [0, 1]. If the motorist is carrying contraband, the index  is randomly
drawn from a distribution with continuous probability density function (PDF) fg (·) and cumulative
distribution function (CDF) Fg (·); if the motorist is not carrying contraband,  is randomly drawn
from a continuous PDF fn (·) and CDF Fn (·). (The subscripts g and n stand for "guilty" and "not
guilty," respectively.)
    We assume that fg (·) and fn (·) satisfy a modified version of the standard monotone likelihood
ratio property (MLRP): fg ()/fn () is strictly increasing in  for  <     ¯ and is constant for    ¯.
The MLRP assumption on the signal distributions provides that a higher index  signals that
a motorist is more likely to be guilty. However, in our formulation, for sufficiently "suspicious"
signals, there is a point at which signals are no longer informative at the margin about a motorist's
likelihood of carrying contraband. In other words, signals are coarse in the sense that troopers can
    9
     Interestingly, we also find that, conditional on motorist race, low-income motorists are more likely to be searched,
but searches of low-income motorists are less likely to yield contraband.


                                                           12
identify the riskiest motorists but, within this group, are unable to distinguish between those who
are more or less likely to carry contraband.10
    Let G denote the event that a motorist is found with contraband if searched. When a trooper
observes a motorist with signal , the posterior probability that the motorist is guilty of carrying
contraband, P r(G|), is given by Bayes's rule:

                                                        fg ()
                                     P (G|) =                          .
                                                  fg () + (1 -  )fn ()

From the MLRP, we have that P (G|) is strictly increasing in  for  < ¯. For   ¯, this probability
is constant and is given by

                                                           fg   ¯
                                  P (G|  ¯) =
                                                   fg    ¯ + (1 -  )fn 
                                                                       ¯ .

    Following the literature, we assume that the trooper's objective is to maximize the rate that
traffic stops yield contraband, net of search costs. We further assume that search costs are a convex
function, C (·), of the overall proportion of stops that result in searches,  .
    Given this cost structure, troopers will choose some threshold  where troopers will search any
motorist with i   . Given this search threshold, the overall search rate is

                                ( ) =  (1 - Fg ( )) + (1 -  )(1 - Fn ( )).

    The trooper's problem is to choose  that maximizes their objective function
                                         1
                                             P (G| )f ()d - C ( ( )),
                                        

where f () = fg () + (1 -  )fn (). Hence, the trooper will set a threshold  to equalize the
marginal costs and benefits of search for the marginal searched motorist:

                                             P (G| ) = C ( ( )).

    Given search threshold  , the trooper's unconditional hit rate is

                                              ( ) =  (1 - Fg ( )).

                                                           ( )
We define the contraband yield rate (or hit rate ) as      ( ) ,   the share of searches that yield contraband.
    We denote the relationship between           ( )   and    ( )    as the trooper's SPC. Equivalently, we
define SPC implicitly as ~( ) =       ( ( )).
                                          We present a theoretical example of this SPC in Figure
I. By the MLRP, this relationship is linear where      ¯, and hence  ( ) is low. As  declines
  10
     We allow for one region for the most suspicious motorists where fg ()/fn () is constant because this fits the
pattern we observe in the data. The framework can be readily extended to allow for alternative locations of this
"flat" region or multiple such regions.


                                                        13
below ¯, the relationship becomes concave, as the marginal searched motorist is less likely to have
contraband than inframarginal searched motorists.

                                       [Figure 1 about here.]

III.A    Trooper Heterogeneity
In practice, we will estimate feasible combinations of search rates and unconditional hit rates using
variation in outcomes across troopers. More formally, let p index troopers. We will identify the set
                                 ,   )}
of outcomes for all troopers, {(p  p pP . We use this set to calculate the between-trooper SPC,
                                          given   , which can be expressed as
the conditional expectation function for p      p

                                                         
                                   ~BT ( )  E [p
                                                 |p s.t. p =  ].

This may differ from the SPC that an individual trooper faces if trooper-specific SPCs--the set of
feasible outcomes for a specific trooper--are heterogeneous.
   In our setting, troopers may vary in their search rates and unconditional hit rates because
                                                                                          . Troopers
they face different search costs, Cp (·), which would lead to varying search thresholds, p
may also vary in their ability to infer the contraband risk for each motorist in the sense that the
signal distributions fg (·) and fn (·) may vary across troopers. In this case, troopers may vary in
the unconditional hit rates they can achieve for a given search rate, leading to variation in trooper-
specific SPCs. A uniformly higher SPC--meaning a trooper can achieve a (weakly) higher hit rate
for every given search rate--corresponds to greater screening ability.
   If troopers vary only in search costs, SPCs will not vary across troopers, and the between-
trooper SPC we identify will correspond to each trooper's own SPC. This condition follows from
the strict monotonicity assumption of Arnold et al. (2018). But if troopers vary in screening ability,
SPCs will vary across troopers, and the between-trooper SPC we identify may no longer correspond
to any particular trooper's SPC.
   If trooper-specific SPCs vary, we can still define the average within-trooper SPC. We define the
average within-trooper SPC as the average of trooper-specific SPCs,

                                        ~WT ( )  Ep [~
                                                     p ( )].

For any given search rate  , the value for the average within-trooper SPC is the average uncondi-
tional hit rate troopers would achieve if all troopers search at that rate. The between-trooper SPC
we identify will correspond to the average within-trooper SPC if variation in trooper screening abil-
                                             . More formally, suppose there exists a function that
ity is independent of trooper search rates, p
assigns a skill p to each trooper j such that ~p ( ) = ~p ( ) for all search rates  where p = p .
                                                                                              .
Then the between-trooper SPC identifies the average within-trooper SPC if p is independent of p
This condition corresponds to the skill-propensity independence condition in Chan et al. (2020).
The condition is weaker than the strict monotonicity assumption of Arnold et al. (2018), which


                                                 14
would require that any motorist searched by a given trooper would have also been searched by any
trooper with a higher search propensity, and any motorist not searched by a given trooper would
not have been searched by any trooper with a lower search propensity.

III.B     Disparities between Motorist Groups
The focus of this paper is on racial disparities in search rates and whether equalizing search rates
across motorist racial groups would reduce contraband yield. Accordingly, we extend the model to
allow for multiple motorist groups (e.g., black, Hispanic, and white motorists). In particular, we
                                                                                 r (·) and f r (·)) and
index groups by r  {b, h, w} and allow for group-specific signal distributions (fg          n
                    ), which imply group-specific SPCs. We also allow for search costs to depend
search thresholds (r
on the search rates for each group so that costs are defined as

                                                                     
                                          C ( b (b ),  h (h ) ,  w ( w )).

    By characterizing group-specific SPCs and identifying where troopers locate along those group-
specific SPCs, we can determine whether troopers face an equity-efficiency trade-off.
    There are two scenarios where no trade-off exists. In the first scenario, search productivity at
the margin is unequal across motorist groups, and marginal productivity is lower for the group with
the higher search rate. This corresponds to Panel B of Figure II. In this case, the Becker (1957,
1993) outcome test would identify troopers as biased.
                                                                                               
    In the second scenario, search productivity at the margin is equalized across groups, but r ¯r
for r  {A, B }, and search rates are unequal across groups. This scenario is depicted in Panel C of
Figure II. Note that, in this scenario, troopers are unbiased in the sense of Becker (1957, 1993).11
For comparison, Panel A of Figure II depicts a scenario in which an equity-efficiency trade-off is
present because equalizing marginal hit rates requires unequal search rates.

                                            [Figure 2 about here.]


IV      Estimating the between-Trooper Search Productivity Curve
We have shown that black and Hispanic motorists are more likely to be searched than white mo-
torists, while searches of black and Hispanic troopers are equally or less likely to yield contraband.
The central question of this paper is whether equalizing search rates across motorist racial groups
would decrease contraband yield. To answer this question, we first estimate the relationship be-
tween trooper search rates and unconditional hit rates. We present evidence that different troopers
search equivalent groups of motorists at varying rates and examine how troopers' search rates relate
to their search productivity.
  11
    An alternative notion of bias is based on whether search rates are equal among motorists with r 
                                                                                                        ¯r . We are
unable to test for this form of bias, however, because we cannot measure the total number of motorists meeting this
condition.



                                                        15
   An essential requirement of our approach is that we measure how outcomes vary across troopers
for equivalent stops. There is no random assignment of troopers to stops in our context. Instead,
we will make a selection on observables argument--conditional on the time and location of the
stop, the identity of the trooper who conducts the stop is unrelated to other determinants of search
and search outcomes. In practice, cross-trooper variation arises from week-to-week variation in
trooper shift schedules and within-shift variation in trooper locations. Our primary analysis relies
on between-trooper variation within assigned patrol areas ("sergeant areas") to isolate variation
in search rates conditional on location. We will bolster the argument that we are identifying how
different troopers treat equivalent stops by showing that our SPC estimates are robust to varying
the set of included controls and troopers and are corroborated by two alternative research designs
that rely on different identifying assumptions.

IV.A        Conceptualizing the between-Trooper Search Productivity Curve
For each stop, let i denote the motorist and t denote the specific time. The functions (i, t)
and  (t) map each stop to its associated location and time category. Let P denote the set of
troopers working in location . We limit the analysis to trooper-by-location combinations where the
trooper has conducted stops in that location for each time category. For each stop, the associated
trooper must decide whether to conduct a search. Let SEARCHitp  {0, 1} denote the potential
(search) outcome of the stop, which indicates whether trooper p  P                   (i,t)   would conduct a search
if they were conducting stop (i, t). Let Git  {0, 1} indicate whether the motorist is carrying
contraband at the time of the stop. Hence, trooper p would find contraband in stop (i, t) if
Git × SEARCHitp  CONTRABANDitp = 1.12 Finally, the function p(i, t) maps a stop (i, t) to the
trooper who conducts the stop in practice.
   For every trooper p  P , we can define what their search rate and unconditional hit rate would
be if they conducted all of the searches conducted in location :

                                       p  E [SEARCHitp | (i, t) = ],                                               (1)
                                       p  E [Git SEARCHitp | (i, t) = ].                                           (2)

We refer to these objects as search propensities and unconditional hit propensities.
   We define our between-trooper SPC as

                                       ~BT ( )  E [Ep [p |p s.t. p =  ]].
                                                                                                                   (3)

In words, the between-trooper SPC is the relationship between trooper search propensities and
unconditional hit propensities across troopers within a location, averaging across locations.
   We are also interested in the between-trooper SPC for specific racial groups of motorists (black,
                                                                                              r
Hispanic, and white). Let r(i) indicate the race of motorist i, where r  {b, h, w}. We define p
  12
       Note that we assume no variation across troopers in their ability to identify contraband during a search.



                                                          16
    r analogously as a trooper's search propensity and unconditional hit propensity for motorists
and p
from group r and  BT as the between-trooper SPC for motorists from group r .
                 ~r
   In practice, we do not observe search and unconditional hit propensities. Instead, for trooper
p, we only observe the stop outcomes for stops conducted by trooper p in practice. To recover
propensities, we rely on the following conditional independence assumption:


Conditional Independence (CI) Assumption. Conditional on location (i, t) and time category
 (t), the race r(i), guilt Git , and potential search decisions {SEARCHitp }pP (i,t) are independent
of the trooper associated with the stop p(i, t).

                                                                       r
   We assess the plausibility of this assumption in Section IV.C. Let Sp  denote the set of stops
conducted by trooper p in location          at time category t of motorists from group r. Under this
                                           r and  r using the following weighted averages of
assumption, we can construct estimates for p     p
observed trooper search rates and unconditional hit rates, sr      r
                                                            p and hp :


                                             
                  1                                   |{(i, t)| (i, t) = ;  (t) =  ; r(i) = r}|
   sr
    p 
             
                  r |                SEARCHit  ×                                                ,             (4)
          
                |Sp  (i,t)S r                               |{(i, t)| (i, t) = ; r(i) = r}|
                           p      
                                                                   share for   -r
                   p - -  - r search rate
                                                       
                  1                                           |{(i, t)| (i, t) = ;  (t) =  ; r(i) = r}|
   hr
    p 
             
                  r |                CONTRABANDit  ×                                                      .   (5)
          
                |Sp           r
                                                                    |{(i, t)| (i, t) = ; r(i) = r}|
                        (i,t)Sp   
                                                                            share for   -r
                  p - -  - r unconditional hit rate


IV.B     Measuring between-Trooper Variation in Search Propensities
We begin by documenting substantial between-trooper variation in search rates among stops with
similar locations and times. The notion of location we use at baseline is the sergeant area. The
Texas Highway Patrol Division defines six primary regions, which encompass a total of 21 districts
and 157 sergeant areas. Outside of the state's most populous areas, sergeant areas typically cover
one to two counties in their entirety. In contrast, there are multiple sergeant areas associated with
each of the state's most populous counties. Our data identify the exact location of the stop, and
we geocode the corresponding sergeant area using boundary shape files received in response to a
Texas Public Information Act request.
   We infer the sergeant area to which each trooper is assigned based on the trooper-specific
distribution of stop locations. In a given calendar year (month), troopers conduct 85% (90%) of
all stops in the same sergeant area, on average. Assigning troopers to the modal sergeant area in
which they conduct stops in each year, we observe that roughly two-thirds of troopers are assigned
to the same sergeant area during the entirety of the sample period. Within a given year, however,
temporary reassignments are quite common. When sergeant area assignments are determined on a


                                                       17
monthly basis, we calculate that over 70% of troopers experience a change in assignment at least
once during the sample period. Roughly half of these reassignments are within the trooper's home
region, with the remaining reassignments disproportionately concentrated in the set of districts
adjacent to the US-Mexico border.13
    The notion of time we use at baseline is the combination of quarter of day and whether the stop
was conducted on a weekday or the weekend.
    We apply additional sample restrictions that limit the analysis to troopers who have made a
sufficient number of stops in a given location. For our pooled analysis, which pools motorists from
all racial groups, we limit the analysis to trooper-by-location and time cells with at least 5 stops.
We further limit to trooper and location cells with at least 100 stops. Panel A of Figure III depicts
the number troopers meeting these criteria in each sergeant area. Finally, we limit to locations
with at least 10 troopers meeting these criteria, leaving us with 1,951 troopers in 133 locations
with 2,657 combinations of trooper and location accounting for 71% of stops. There are an average
of 1,235 stops per trooper and location combination.14

                                             [Figure 3 about here.]

    Figure IV plots the distribution of sp where each trooper-by-location combination is weighted
equally. While the median trooper-by-location search rate is only 0.7%, there is a long right tail,
indicating that a small number of troopers search at particularly high rates. The 90th percentile
search rate is 3.4%.

                                             [Figure 4 about here.]

    We next look at search rates separately by motorist race. We denote the race-specific search
rates by sr
          pl where r  {w, b, h}. When examining race-specific search behavior, we apply different
sample criteria to ensure that the troopers we include have made a sufficient number of stops for a
specific motorist group. We limit the analysis to trooper-by-location-by-time-by-motorist-race cells
with at least 5 stops and trooper-by-location-by-motorist-race cells with least 100 stops. We then
limit to locations where, for each motorist racial group, there are at least 10 troopers meeting the
sample criteria, leaving us with 1,289 troopers in 79 locations accounting for 58% of black motorist
stops, 34% of Hispanic motorist stops, 53% of white motorist stops, and 46% of stops overall. The
sample includes 1,064 troopers for black motorists, 1,238 for Hispanic motorists, and 1,280 for
white motorists. For the sergeant areas we include in the race-specific analysis, Panel B of Figure
III depicts the number of troopers who satisfy the sample criteria, averaging across motorist racial
groups. There are an average of 266, 500, and 1,003 stops per trooper for black, Hispanic, and
white motorists.15
  13
      In an effort to strengthen border enforcement by increasing trooper presence, the Texas Department of Public
Safety launched a "border surge" in 2014 that involved rotating troopers to the border region (Benning and Chavez,
2016).
   14
      Descriptive statistics for the stops included in the pooled analysis are presented in Appendix Table B3.
   15
      Descriptive statistics for the stops included in the race-specific analysis are presented in Appendix Table B4.


                                                         18
   Mirroring racial differences in overall search rates, between-trooper variation in search rates is
larger for non-white motorists. For white, black, and Hispanic motorists, the difference in search
rates between the 10th and 90th percentiles of the trooper distribution is 2.8, 6.2, and 4.2 percentage
points.
   Our goal is to identify variation in how different troopers treat equivalent stops. However, for
a fixed sergeant area and time category, the composition of stopped motorists may still vary across
troopers. Sergeant area and time category may not fully capture variation in stop context. Even
in the same environment, troopers may vary in the composition of motorists they decide to stop.
For example, troopers may vary in whether they racially profile when deciding whom to stop for
speeding (Horrace and Rohlin, 2016). We examine how search rates change when we condition on a
larger set of stop and motorist characteristics. The objective is to learn whether a significant portion
of the variation in search rates is due to differences in motorist composition and to isolate variation
due to differences in trooper search behavior rather than differences in motorist composition.
   To calculate search rates that adjust for differences in stop and motorist characteristics, we
estimate the following linear probability model, separately by location:


                                SEARCHit = p(i,t)          (i,t) (t)   + Xit  + m(t) + r(i,t) +     it ,             (6)

where p(i,t)     (i,t) (t)   are fixed effects for trooper-by-location and time combinations, m(t) are fixed
effects for the month of the stop, and r(i,t) are fixed effects for the (highway) road of the stop. Xit
is a vector of motorist characteristics, including race, gender, log of neighborhood median income,
vehicle-based expected log neighborhood income, stop history, non-drug arrest history, and drug
arrest history. We use this model to calculate search rates for each trooper-by-location-by-time
combination, adjusting for motorist characteristics and stop month. We use these predicted search
rates to construct an overall search rate for a trooper-by-location combination using the same
                                                                 ~p .16
weights as above. We denote this adjusted trooper search rate as s
   Appendix Figure B1 compares adjusted trooper search rates (~
                                                              sp ) to unadjusted trooper search
rates (sp ) across trooper-by-location combinations after partialling out location fixed effects. The
slope of the fitted line is 0.97, and the correlation is 0.99. Observable motorist characteristics
explain virtually none of the variation in search rates across troopers. Instead, the variation is
attributable to differences in trooper search behavior for observably similar stops. This finding
provides support for our interpretation of trooper search rates as characterizing causal trooper
search propensities.
  16
       Formally, s
                 ~p is given by

                 s
                 ~p =           ^p
                                        + E [Xit ^+^m(t) + ^r(i,t) | (i, t) = ;  (t) =  ] P ( (t) =  | (i, t) = ).
                             




                                                                       19
IV.C      Trooper Search Rates and Motorist Characteristics
To further probe the CI assumption, we investigate the degree to which troopers with high and low
search rates stop different types of motorists. Specifically, we examine how motorist characteristics
predict the search rate of the trooper conducting the stop. As a benchmark, we estimate the
analogous relationship between the same motorist characteristics and whether the stop leads to a
search. In particular, we estimate linear regression models of the form

                                    Yit =    (i,t)   +  (t) + m(t) + Xit  +   it ,                           (7)

where Yit is either SEARCHit or leave-out trooper-by-location search rates, unadjusted (s-it
                                                                                         p ) or
          s-
adjusted (~  it
           p ).      (i,t)   and  (t) are location and time category fixed effects.
    Table II shows that motorist characteristics predict trooper-by-location search rates, but the
magnitude of the relationship is small.17 Column (1) uses a linear probability model to examine
how motorist characteristics predict whether a stop leads to search. Columns (2) and (3) use
identical specifications to assess the extent to which these same motorist characteristics predict
the unadjusted (s-it
                                                         s-
                 p ) and adjusted leave-out search rate (~
                                                            it
                                                          p ) of the trooper conducting the stop.
Where the outcome is the trooper search rate, the coefficients on all motorist characteristics are one
to two orders of magnitude smaller. The relative magnitudes are particularly small for stop and
arrest history, which would be difficult for troopers to observe before conducting the stop. Given
the large size of our sample, many of these coefficients are statistically significant. In Section IV.D,
we show that our SPC estimates are quantitatively similar whether or not we control for these
characteristics directly. We also corroborate our baseline SPC estimates using two alternative
research designs that rely on different identifying assumptions.

                                              [Table 2 about here.]

    As a robustness check, we repeat our main analyses after excluding troopers with the most
selected set of stopped motorists. For varying , we remove the % of troopers with compositions
of stopped motorists who deviate most from their expected composition given the time and location
of their stops. We discuss how we identify these troopers in more detail in Appendix B. Columns
(4)­(6) replicate (1)­(3) after removing stops conducted by the 20% of troopers with the most
selected set of stopped motorists. In columns (5) and (6), which relate trooper search rates to
stopped motorist characteristics, removing these troopers from the analysis further reduces the
magnitude of coefficients on motorist characteristics. All results presented in the remainder of the
paper are insensitive to excluding troopers with the most selected set of stopped motorists.
  17
     Appendix Table B5 presents analogous estimates for trooper-by-location unconditional hit rates. The findings
are similar.




                                                           20
IV.D      Baseline Search Productivity Curve Estimates
For each location, we observe multiple troopers with varying search rates. We next calculate
and compare unconditional hit rates across troopers within a location. We calculate trooper-by-
location-specific unconditional hit rates analogous to the search rates constructed above, replacing
the outcome with CONTRABANDit . We denote the unadjusted and adjusted trooper-by-location-
                                           ~ p . Each trooper demonstrates a feasible combination
specific unconditional hit rates as hp and h
of search rate and unconditional hit rate, which we use to construct a between-trooper SPC. We
then pool these location-specific SPCs across locations to construct an aggregate SPC.
    Note that trooper-by-location-specific search rates and unconditional hit rates are, in principle,
only directly comparable across troopers within a location.18 Hence, we aggregate location-specific
SPCs without relying on between-location comparisons. We do so in two ways. First, we plot
the relationship between search rates and unconditional hit rates while adjusting for location fixed
effects using the method of Cattaneo et al. (2019). We refer to this as the fixed effects (FE)
approach. One problem with this is approach is that because the distribution of trooper search rates
varies across locations, different portions of the SPC are estimated using varying sets of locations.
In the second approach, within locations we divide troopers into quantiles by search rate, group
quantiles across locations, and then plot the relationship between search rates and unconditional
hit rates across quantiles. We refer to this as the quantile (Q) approach. The advantage of this
approach is that each location is proportionally represented in each quantile. The interpretation of
the slope of this relationship is the change in the aggregate unconditional hit rate associated with
a change in the search rate quantile for all locations. We use deciles because each location has at
least 10 troopers by construction.
    Figure V summarizes the relationship between adjusted trooper search rates (~ sp ) and uncon-
                    ~ p ) using both approaches. In both approaches, we weight trooper-by-location
ditional hit rates (h
combinations by number of stops. From the FE approach, the figure includes 95% confidence bands
for the local linear relationship between adjusted trooper search rates and unconditional hit rates,
the best linear fit in the depicted range, and the slope of the best linear fit, labeled as  FE . From
the Q approach, the figure includes the mean values for each decile, the best linear fit, and the
slope of the best linear fit, labeled as  Q .

                                            [Figure 5 about here.]

    There are two main findings to note. First, for both approaches the SPC is approximately
linear. For the FE approach, we conduct a formal test for linearity following Cattaneo et al. (2019)
and fail to reject the null hypothesis that the relationship is linear. Second, the two approaches
provide similar SPC estimates:  FE is 0.331 and  Q is 0.346. These slopes indicate that a 1
percentage point increase in search rate is associated with about a 0.34 percentage point increase
in the unconditional hit rate. Note that the ratio of the unconditional hit rate to the search
  18
      In Sections IV.E.1 and IV.E.2 we show that trooper-by-location-specific search rates predict between-location
differences in search behavior as well.


                                                        21
rate gives us the percentage of searches that yield contraband, the hit rate. The fact that the
relationship between the unconditional hit rate and the search rate is linear implies that hit rates
are approximately constant across quantiles of trooper search rates and hence are unrelated to
trooper search rates.
    In Figure VI we repeat the analysis separately by motorist racial group. Estimates in Panel
A are derived using only white motorists, Panel B using only black motorists, and Panel C using
only Hispanic motorists. There are two main findings to note. First, as above, each SPC is
approximately linear. Second, the slopes for white and black motorists are comparable, while the
slope for Hispanic motorists is smallest in magnitude. Using either the FE or Q approach, we
cannot reject the null hypothesis of equal slopes for white and black motorists, while the slope for
Hispanic motorists is significantly smaller than the slope for white motorists at the 1% level. Using
the FE approach, the estimated SPC slopes for white, black, and Hispanic motorists are 0.395,
0.346, and 0.294. These slope estimates are comparable to overall group-specific hit rates described
in Appendix Table B4. Using the Q approach, the estimated SPC slopes for white, black, and
Hispanic motorists are 0.372, 0.388, and 0.312.19

                                             [Figure 6 about here.]

IV.E      Robustness Checks
The CI assumption underlying our approach is violated if, conditional on the sergeant area and
time category of a stop, troopers vary in the composition of motorists they stop. This variation
may exist because our location and time measures are not sufficiently granular or because, in the
same environment, troopers vary in the motorists they decide to stop. In this section we present
several robustness checks for the baseline results presented in Section IV.D.
    In Section IV.E.1 we reestimate pooled and race-specific SPCs using only within-motorist vari-
ation in stop outcomes among motorists involved in multiple speeding stops. In Section IV.E.2 we
compare stop outcomes on opposite sides of trooper patrol area borders in a spatial RD design to
validate trooper search rates as estimates of causal trooper search propensities. In both sections
we conduct additional tests for whether between-trooper SPCs are linear.
    In Appendix Figure B4, we show that the slope of the pooled between-trooper SPC is stable if
we exclude a varying proportion of troopers with compositions of stopped motorists who deviate
most from their expected composition given the time and location of their stops. In Appendix
Figure B5 we conduct a similar exercise for race-specific SPC slopes and find that slope estimates
and their ordering across groups are stable when we vary the set of included troopers.
   Another concern with our approach is that s       ~ p , as estimates of their population analogs,
                                              ~p and h
p and p , are subject to correlated sampling error. This sampling error may bias our estimate
   19
      Under the strict monotonicity assumption of Arnold et al. (2018), troopers' individual SPCs are the same as
the between trooper SPCs we estimate. Under this assumption, the SPC estimates imply that Texas state troopers
exhibit racial bias against Hispanic, but not black motorists. However, in Appendix B we document that strict
monotonicity does not hold in our setting. We show that, conditional on their search rate, troopers vary in their hit
rate, implying variation in screening ability across troopers.


                                                         22
of  . We account for sampling error in two ways in Appendix B. First, we apply empirical
Bayes adjustments to s
                     ~p and h~ p (Morris, 1983). Second, we take a split-sample IV approach to
estimation. We randomly split stops into two samples and estimate s
                                                                  ~p and h~ p separately in each
                                   ~ p on s
sample. In each sample, we regress h      ~p and location fixed effects, instrumenting for s
                                                                                           ~p using
its pair estimate from the other sample. Reassuringly, both approaches yield  estimates that are
statistically indistinguishable from the OLS estimates.
   Finally, we verify that the key features of the pooled and race-specific SPCs are not sensitive to
the particular hit rate definition employed. In our main specifications, we measure hit rates using
an indicator for whether the trooper finds any contraband as recorded in the traffic stop data. This
measure may mask heterogeneity in the significance of the contraband discovered across stops.
In Appendix Figures B6 through B7 we replicate Figure V and Figure VI using an alternative
outcome: an indicator for whether the contraband found leads to an arrest. The patterns are
qualitatively similar. The SPCs are approximately linear, the slopes for white and black motorists
are comparable, and the slope for Hispanic motorists is smaller in magnitude.

IV.E.1    Exploiting within-Motorist Variation

High and low search rate troopers may stop motorists who differ on unobservables correlated with
contraband risk. To address this concern, we take advantage of the fact that we can match multiple
stops to the same motorist. We look at sequential pairs of stops for the same motorist and measure
the relationship between differences in stop outcomes and differences in the search behavior of the
troopers conducting those stops. By looking at differences in stop outcomes for the same motorist,
we net out time-invariant motorist-level determinants of search and contraband risk.
   Consider a group of motorists stopped by two sets of troopers, one with high search costs and
the other with low search costs. Suppose that the distribution of screening skill across troopers and
the probability that a given motorist is carrying contraband are equal across sets. With diminishing
returns to search, we expect the hit rate to be lower for the low search cost (and hence high search
rate) set. Moreover, we expect this difference in hit rates to be increasing in the difference in search
rates between the trooper sets. By contrast, if troopers are searching on the linear portion of the
SPC, we expect constant hit rates.
   To implement this idea, we first group sequential pairs of stops of the same motorist into deciles
by their difference in trooper-by-location search rates, it s
                                                            ~p = s
                                                                 ~p(i,t)   (i,t) - s
                                                                                   ~p(i,t ) (i,t ) ,   where t > t
and stops at t and t are sequential for motorist i. Descriptive statistics for the sequential pairs of
stops are presented in Appendix Table B7 and Appendix Table B8.
   Panel A of Figure VII summarizes the characteristics of motorists involved in sequential pairs
of stops, grouped into deciles on the horizontal axis based on their value of it s
                                                                                 ~p . The vertical axis
depicts the average value of P (SEARCH |Xit ), the predicted search rate for a motorist given their




                                                  23
characteristics at the time of the initial stop.20 The figure includes the best linear fit and a bin
scatter. The measured relationship is flat. Motorists stopped by different troopers, as characterized
by their search rates, do not markedly vary in their characteristics.

                                              [Figure 7 about here.]

    In Panel B of Figure VII we plot the relationship between it s
                                                                 ~p and it SEARCH. The
relationship is linear with a slope of 0.733. If we suppose that it SEARCH is an unbiased measure
of differences in trooper search propensities for motorist i, then the fact that this slope is less than
one indicates that it s
                      ~p exhibits forecast bias. This could be explained by one or a combination of
two factors: (1) s
                 ~p is a biased estimate of p or (2) trooper search propensities vary with motorist
characteristics, and motorists stopped multiple times differ from typical motorists stopped in either
location.21 The overall search rate in the pooled SPC sample is 1.11% while the search rate for the
subset of stops analyzed here is 0.93%.
    Panel C of Figure VII plots the relationship between it s
                                                            ~p and it CONTRABAND by decile.
Again, the relationship is strikingly linear. If marginal motorists--motorists more likely to be
searched by high search rate troopers--are less likely to carry contraband, we would expect the
slope to be declining in it s
                            ~p . Instead, linearity is consistent with marginal motorists who are as
likely to carry contraband as inframarginal motorists.
    The patterns in Panels B and C of Figure VII imply a particular relationship between a given
increase in search rates and an increase in the unconditional hit rate if we frame it s
                                                                                      ~p as an
instrument for it SEARCH. The slope we estimate is essentially the slope of an SPC in first
differences. More concretely, we estimate the following model via just-identified two-stage least
squares (2SLS), separately by motorist race:

                                  it CONTRABAND =  it SEARCH +                     it ,                             (8)

where the first stage is
                                          it SEARCH =  it s
                                                          ~p + it .                                                 (9)

    We repeat this exercise pooling all motorists and separately by motorist racial group. When
we estimate the model for a specific motorist racial group, we replace it s
                                                                          ~p with its race-specific
           ~r
analog, it s p .
                22

   20
        We construct P (SEARCH |Xit ) using the logistic regression model

                                                                     e(Xit  )
                                         P (SEARCHit = 1|Xit ) =
                                                                   1 + e(Xit  )
where Xit is a vector of motorist characteristics including motorist race, gender, log of neighborhood income, expected
log income given vehicle, stop history, non-drug arrest history, and drug arrest history.
    21
       A third possibility is that s
                                   ~p differs from p due to sampling error, leading to attenuation bias. However,
the fact that empirical Bayes and split sample adjustments of s     ~p explored in Appendix B do not make a material
difference indicates that sample sizes are sufficiently large for sampling error to not be a significant issue.
    22
       Note that the set of stops included in the race-specific analysis is a subset of the stops included in the pooled
analysis because s ~r
                    p is measured for a smaller set of trooper-by-location combinations, as discussed in Section IV.B.



                                                          24
   We report  estimates in Table III. For all motorists pooled and each motorist group, the
slopes are somewhat smaller than, but comparable to, the baseline SPC slopes. As above, the
SPC slope for white motorists exceeds the slopes for black and Hispanic motorists in magnitude.
Time-invariant motorist unobservable characteristics cannot explain the pattern of SPC slopes we
identify in Section IV.D.

                                                [Table 3 about here.]

IV.E.2        Marginal Returns to Search at Sergeant Area Borders

We derive an alternative estimate for the marginal returns to search by comparing outcomes of
stops conducted on opposite sides of sergeant area borders. Along the same highway route, the
composition of troopers making traffic stops changes sharply across sergeant area borders, which
designate the areas that troopers are assigned to patrol. If troopers assigned to one sergeant
area search motorists at higher rates than troopers in a neighboring sergeant area, then motorists
crossing from one sergeant area to the other will face sharp changes in their chances of being
searched. This spatial feature of search rates suggests a natural RD research design. By comparing
search and unconditional hit rates for speeding stops on either side of sergeant area borders, we
measure the causal effect of changing from one set of troopers to another with higher search rates.
This comparison provides another test for whether trooper search rates characterize the causal
effect of trooper assignment on search likelihood and another measure of the between-trooper SPC
slope.
   Our identifying assumption is that the composition of motorists evolves continuously through
sergeant area borders. This assumption is reasonable because sergeant area borders are defined only
for administrative purposes; there is little reason to think the composition of motorists traveling
on a given stretch of highway would change discontinuously at these boundaries. One possible
exception is that some motorists are aware that their chances of being subject to a search change
at sergeant area borders and adjust their travel or contraband carrying behavior accordingly. In
practice, we find little evidence of a deterrence effect at sergeant area borders, a point we discuss
in more detail in Section V.B.
   For this exercise, we apply sample restrictions that differ from the sample restrictions described
in Section IV.B.23 There are 202 state and interstate highways crossing 319 distinct sergeant area
borders. Each highway by border pair is a potential RD. We limit the RD analysis to highway and
border intersections with at least 100 stops made in each corresponding sergeant area between 2
and 7 miles from the intersection. We are left with 424 intersections. These intersections as well
as the corresponding highways and sergeant areas are shown in Appendix Figure B8.
   For each intersection, we limit the analysis to speeding stops made in each corresponding
sergeant area within seven miles from the intersection. We use the distance between the location
  23
       Descriptive statistics for the stops included in this analysis are presented in Appendix Table B9.




                                                           25
of a stop and the intersection as the running variable. For each intersection, we set the distance as
negative for the sergeant areas with the lower average trooper search rate.24
    While sergeant area borders generate a discrete change in trooper patrol areas, in practice these
borders do not provide a discontinuity in where troopers search. Troopers conduct some stops
outside of their patrol area, and they are particularly likely to do so just outside sergeant area
borders. Figure VIII pools all intersections and plots the share of stops conducted by troopers
assigned to each adjacent sergeant area by distance from the intersection. More than two miles
from the border, the share of stops conducted by troopers assigned to that corresponding sergeant
area generally exceeds 70%. Approaching the border, this share falls to about 40%.

                                             [Figure 8 about here.]

    To add substantial statistical power to our test, we take a "donut" approach and exclude stops
that occur within a two-mile window around the intersection, denoted by the dashed vertical lines
in Figure VIII (Barreca et al., 2016). The trade-off is that, by excluding stops in this range, we
can no longer take a non-parametric approach to identification. Instead we assume that, in the
absence of contamination near the intersection, potential search outcomes would continue to evolve
as they do outside of this range.25 We use a bandwidth of seven miles, leaving us with 1,480,372
stops conducted between two and seven miles from the border.
    Figure IX plots (leave-out) trooper search rates in Panel A and motorist characteristics in
Panel B as a function of distance from the intersection. For each RD plot, within each set of
stops corresponding to an intersection, we demean the outcome and then stack observations across
intersections. Panel A shows that the search rates for troopers conducting stops are approximately
constant across distances within each sergeant area. Across the boundary, extrapolated trooper
search rates jump by 0.309 percentage points using a constant extrapolation and 0.287 percentage
points using a linear extrapolation.
    By contrast, as indicated in Panel B, the characteristics of stopped motorists vary only slightly
across the threshold. Note that the statistical significance of this discontinuity does not necessarily
indicate a discontinuity in the composition of motorists on either side of the border. Instead, it
may simply reflect differences in trooper stop behavior.

                                             [Figure 9 about here.]

    Figure IX plots search rates (Panel C) and unconditional hit rates (Panel D) by stop location.
In Panel C the pattern is noisier, but there is again a clear jump in extrapolated search rates at the
boundary. The magnitude of the jump is 0.306 percentage points using a constant extrapolation
   24
      We measure trooper search rates using all speeding stops conducted by a trooper, not just those made in the
RD window or in a specific location.
   25
      In contrast with typical applications of the donut RD design, we are not concerned about manipulation or error
in the running variable (Barreca et al., 2016). Instead, we apply this approach because the change in treatment--in
our case, the search rates of the troopers conducting the stops--at the border is muted by the fact that troopers
make some stops just outside their assigned patrol area.


                                                        26
and 0.490 percentage points using a linear extrapolation. In the constant case, the magnitude of
the jump is comparable to the magnitude of the corresponding change in trooper search rates. This
result can be interpreted as a validation of trooper search rates as measures of causal trooper search
propensities. In the linear case, the jump in search rates is larger, though the estimate is relatively
imprecise.
    The ratio of the increase in the unconditional hit rate to the increase in the search rate is
0.352 (with a standard error of 0.030) in the constant case and 0.333 (0.061) in the linear case.26
This ratio provides an alternative estimate of the marginal slope of the between-trooper SPC. Both
estimates are consistent with our SPC slope estimates of 0.331 and 0.346 in Section IV.D. They are
also statistically indistinguishable from the overall hit rate, consistent with a linear between-trooper
SPC.


V      Policy Counterfactuals
We next use our SPC estimates to investigate how contraband yield would change if troopers equal-
ized search rates across motorist racial groups. In Section V.A we describe the distinction between
the between-trooper SPC and the within-trooper SPC and why the latter is central to construct-
ing counterfactuals. We then provide suggestive evidence that the between-trooper and average
within-trooper SPCs are similar. In Section V.B, we present evidence that motorist group-specific
deterrence effects are negligible at the margin, implying that such deterrence effects are unlikely
to substantively influence counterfactual conclusions. In Section V.C, we proceed to simulate and
discuss counterfactuals.

V.A      The within-Trooper Search Productivity Curve
We have documented the between-trooper relationship between search rates and unconditional
hit rates. We find that this relationship is linear with racial group-specific slopes that suggest
it is feasible for troopers to (1) search all motorist racial groups at the same rate, (2) maintain
the status quo overall search rate, and (3) increase overall contraband yield. This counterfactual
requires that individual troopers change their search behavior, so determining what would happen
in this scenario requires knowing the SPCs faced by individual troopers. Yet, the between-trooper
SPC need not be the same as within-trooper SPCs. In particular, a linear between-trooper SPC
may still be consistent with troopers facing diminishing returns to search if troopers with more
screening skill search at higher rates.27
  26
      We estimate the ratios and associated standard errors by instrumenting for SEARCHit using threshold crossing
in a linear regression model for CONTRABANDit .
   27
      As we discuss in Section III.A, the distinction between the between-trooper SPC and within-trooper SPCs is
related to the monotonicity conditions of Arnold et al. (2018), Chan et al. (2020), and Frandsen et al. (2020). Under
the strict monotonicity condition of Arnold et al. (2018), each trooper faces the same SPC, which also corresponds
to the between-trooper SPC. Strict monotonicity does not hold in our setting; in particular, we find systematic
variation in hit rates between troopers. The between-trooper SPC and average within-trooper SPC are equal under
a substantively weaker condition: independence of trooper screening ability and search propensity. This condition



                                                         27
   Two recent papers closely related to ours, Arnold et al. (2020) and Chan et al. (2020), face
a similar issue. Those papers identify cross-sectional variation in behavior across bail judges and
doctors, respectively, and then conduct counterfactual exercises where they consider what would
happen if decision-makers were made to change their behavior in some way. To infer how judge and
doctor outcomes would change under counterfactuals, Arnold et al. (2020) and Chan et al. (2020)
make parametric assumptions about the form of heterogeneity across agents and then use features
of the cross-sectional distribution of agent behavior to identify parameters that characterize this
heterogeneity.
   By contrast, we aim to identify plausibly exogenous within-trooper variation in search behavior.
Our ideal instrument would predict changes in a trooper's effective search costs that are orthogonal
to changes in the composition of motorists they stop and their screening ability. We propose using
changes in the search behavior of a trooper's coworkers as an instrument for that trooper's search
behavior. The rationale is that troopers share managers (sergeants) and peers who influence their
effective search costs. Our instrument captures shocks to search rates common across coworkers (as
defined by sergeant areas). Unfortunately, we do not have a direct measure of manager influence
or peer effects. Instead, we use this "black box" variation and show that it does not appear to be
driven by variation in motorist composition. In this context, the exclusion restriction requires that
changes in coworker search rates affect search outcomes only through changes in a given trooper's
own search rate. One potential violation is that coworker search rates affect a trooper's search
outcomes by influencing whether motorists carry contraband. However, in Section V.B we show
that deterrence effects are likely to be negligible on the margin in our setting.
   Let ^(p, t) denote the assigned location of trooper p in the year corresponding to t. Let s-
                                                                                              ^
                                                                                                p
                                                                                                          (i,t)
denote the search rate of all troopers assigned to location in the year corresponding to t excluding
trooper p.
   We estimate a 2SLS system with first stage

                            SEARCHit = s-
                                        ^
                                          p
                                            + Xit  + p(i,t)          (i,t)   + y(t) +     it ,           (10)
                                             (i,t)


where p(i,t)   (i,t)   are trooper-by-location fixed effects and y(t) are year fixed effects. The second
stage is
                       CONTRABANDit =  SEARCHit + Xit  + p(i,t)                (i,t)   + y(t) + it .     (11)

   Table IV correlates the instrument with observable motorist characteristics and presents first
stage and 2SLS estimates. In column (1) we estimate (10) but with P (SEARCHit |Xit ) as the
outcome. The estimated coefficient on s-
                                       ^
                                         p
                                                      is 0.012, indicating that a 1 percentage point increase
                                              (i,t)
in coworker search rates is associated with a 0.012 percentage point increase in P (SEARCHit |Xit ).
This coefficient estimate is statistically significant but is small in magnitude. Columns (2) and (3)
present first stage estimates with and without controls for motorist characteristics. The coefficient
corresponds to the skill-propensity independence condition in Chan et al. (2020) and is implied by the average
monotonicity condition of Frandsen et al. (2020).



                                                         28
on s-
    ^
      p
               is 0.130 in column (2), indicating that a 1 percentage point increase in coworker search
       (i,t)
rates is associated with a 0.130 percentage increase in a trooper's own search rate. The coefficient
is statistically significant, with a t -statistic of about 4.
    Consistent with the limited relationship between coworker search rates and motorist character-
istics shown in column (1), adding controls for motorist characteristics in column (3) only slightly
attenuates this coefficient to 0.116. Columns (4) and (5) present IV estimates for  . Without
controlling directly for motorist characteristics, the 2SLS estimate for  of 0.273 with a standard
error of 0.087, in line with our between-trooper estimates. Adding motorist controls Xit has no
material effect on this estimate. In Appendix Figure B9 we show that both the first stage and
reduced form relationships are approximately linear.

                                              [Table 4 about here.]

    Overall, these results suggest that the marginal slope of the within-trooper SPC, averaged across
troopers, is similar to the between-trooper SPC slope.28

V.B        Deterrence Effects
To assess how contraband yield would change under counterfactual search rates, it is important to
first gauge the expected responsiveness of contraband carrying behavior to motorist racial group-
specific search intensity. While our analysis is not structured to explicitly characterize motorist
racial group-specific deterrence effects, a number of factors suggest that changes in contraband car-
rying rates are likely to be negligible. First, if drivers respond to the overall search rate rather than
to racial group-specific search rates (e.g., if drivers are uninformed regarding racial group-specific
changes in search), then equalizing search rates across racial groups while keeping the overall search
rate constant will not influence contraband carrying rates. To the extent that drivers do respond
to racial group-specific search rate changes, then the relative (racial group-specific) elasticities of
contraband carrying with respect to the search rate will determine the net impact of search rate
equalization (see Bjerk, 2007 for a related discussion). In practice, changes in aggregate contraband
carrying rates will be quite limited unless the difference in racial group-specific elasticities is large.
Low observed rates of search and the fact that searches can only occur if a motorist is first stopped
indicate, however, that these elasticities are likely to be low in the neighborhood of status quo
search rates.
    To provide support for the assertion that deterrence effects are likely to be negligible on the
margin in our setting, we undertake two complementary exercises. The logic behind both exercises
is that motorists cannot influence the trooper who conducts a stop within a sergeant area, but
they can choose to not drive through a particular sergeant area while carrying contraband. Hence,
if higher search rates deter motorists from carrying contraband, we expect motorist behavior to
  28
     Note that this does not imply that all troopers face the same SPC. In fact, we see persistent differences in hit
rates between troopers, implying differences in screening ability. The similarity of the between- and within-trooper
SPCs suggests that trooper skill and search rates are largely unrelated.



                                                         29
be responsive to between-sergeant area variation in search rates, but not within-sergeant area,
between-trooper variation in search rates.
   In the first exercise, we compare SPC slopes estimated using within-sergeant area variation
(as in Section IV.D) to SPC slopes estimated using cross-sergeant area boundary variation (as in
Section IV.E.2). With significant deterrence effects, we would expect the SPC slope to be smaller
when derived from cross-sergeant area boundary variation because the estimate would reflect the
fact that motorists are less likely to carry contraband in high search rate sergeant areas. Instead,
we find that the two slope estimates are statistically indistinguishable, suggesting that motorist
behavior is not responding to sergeant area search rates.
   In the second exercise, we compare the SPC slopes estimated using within-motorist variation
(as in Section IV.E.1) among two sets of sequential pairs of stops. In one set, both stops are in the
same sergeant area. In the other set, the two stops are in different sergeant areas. With significant
deterrence effects, we would expect SPC slope derived using the second set of stops to be smaller.
Instead, we find the two slopes to be statistically indistinguishable. In other words, we find no
evidence of deterrence.
   Importantly, the lack of measured deterrence effects is applicable only for the range of sergeant-
area-level search rates we observe. Deterrence effects may be non-linear so that motorists are
substantially more responsive to larger changes in search risk. For example, while we find that
searches of white motorists are weakly more productive than searches of black or Hispanic motorists
at the margin, suggesting that troopers could increase contraband yield by only searching white
motorists, deterrence effects may be more relevant in that counterfactual. In addition, it is possible
that motorists are insensitive to between-sergeant area variation in search rates because they are
not aware of that variation. In that case, deterrence effects may be more relevant in counterfactuals
where changes in motorist racial group-specific search rates are more salient.

V.C     Equity and Counterfactuals
Based on the group-specific SPCs we estimate, it is straightforward to assess whether search rates
can be equalized across motorist racial groups while maintaining search efficiency. To provide a
benchmark, column (1) of Table V summarizes status quo search and hit rates by motorist group
and in the aggregate. In column (2), we apply group-specific SPC slope estimates to calculate
the predicted hit rate associated with status quo search rates (as expected, predicted hit rates are
similar to those in column (1)).
   To test for an equity-efficiency trade-off, in column (3) we characterize predicted changes in hit
rates if all motorist racial groups were searched at a rate equal to the status quo aggregate search
rate. The estimates indicate that equalizing search rates would modestly increase search produc-
tivity. Under the assumption that marginal changes in search rates do not influence contraband
carrying behavior, this summary finding implies that there is no equity-efficiency trade-off present.
In other words, it is feasible for troopers to search all motorist racial groups at the same rate,
maintain the status quo overall search rate, and increase overall contraband yield.


                                                 30
                                         [Table 5 about here.]


VI     Are Search Disparities Driven by Racial Bias?
Black and Hispanic motorists are more likely to be searched, but racial disparities in search rates
are not justified on efficiency grounds. As such, an outstanding question is why troopers elect to
search black and Hispanic motorists more frequently. Two candidate explanations are that (1)
troopers hold inaccurate beliefs regarding differences in contraband carrying behavior by race or
(2) troopers search black and Hispanic motorists more frequently due to racial bias. Understanding
the precise reason why black and Hispanic motorists are searched more frequently in the absence of
efficiency gains is not central to our analysis, since our counterfactual conclusions hold regardless
of the source of search rate disparities. Moreover, the legality of search rate disparities in the
absence of efficiency gains does not likely depend on the specific mechanism that explains these
disparities. Nonetheless, we briefly investigate the potential role of racial bias by assessing whether
trooper-level racial disparities in search rates are associated with three factors: trooper race, local
political preferences, and local disparities in citation rates.
   A common test for racial bias in the policing literature is to compare the behavior of officers from
different racial groups (Anwar and Fang, 2006; Close and Mason, 2007; Antonovics and Knight,
2009; West, 2018; Goncalves and Mello, 2018). The typical approach is to test whether black-white
search rate disparities are smaller or reversed for black troopers, or whether Hispanic-white search
disparities are smaller or reversed for Hispanic troopers. The premise is that if search disparities
are driven by racial bias, we should expect biased troopers to favor motorists from the same racial
group. We identify trooper race using 2015 personnel records for 2,469 troopers accounting for
84% of stops. Appendix Table B10 documents search rates and hit rates by both motorist and
trooper race. Appendix Table B11, discussed in more detail in Appendix B, summarizes differences
in black-white and Hispanic-white search odds ratios by trooper race that account for other stop
and motorist characteristics. We find that all trooper racial groups are more likely to search black
and Hispanic motorists than white motorists, but the black-white disparity is smaller for black
troopers. The Hispanic-white disparity is similar for white and Hispanic troopers and smaller for
black troopers.
   We next examine whether, at the sergeant area level, racial group search rate disparities are
associated with two proxies for trooper preferences and beliefs: racial disparities in citation rates
(Goncalves and Mello, 2018) and the local Republican vote share in the 2016 presidential election
(Cohen and Yang, 2019). For the 79 sergeant areas that we include in our estimation of race-specific
SPCs, we calculate black-white and Hispanic-white search odds ratios using the following logistic
regression model:
                                                          e(Xit  + (t) +m(t) )
                           P (SEARCHit = 1|Xit ) =                                                (12)
                                                        1 + e(Xit  + (t) +m(t) )
where Xit includes indicators for whether the motorist is female, black, and Hispanic.


                                                   31
    To measure racial disparities in citation rates, for each sergeant area we estimate logistic re-
gression models analogous to equation (12) where the outcome is replaced with an indicator for
whether the stop led to a speeding citation. Overall, white motorists are cited in 28.2% of stops,
while black and Hispanic motorists are cited in 34.9% and 37.5% of stops.29 We next calculate the
Republican vote share in each sergeant area in the 2016 presidential election. For sergeant areas
that cover multiple counties, we take a weighted average of the county-level Republican vote shares
where weights reflect the share of sergeant area stops conducted in each county.
    Appendix Table B12 summarizes the joint, sergeant area-level relationship between search dis-
parities, citation disparities, and Republican vote share. The relationship between black-white
search disparities and vote share is both economically and statistically significant. A 10 percentage
point increase in the Republican vote share is associated with an increase in the black-white odds
ratio of 0.32. By contrast, there is no detectable relationship between black-white search disparities
and citation disparities. We find a marginal positive relationship between Hispanic-white search
and citation odds ratios, but no detectable relationship between the Hispanic-white search disparity
and Republican vote share.


VII       Conclusion
In this paper we use unique administrative data on traffic stops conducted by the Texas Highway
Patrol to evaluate whether racial profiling poses an equity-efficiency trade-off. As in previous
analyses, compared to white motorists, we find that troopers are more likely to search black and
Hispanic motorists following stops for speeding, yet these searches are equally or less likely to yield
contraband. In general, this finding does not imply that troopers can equalize search rates without
sacrificing contraband yield due to the inframarginality problem: average search productivity may
differ from search productivity at the margin. However, we show that the inframarginality problem
is not empirically relevant in our setting. To do so, we exploit variation across troopers in search
behavior and find that the relationship between trooper search rates and the proportion of stops
that yield contraband is approximately linear. This finding suggests that, among motorists searched
with positive probability, troopers are unable to distinguish between those who are more or less
likely to carry contraband.
    Overall, our results imply that it is feasible for troopers to (1) search all motorist racial groups
at the same rate, (2) maintain the status quo overall search rate, and (3) increase overall contraband
yield. Our findings highlight a limitation of the Becker (1957, 1993) outcome test: when the returns
to search are constant, equalized marginal hit rates do not imply an equity-efficiency trade-off. More
generally, our findings demonstrate that even if racial disparities in treatment cannot be definitively
attributed to racial bias, such disparities may not be justifiable on efficiency grounds.
  29
    Goncalves and Mello (2018) test whether troopers are more likely to give speeding "discounts" to white motorists
than black motorists. There is no apparent bunching in speeds in our data.




                                                        32
References
Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander, "Teacher and Student Achievement
  in the Chicago Public Schools," Journal of Labor Economics, 2007, 25 (1), 95­135.
Anderson, April J., "Racial Profiling:         Constitutional and Statutory Considerations for
  Congress," Technical Report, Congressional Research Service July 2020.
Antonovics, Kate and Brian G. Knight, "A New Look at Racial Profiling: Evidence fom the
  Boston Police Department," Review of Economics and Statistics, February 2009, 91 (1), 163­177.
Anwar, Shamena and Hanming Fang, "An Alternative Test of Racial Prejudice in Motor
  Vehicle Searches: Theory and Evidence," American Economic Review, March 2006, 96 (1), 127­
  151.
  , Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson, "The Impact of Jury Race in Criminal Trials,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2012, 127 (2), 1017­1055.
Arnold, David, Will Dobbie, and Crystal S. Yang, "Racial Bias in Bail Decisions," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, November 2018, 133 (4), 1885­1932.
  ,   , and Peter Hull, "Measuring Racial Discrimination in Bail Decisions," April 2020. Un-
  published manuscript.
Ayres, Ian, "Outcome Tests of Racial Disparities in Police Practices," Justice Research and Policy,
  2002, 4, 131­142.
Barreca, Alan, Jason Lindo, and Glen Waddell, "Heaping-Induced Bias in Regression Dis-
  continuity Designs," Economic Inquiry, 2016, 54 (1), 268­293.
Baumgartner, Frank R., Derek A. Epp, and Kelsey Shoub, Suspect Citizens: What 20
  Million Traffic Stops Tell Us About Policing and Race, Cambridge University Press, 2018.
Becker, Gary S., The Economics of Discrimination, University of Chicago Press, 1957.
  , "Nobel Lecture: The Economic Way of Looking at Behavior," Journal of Political Economy,
  June 1993, 101 (3), 385­409.
Benning, Tom and Andrew Chavez, "After 2 years and $800M, Texas' border boost has one
  solid outcome: more traffic tickets," November 2016.
Bjerk, David, "Racial Profiling, Statistical Discrimination, and the Effect of a Colorblind Policy
  on the Crime Rate," Journal of Public Economic Theory, 2007, 9 (3), 521­546.
Cattaneo, Matias, Richard Crump, Max Farrell, and Yingjie Feng, "On Binscatter,"
  2019. Unpublished manuscript.
Chan, David C., Matthew Gentzkow, and Chuan Yu, "Selection with Variation in Diagnostic
  Skill: Evidence from Radiologists," April 2020. Unpublished manuscript.
Chandra, Amitabh, Amy Finkelstein, Adam Sacarny, and Chad Syverson, "Health Care


                                                33
  Exceptionalism? Performance and Allocation in the US Health Care Sector," American Economic
  Review, August 2016, 106 (8), 2110­2144.
Close, Billy R. and Patrick Leon Mason, "Searching for Efficienct Enforcement: Officer
  Characteristics and Racially Biased Policing," Review of Law and Economics, 2007, 3 (2), 263­
  321.
Cohen, Alma and Crystal S. Yang, "Judicial Politics and Sentencing Decisions," American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2019, 11 (1), 160­191.
Collister, Brian, "Texas troopers ticketing Hispanic drivers as white," November 2015.
Correia, Sergio, Paulo Guimar~
                             aes, and Thomas Zylkin, "Verifying the existence of maxi-
  mum likelihood estimates for generalized linear models," August 2019. Unpublished manuscript.
Davis, Elizabeth, Anthony Whyde, and Lynn Langton, "Contacts Between Police and the
  Public, 2015," Special Report, Bureau of Justice Statistics October 2018.
Diamond, Rebecca, Tim McQuade, and Franklin Qian, "The Effects of Rent Control Expan-
  sion on Tenants, Landlords, and Inequality: Evidence from San Francisco," American Economic
  Review, September 2019, 109 (9), 3365­3394.
Dominitz, Jeff and John Knowles, "Crime Minimisation and Racial Bias: What Can We Learn
  From Police Search Data?," Economic Journal, November 2006, 116 (515), F368­F384.
Epp, Charles R., Steven Maynard-Moody, and Donald P. Haider-Markel, Pulled Over:
  How Police Stops Define Race and Citizenship, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014.
Frandsen, Brigham R., Lars J. Lefgren, and Emily C. Leslie, "Judging Judge Fixed Ef-
  fects," June 2020. Unpublished manuscript.
Fryer, Roland, "An Empirical Analysis of Racial Differences in Police Use of Force," Journal of
  Political Economy, June 2019, 127 (3), 1210­1261.
Goncalves, Felipe and Steve Mello, "A Few Bad Apples? Racial Bias in Policing," January
  2018. Unpublished manuscript.
Harcourt, Bernard E., "Rethinking Racial Profiling: A Critique of the Economics, Civil Lib-
  erties, and Constitutional Literature, and of Criminal Profiling More Generally," University of
  Chicago Law Review, 2004, 71 (4).
Horrace, William C. and Shawn M. Rohlin, "How Dark Is Dark? Bright Lights, Big City,
  Racial Profiling," Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2016, 98 (2), 226­232.
Knowles, John, Nicola Persico, and Petra Todd, "Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle Searches:
  Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, February 2001, 109 (1), 203­229.
MacDonald, John M. and Jeffrey Fagan, "Using Shifts in Deployment and Operations to Test
  for Racial Bias in Police Stops," AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2019, 109, 148­51.



                                                34
Marx, Philip, "An Absolute Test of Racial Prejudice," May 2020. Unpublished manuscript.
Morris, Carl N., "Parametric Empirical Bayes Inference: Theory and Applications," Journal of
  the American Statistical Association, 1983, 78 (381), 47­55.
Persico, Nicola, "Racial Profiling, Fairness, and Effectiveness of Policing," American Economic
  Review, December 2002, 92 (5), 1472­1497.
Phillips, David, "Measuring Housing Stability with Consumer Reference Data," Demography,
  forthcoming.
Pierson, Emma, Camelia Simoiu, Jan Overgoor, Sam Corbett-Davies, Daniel Jenson,
  Amy Shoemaker, Vignesh Ramachandran, Phoebe Barghouty, Cheryl Phillips, Ravi
  Shroff, and Sharad Goel, "A large-scale analysis of racial disparities in police stops across the
  United States," March 2019. Unpublished manuscript.
Rehavi, M. Marit and Sonja B. Starr, "Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Sentences,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2014, 122 (6).
Simoiu, Camelia, Sam Corbett-Davies, and Sharad Goel, "The Problem of Infra-
  Marginality in Outcome Tests for Discrimination," The Annals of Applied Statistics, 2017, 11
  (3), 1193­1216.
Tiwara, Alisa, "Disparate-Impact Liability for Policing," The Yale Law Journal, 2019, 129 (1).
West, Jeremy, "Racial Bias in Police Investigations," 2018. Unpublished manuscript.




                                                 35
                                        Figure I
                        A Theoretical Search Productivity Curve




Note: This figure depicts a theoretical example of a trooper's search productivity curve (SPC), the relationship
between the trooper's search rate,  ( ), and unconditional hit rate,  ( ). For signal thresholds           ¯, the
                         ¯
SPC is linear. For  < , the relationship is concave, as the marginal searched motorist is less likely to have
contraband than inframarginal searched motorists.




                                                     36
                                 Figure II
     Theoretical Cases with and without an Equity-Efficiency Trade-Off

                                                (a) Trade-Off




                                                            <
                                      (b) No Trade-Off and r ¯r




                                                            
                                      (c) No Trade-Off and r ¯r




Note: These figures depict three scenarios for search productivity curves (SPCs) for two groups of motorists,
Group A and Group B. In all scenarios, the search rate for Group A exceeds the search rate for Group B. In Panel
A, the trooper faces diminishing returns to search within each group and equalizes marginal hit rates between
groups. Equalizing search rates between groups while maintaining the overall search rate would decrease the hit
rate. In Panel B, the trooper faces diminishing returns to search within each group but does not equalize marginal
hit rates. In Panel C, the trooper equalizes marginal hit rates between groups but faces constant returns to search.
In Panels B and C, the trooper can equalize search rates without reducing the overall hit rate.


                                                      37
                                 Figure III
       Number of Troopers Satisfying Sample Criteria by Sergeant Area

           (a) Pooled SPC Criteria                                (b) Race-Specific SPC Criteria




Note: These maps depict the number of troopers in each sergeant area that satisfy the sample criteria described
in Section IV.B. State and interstate highways are superimposed in green. Panel A depicts the number of troopers
who satisfy sample criteria for estimating the pooled search productivity curve (SPC). We include sergeant areas
in the analysis if they have at least ten troopers meeting the sample criteria. For sergeant areas included in the
estimation of race-specific SPCs, Panel B depicts the number of troopers who satisfy the sample criteria, averaging
across motorist racial groups (white, black, Hispanic). Sergeant areas included in the estimation of race-specific
SPCs have at least ten troopers meeting the sample criteria for each motorist racial group.




                                                      38
                                    Figure IV
           Distribution of Search Rates across Troopers and Locations




Note: This figure plots the distribution of search rates across trooper-by-location combinations (sp ). Sample
restrictions are described in Section IV.B.




                                                    39
                                       Figure V
                       Between-Trooper Search Productivity Curve




                                                                       ~ p ) against trooper search rates (~
Note: In this figure we plot adjusted trooper unconditional hit rates (h                                    sp ) using
two approaches described in Section IV.D: the fixed effects (FE) approach and the quantile (Q) approach. In the
fixed effects approach we net out location fixed effects from both s ~p and h ~ p and plot the residuals. From the
FE approach, the figure includes 95% confidence bands for the local linear relationship between adjusted trooper
search rates and unconditional hit rates and the best linear fit and its slope. The local linear fit is derived using
a Gaussian kernel with a rule-of-thumb bandwidth. In the quantile approach we divide troopers into quantiles by
search rate within locations, group quantiles across locations, and then plot the relationship between search rates
and unconditional hit rates across quantiles. From the Q approach, the figure includes the mean values for each
decile and the best linear fit and its slope.




                                                       40
                                 Figure VI
         Between-Trooper Search Productivity Curve, by Motorist Race

              (a) White Motorists                                          (b) Black Motorists




                                           (c) Hispanic Motorists




Note: In this figure we plot adjusted trooper unconditional hit rates (h~ p ) against trooper search rates (~
                                                                                                            sp ) using
two approaches described in Section IV.D: the fixed effects (FE) approach and the quantile (Q) approach. In the
fixed effects approach we net out location fixed effects from both s  ~p and h ~ p and plot the residuals. From the
FE approach, the figure includes 95% confidence bands for the local linear relationship between adjusted trooper
search rates and unconditional hit rates and the best linear fit and its slope. The local linear fit is derived using
a Gaussian kernel with a rule-of-thumb bandwidth. In the quantile approach we divide troopers into quantiles
by search rate within locations, group quantiles across locations, and then plot the relationship between search
rates and unconditional hit rates across quantiles. From the Q approach, the figure includes the mean values for
each decile and the best linear fit and its slope. Panel A, Panel B, and Panel C plot the search productivity curve
(SPC) for white motorists, black motorists, and Hispanic motorists, respectively.




                                                       41
                                 Figure VII
      Selection and within-Motorist Differences in Trooper Search Rates

                                       (a) Motorist Characteristics




               (b) Search Rate                                       (c) Unconditional Hit Rate




Note: This figure plots the relationship between the difference in trooper search rates associated with sequential
pairs of stops for the same motorist, it s~p , and three variables: (1) motorist characteristics, (2) the difference
in search rates between stops, and (3) the difference in unconditional hit rates between stops. Motorist charac-
teristics are summarized by the probability of search given motorist characteristics at the time of the initial stop,
P (SEARCHit |Xit ). Sequential pairs of stops are grouped by their decile value of it s~p .




                                                       42
                                        Figure VIII
                           Trooper Assignments by Stop Location




Note: This figure plots the share of stops conducted by troopers assigned to each adjacent sergeant area by travel
distance from highway and sergeant area border intersections as described in Section IV.E.2. The data are limited
to stops within 10 miles of the intersection. The figure includes a bin scatter, where stops are grouped by side
of the border and into deciles by distance from the intersection. Stops conducted between 2 and 7 miles of the
intersections are included in the regression discontinuity (RD) analysis.




                                                     43
                                  Figure IX
       Stop Characteristics and Outcomes by Stop Distance from Border

          (a) Trooper Search Rates                           (b) Index of Motorist Characteristics




                   (c) Search                                            (d) Contraband




Note: These figures are stacked regression discontinuity plots for four outcomes: leave-out trooper search rates
(Panel A); P (SEARCHit |X ) (Panel B), an index of motorist characteristics; search (SEARCHit ) (Panel C);
and contraband (CONTRABANDit ) (Panel D). The running variable is the travel distance from a stop to its
corresponding highway by sergeant area border intersection. Sample selection criteria are described in Section
IV.E.2. The figures include discontinuity estimates using linear and constant extrapolation.




                                                    44
                                                            Table I
                                               Traffic Stop Descriptive Statistics

                                                              All Stops                                        All Searches
                                           Black      Hispanic        White           All        Black     Hispanic      White        All
     Black                                   100           0            0            9.09         100           0           0         18.91
     Hispanic                                 0           100           0           35.88           0          100          0        41.82
     White                                    0            0           100          55.03           0           0          100       39.26
     Female                                 38.95        32.59        37.67         35.96        16.32        15.58       20.80      17.77
     Log Median Income                      10.70        10.71        10.95         10.84        10.59        10.60       10.87      10.71
                                          (0.500)      (0.495)       (0.466)       (0.495)      (0.492)     (0.469)     (0.471)     (0.493)
     Expected Log Income Given             -0.161       -0.083        0.081         0.000        -0.524      -0.456      -0.371      -0.436
     Vehicle (Standardized)               (1.013)      (0.966)       (1.012)       (1.000)      (0.889)     (0.841)     (0.893)     (0.873)

     Stop History :
     No Prior Stops                        60.32        57.31         56.53         57.15        58.12       56.72       53.60       55.76
     Prior Stop, No Search                 37.92        41.13         42.61         41.66        32.01       35.12       37.50       35.47
     Prior Search, No Contraband           1.130        1.205         0.534         0.829        4.669       4.429       3.796       4.226
     Prior Search, Contraband              0.626        0.356         0.322         0.362        5.195       3.728       5.098       4.544




45
     Non-Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Non-Drug Arrests             87.02        89.41         93.48         91.43        64.46       72.42       71.80       70.67
     1-2 Prior Non-Drug Arrests            7.158        6.830         4.296         5.465        14.88       14.46       14.24       14.45
     3+ Prior Non-Drug Arrests             5.824        3.760         2.223         3.102        20.66       13.12       13.96       14.88

     Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Drug Arrests                 93.92        96.29         97.55         96.77        73.48       82.39       79.42       79.54
     1 Prior Drug Arrest                   2.814        2.161         1.363         1.781        10.13       8.588       9.426       9.208
     2+ Prior Drug Arrests                 3.263        1.547         1.088         1.451        16.40       9.019       11.16       11.25

     Search Rate                           2.202        1.234         0.755         1.059         100         100         100         100
     Unconditional Hit Rate                0.757        0.324         0.285         0.342        34.00       25.90       37.35       31.93
     Observations                         448,337     1,769,369     2,713,626     4,931,332      9,874      21,832       20,497     52,203
       Sample restrictions are described in Section II. `Log Median Income' refers to the median household income for the Census block
       group of the motorist's residential address as measured in the 2009-2013 5-year American Community Survey. `Expected Log Income
       Given Vehicle' is the average Log Median Income associated with a vehicle, where vehicles are classified as a combination of make, type
       (passenger car, pick-up truck, SUV), and age (above and below median given make and type), generating 204 total vehicle categories.
       We standardize Expected Log Income Given Vehicle to have mean zero and standard deviation one in our sample of stops.
                                     Table II
              Motorist Selection into Stops by Trooper Search Rate

                                                                            Excluding Most Selective Troopers
                                    100 ×          100 ×        100 ×         100 ×         100 ×         100 ×
                                  SEARCHit          s-
                                                     p
                                                       it
                                                                 ~-
                                                                 sp
                                                                    it
                                                                            SEARCHit         s-
                                                                                              p
                                                                                                it
                                                                                                           ~-
                                                                                                           sp
                                                                                                              it

                                     (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
Black                                 0.888          0.106       0.066          0.774         0.050        0.026
                                    (0.058)        (0.020)      (0.020)       (0.054)       (0.013)      (0.012)
Hispanic                              0.299          0.028        0.009         0.274         0.007       -0.005
                                    (0.022)        (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.022)       (0.006)      (0.006)
Female                               -0.513         -0.023       -0.018        -0.474        -0.010       -0.008
                                    (0.021)        (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.021)       (0.003)      (0.003)
Log Median Income                    -0.312         -0.007       -0.006        -0.281         0.003       -0.001
                                    (0.019)        (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.019)       (0.004)      (0.004)
Expected Log Income Given            -0.295         -0.027       -0.025        -0.258        -0.011       -0.011
Vehicle (Standardized)              (0.012)        (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.011)       (0.002)      (0.002)
1-2 Prior Non-Drug Arrests            0.805          0.011        0.008         0.744        -0.003       -0.004
                                    (0.053)        (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.055)       (0.004)      (0.004)
3+ Prior Non-Drug Arrests             1.700          0.022        0.019         1.531         0.008        0.008
                                    (0.099)        (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.101)       (0.006)      (0.006)
1 Prior Drug Arrest                   3.304          0.022        0.017         3.106         0.002        0.001
                                    (0.145)        (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.146)       (0.006)      (0.006)
2+ Prior Drug Arrests                 5.324          0.029       0.020          4.823        -0.000       -0.004
                                    (0.213)        (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.218)       (0.008)      (0.008)
Prior Stop, No Search                -0.221         -0.015       -0.008        -0.192        -0.010       -0.006
                                    (0.017)        (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.017)       (0.004)      (0.004)
Prior Search, No Contraband           2.943          0.072       0.065          2.806         0.033        0.031
                                    (0.201)        (0.017)      (0.017)       (0.201)       (0.012)      (0.012)
Prior Search, Contraband            10.025           0.158        0.154         8.722         0.100       0.105
                                    (0.642)        (0.025)      (0.024)       (0.653)       (0.023)      (0.022)
Location by Time FEs
Joint F-Statistic                    84.88          9.31         8.65          74.03          6.30         5.84
Observations                       3,280,250     3,280,250    3,280,171      2,739,955     2,739,955    2,739,899
  This table presents coefficients from estimates of equation (7), where in columns (2) and (3) we replace
  the outcome SEARCHit with s-        it
                                                     ~-
                                    p(i,t) (i,t) and s
                                                        it
                                                      p(i,t) (i,t) , leave-out trooper search rates corresponding to
  the trooper who conducted the stop. Columns (4)­(6) exclude stops conducted by the 20% of troopers
  with the most selected set of stopped motorists. Standard errors are clustered at the motorist level. `Joint
  F-Statistic' refers to an F-test for the joint significance of all motorist characteristics.




                                                       46
                    Table III
      Search Productivity Curve Estimates,
             within-Motorist Design

                         it SEARCH         it CONTRABAND
                              OLS            OLS          2SLS
                              (1)            (2)           (3)
Pooled
it s
   ~p                        0.733          0.214
                            (0.016)        (0.009)
it SEARCH                                                 0.292
                                                         (0.011)

Observations                694,246        694,246      694,246
White Motorists
   ~r
it s p                       0.750          0.272
                            (0.032)        (0.019)
it SEARCH                                                 0.362
                                                         (0.021)

Observations                245,778        245,778      245,778
Black Motorists
   ~r
it s p                       0.778          0.247
                            (0.039)        (0.024)
it SEARCH                                                 0.317
                                                         (0.025)

Observations                50,674          50,674       50,674
Hispanic Motorists
   ~r
it s p                       0.688          0.196
                            (0.036)        (0.020)
it SEARCH                                                 0.284
                                                         (0.025)

Observations                87,320          87,320       87,320
  This table presents coefficients for the two-stage least squares
  (2SLS) system described by equations (8) and (9). Each obser-
  vation is a pair if sequential stops for a given motorist. Standard
  errors are clustered at the motorist level.




                                47
                                           Table IV
                               Within-Trooper Returns to Search

                                  P (SEARCHit |Xit )            SEARCHit                  CONTRABANDit
                                        OLS                   OLS     OLS                  IV     IV
                                        (1)                   (2)      (3)                 (4)    (5)
SEARCHit                                                                                   0.273         0.261
                                                                                          (0.087)       (0.095)
s-
 ^
   p
                                          0.012               0.130         0.116
  (i,t)
                                         (0.004)             (0.030)       (0.030)
Motorist by Location FEs
Year FEs
Motorist Controls
Observations                           3,206,583            3,206,583     3,206,583     3,206,583      3,206,583
  This table presents estimates of equations (10) and (11). s- p
                                                             ^(i,t) denotes the search rate of all troopers assigned
  to location in the year corresponding to t excluding trooper p. Motorist characteristics include race, gender,
  log of neighborhood median income, vehicle-based expected log income, stop history, non-drug arrest history,
  and drug arrest history.




                                                       48
                                Table V
                             Counterfactuals

                          Observed               Estimated SPC-Based
                         Status Quo       Status Quo       Equal Search Rates
All Motorists
   Search Rate                1.16            1.16                  1.16
   Hit Rate                  34.20           34.74                 35.89
                                             (0.57)                (0.56)
White Motorists
  Search Rate                 0.82            0.82                  1.16
  Hit Rate                   37.28           39.42                 39.42
                                             (0.53)                (0.54)
Black Motorists
   Search Rate                2.24            2.24                  1.16
   Hit Rate                  34.51           34.26                 34.26
                                             (0.62)                (0.62)
Hispanic Motorists
   Search Rate                1.37            1.37                  1.16
   Hit Rate                  30.14           29.36                 29.36
                                             (0.57)                (0.57)
  This table presents observed and simulated counterfactual search rates and hit
  rates by motorist racial group. Observed search rates and hit rates are calculated
  using the sample of stops used to estimate race-specific search productivity curves
  (SPCs). Sample criteria are described in Section IV.B. Simulated counterfactual
  search rates and hit rates are calculated using racial group-specific SPC estimates
  from Section IV.D.




                                       49
A     Appendix: Data Construction
We merge traffic stop data to commercial address history data from Infogroup using full name and
address. We first use an address standardization algorithm, the Stata function stnd address, to
ensure that addresses are structured analogously across the two data sets, with separate fields for
street address, unit number, etc. We also extract the address number. In addition, we manually
standardize Texas city and town names in the traffic stop data. We standardize full names and
extract suffixes. We then use the Stata command reclink2 to perform a probabilistic linkage
across the two data sources. We fuzzy match using the following fields: last name, first name,
middle name, suffix, address number, street name, city, and zip code. We require that observations
match exactly on the first letter of the first name and the first letter of the last name. For zip code,
we define agreement discretely based on whether the fields match exactly. For all other fields, we
utilize the bigram string comparator to assess the degree of agreement. The address history data
includes an identifier that matches the same individual to multiple addresses. We use this identifier
to match multiple stops to the same person. We are able to match 75% of stops to the address
history data. For stops that we are unable to match, we create identifiers based on full name, street
address, and zip code.
    We then match the criminal history data to traffic stops using the full set of addresses associated
with each person. We apply the same address and name standardization to the criminal history
data, and apply the same fuzzy match.
    Though Diamond et al. (2019) and Phillips (forthcoming) find that similar address history data
from Infutor are of high quality, we are unable to match every stop to the address history data
and these data may be incomplete. Hence, we may not correctly associate all stops and criminal
history with the corresponding motorist.


B     Appendix: Additional Analyses
B.1    Variation in Cited Speeds Across Troopers Is Limited
We limit our analysis to traffic stops associated with speeding violations because, as previous
researchers have argued (see, for example, Baumgartner et al., 2018), we believe these stops are
more likely to be motivated by the traffic violation itself, rather than some investigatory motive.
For stops that are motivated by the traffic violation itself, we expect the composition of stopped
motorists to be more similar across troopers, conditional on the location and time of the stop.
    In this section we document the extent that cited speeds vary across troopers. Each traffic stop
is associated with a speeding warning or a speeding citation. There is a citation in 34% of stops.
Actual speeds are observed for citations but not warnings.
    We rescale cited speeds by taking the difference between the log cited speed and log posted
speed limit. We refer to this rescaled speed as the log speed above limit.
    The average log speed above limit is 0.208, meaning the average cited speed is about 21% over


                                                  50
the posted speed limit. The standard deviation of log speed above limit is 0.076. 99% of cited
speeds are at least 10% above the speed limit. Cited speeds are similar for white and Hispanic
motorists (about 20.6% above the posted speed limit), while cited speeds are slightly higher for
black motorists (22.4% above the posted speed limit).
   For each trooper-by-location combination, we calculate the citation rate and average log speed
above limit. Within locations, the standard deviation of average log speed above limit across
troopers is 0.027. The difference in average log speed above limit between the 10th and 90th
percentile of troopers is only about 6% of the speed limit, which for the average speed limit is
about 4 miles per hour.
   Troopers that cite more often have lower average cited speeds, but the differences are minor.
For every 10 percentage point increase in the citation rate, cited speeds decrease by 0.4%.

B.2     Detailed Search Outcomes by Motorist Race
Detailed outcomes of searches are summarized in Table B1.

B.3     Descriptive Analysis of What Predicts Search and Contraband Yield
We use the uniquely rich merged data set to answer two descriptive questions: (1) what motorist
characteristics predict trooper search? And (2) among those searched, what motorist characteristics
predict whether a search yields contraband? The answers to these questions clarify the degree to
which race-based differences in search and hit rates can be explained by factors correlated with
race but that have been unobservable to previous researchers.

B.3.1    Racial Disparities in Search Rates

One advantage of our setting relative to prior analyses is that we have a much richer set of motorist
covariates. It is potentially the case that racial differences in search rates documented previously­
and interpreted as evidence of racial profiling­could be explained, at least in a statistical sense,
by other motorist characteristics that are observed by troopers but typically not observed by re-
searchers. We investigate this possibility by examining whether conditioning on criminal history,
stop history, and income affects measured race-based differences in search rates.
   For each stop, let i denote the motorist and t denote the specific time. The functions (i, t),
 (t), and m(t) map each stop to its associated location, time category, and month (e.g., June 2013),
respectively. We categorize time by as the combination of quarter of day and whether the stop was
conducted on a weekday or weekend. We estimate logistic regressions of the form

                                                                  e( + +m +Xit  )
                 P (SEARCHit = 1| (i, t),  (t), m(t), Xit ) =                       ,          (B.1)
                                                                1 + e( + +m +Xit  )
where SEARCHit is an indicator whether the stop of motorist i at time t led to a search;  ,  , and
m are fixed effects for stop location, time category, and month of the stop; and Xit is a vector of


                                                 51
motorist characteristics, including race, gender, log of neighborhood median income, stop history,
non-drug arrest history, and drug arrest history. We also construct a second proxy for motorist
income based on the vehicle involved in the stop. We classify vehicles by make, type (passenger
car, pick-up truck, SUV), and age (above and below median given make and type), generating 204
total vehicle categories. We then calculate the mean of log of median neighborhood income among
stopped motorists for each vehicle category. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to examine
the relationship between trooper search behavior and motorist's criminal history, stop history, and
neighborhood income.
   Odds ratios for estimates of equation (B.1) are presented in Table B2. Across specifications,
we vary the set of covariates included in the model, moving from more parsimonious specifications
to more saturated models. In column (1) we include only a subset of motorist characteristics
(Xit ): motorist race and gender. The baseline search rate for white motorists is 0.76 percent.
The coefficient for black of 3.00 indicates that, controlling only for gender, odds of search are 3
times higher for black motorists. Given the low probabilities in this context, odds and probabilities
are similar, meaning search rates are also approximately 3 times higher for black motorists. For
Hispanic motorists, search rates are about 58% higher. Conditional on motorist race, women are
about 62% less likely to be searched. In column (2) we add separate fixed effects for stop location,
time category, and month. Doing this reduces the black odds ratio slightly to 2.70, while the
Hispanic odds ratio increases to 1.68. The coefficient for female is unaffected. In column (3) we
add our income proxies as covariates. The coefficient for log median income is 0.68, indicating
that a one standard deviation increase in neighborhood income (about 35 log points) is associated
with about a 11% decrease in search rates. The association with vehicle-based expected log income
is similar. Including the income proxies as controls reduces the black odds ratio to 2.20 and the
Hispanic odds ratio to 1.45.
   Column (4) adds motorist arrest history indices as explanatory variables. Previous arrests also
predict searches, particularly drug arrests. The increase in search likelihood associated with black
motorists relative to white motorists is similar in magnitude to the increase in search likelihood
associated with multiple previous non-drug arrests and half of the increase associated with a prior
drug arrest. Column (5) adds motorist stop history. Conditional on motorist demographics and
arrest history, motorists who have been stopped previously but not searched previously are 18% less
likely to be searched than motorists who have not been stopped previously, the omitted category.
Motorists who have been searched previously but not found with contraband are 115% more likely
to be searched, while motorists who have been previously found with contraband are 383% more
likely to be searched.
   Controlling for criminal and stop history reduces the black and Hispanic odds ratios to 1.86
and 1.44. Comparing columns (2) and (5), motorist income and criminal/stop history can sta-
tistically explain about 50% and 35% of the black-white and Hispanic-white disparities in search
rates, respectively. Note that racial differences in stop history and likely criminal history already
incorporate racial differences in police treatment. Hence, we think of these percentages as upper


                                                 52
bounds on the share of black-white and Hispanic-white disparities that can be explained by these
factors.

B.3.2      Racial Disparities in Hit Rates

Next, we estimate logistic models identical to (B.1) except that we replace the outcome with
CONTRABANDit , an indicator for whether a search yields contraband.30 We limit estimation to
stops that led to a search (i.e., where SEARCHit = 1).
    The results are presented in columns (6) through (10) of Table B2. The model specifications
are analogous to those in columns (1) through (5).
    There are four main findings. First, controlling for only motorist race and gender, searches of
black and Hispanic motorists are about 14% and 41% less likely to yield contraband.
    Second, hit rates are increasing in motorist income, and the magnitude of the relationship is
economically significant. In columns (8) through (10) the coefficient for log neighborhood median
income hovers around 1.27, indicating that a one standard deviation increase in neighborhood
income is a associated with a nearly 10% increase in the hit rate. Interestingly, hit rates are
unrelated to our vehicle-based proxy for motorist income.
    Third, while previous drug arrests predict about a 40% increase in the hit rate, hit rates are
weakly lower for motorists with previous non-drug arrests. For those with one or two previous non-
drug arrests, the hit rate is the same as for those without any non-drug arrests; for those with more
than two previous non-drug arrests, the hit rate is about 13% lower. This finding is particularly
interesting given that previous non-drug arrests significantly increase a motorist's likelihood of
being searched in the first place.
    Fourth, for motorists who have been previously searched, the outcomes of those previous
searches are highly predictive of contemporaneous outcomes. Relative to motorists with no stop
history, searches of motorists who have been previously searched but not found with contraband
are 37% less likely to yield contraband. Searches of motorists who have been previously found with
contraband are 245% more likely to yield contraband.

B.4     Estimating Between-Trooper Search Productivity Curves
We estimate search productivity curve slopes using various specifications in Table B6.
  One concern with our approach is that s~p and h~ p , as estimates of their population analogs, p
and p , are subject to sampling error, and those errors are correlated. This correlated sampling
error may bias our estimate of  .
    As one approach to accounting for this measurement error, we adjust estimates of trooper-
location search propensities using an Empirical Bayes (EB) approach (Morris, 1983, Aaronson et
al., 2007). We observe trooper-location search rates, which are estimates of search propensities.
   30
     We show in Table B1 that the percent of stops yielding contraband that lead to an arrest and the severity of
arrest charges, as proxied by the average incarceration sentence associated with conviction, are similar across motorist
racial groups.



                                                          53
Some trooper-location estimates are derived from more observations and are thus more precise than
others. The EB estimate for trooper-location p is a weighted average of the trooper-location search
rate and overall search rate of the location, where the weight is a function of the reliability of the
trooper-location p estimate. We follow the approach of Chandra et al. (2016) and use their Stata
code to construct EB estimates for trooper-location search rates, sEB
                                                                   p . We construct an analogous
EB estimate of conditional search propensities, hEB
                                                 p , using the same weighting.
    In Table B6 we show alternative estimates for the SPC slope from regressing hEB
                                                                                 p  on sEB
                                                                                        p
with location fixed effects. The slope we estimate is indistinguishable from the slope we get using
unadjusted search and unconditional hit rates.31
   To account for sampling error, we also take a split-sample IV approach to estimation. We
randomly split stops into two samples and estimate s      ~ p separately in each sample. In each
                                                   ~p and h
                   ~ p on s
sample, we regress h      ~p and location fixed effects, instrumenting for s
                                                                           ~p using its pair estimate
from the other sample. Reassuringly, as shown in Table B6, this procedure yields  estimates that
are statistically indistinguishable from the OLS estimates.

B.4.1     Excluding Selective Troopers

A key concern with our research design is that stopped motorists are not randomly assigned to
troopers. We take a `conditional on observables' approach and argue that, conditional on stop
time and location, the identity of the trooper conducting the stop is as good as randomly assigned.
However, even conditional on these stop contextual characteristics, we see motorist characteristics
that predict search (e.g., race, income, criminal history) also predict the search propensity of the
troopers that stop them. This relationship is quite weak (as discussed in Section IV.B), and
controlling directly for observable motorist characteristics does not affect any of our conclusions.
Nonetheless, this selection may introduce bias.
    Here we take a complementary approach to assess whether our results are sensitive to this form
of selection. We exclude troopers for whom we find the most evidence of motorist selection, and
then repeat our analysis using this selected sample of troopers.
    We first describe how we identify the troopers to exclude. The goal is to identify troopers that
have a composition of stopped motorists that deviates most from what one would expect based on
the time and location of their stops alone. We estimate the following logistic regression model:

                                                                       e(Xit  )
                                      P (SEARCHit = 1|Xit ) =                                                     (B.2)
                                                                     1 + e(Xit  )
where Xit is a vector of motorist characteristics including motorist race, gender, log of neighborhood
income, expected log income given vehicle, stop history, non-drug arrest history, and drug arrest
history. From this we calculate the search probability for each stop based on observable motorist
   31
     Note that the SPC slopes presented here differ somewhat from the slopes presented in Figure V and Figure VI.
The slopes in the main text are fit to local linear estimates for the relationship between search rates and unconditional
hit rates over a more limited range of search rates. The slopes in Table B6 are derived from a linear regression of
hEB
 p   on sEB
          p  with location fixed effects using all trooper-location combinations.


                                                           54
characteristics, P(SEARCH | Xit ). Figure B2 depicts a histogram of P(SEARCH | Xit ) across
stops.
   We then characterize troopers by their mean value of P(SEARCH | Xit ) after conditioning on
stop time and location. We estimate the following Poisson pseudo-likelihood regression model:



            log(E (P (SEARCH|Xit )|p(i,t)      (i,t) ,   (i, t),  (t), m(t)) =
                                                         p(i,t)   (i,t)   +   (i,t)   +  (t) + m(t) +   it   (B.3)

where p(i,t)   (i,t)   are trooper by location fixed effects. We estimate the model using the pseudo-
maximum likelihood estimator of Correia et al. (2019). Figure B3 depicts a histogram of p across
troopers. If the assignment of motorists to troopers conditional on stop time and location were
indeed as good as random, p would only vary across troopers due to chance. Troopers with
large and positive (negative) values of p are stopping motorists with characteristics that predict
high (low) search rates (e.g. non-white, low-income men with criminal histories) relative to other
troopers making stops at the same times and in the same locations. We rank trooper by location
combinations by |p |, where combinations with the largest absolute values are `most selective'.
   In Figure B4, we show that the slope of the pooled between-trooper SPC is stable if we exclude
a varying proportion of troopers with compositions of stopped motorists who deviate most from
their expected composition given the time and location of their stops. In Figure B5 we conduct a
similar exercise for race-specific SPC slopes and find that slope estimates and their ordering across
groups are stable when we vary the set of included troopers.

B.4.2    Troopers Vary in Screening Ability

Our finding that average and marginal hit rates are similar is consistent with Knowles et al. (2001),
who develop an equilibrium model where troopers decide whether or not to search motorists and
motorists decide whether or not to carry contraband. They show that if troopers are not racially
biased, all motorists must, in equilibrium, carry contraband with equal probability. In this model
there is no inframarginality problem because there is no difference between hit rates for the marginal
and average searched motorists.
   However, there are at least two features of our setting that are inconsistent with the Knowles et
al. (2001) framework. First, as we document in Section V.B, we find little evidence that motorists
respond to variation in search risk by adjusting contraband carrying rates, at least in the range of
search rates we observe. Second, as we show in this section, troopers vary systematically in their
hit rates, implying variation in screening ability. This is inconsistent with Knowles et al. (2001),
which assumes there is no screening.
   Figure B10 documents that troopers vary in screening ability in two ways. Panel A plots
adjusted search rates s                                           ~ p for each trooper by location
                      ~p against adjusted unconditional hit rates h
combination. Conditional on search rate, there is significant variation in unconditional hit rates.


                                                         55
This variation is not due to statistical noise alone. Panel B plots trooper by location hit rates in
one randomly selected half of stops against the same trooper by location hit rate in the remaining
half of stops. The estimated slope is 0.372, indicating that while some variation in hit rates is due
to chance, there is systematic variation in hit rates across trooper by location combinations.

B.4.3   Racial Search Disparities by Trooper Race

In this section we examine differences in search behavior by trooper race. We identify trooper race
using 2015 personnel records for 2,469 troopers accounting for 84% of stops. Table B10 documents
search rates and hit rates by both motorist and trooper race.
   We next measure differences in black-white and Hispanic-white search odds ratios by trooper
race, accounting for stop and other motorist characteristics. We estimate logistic regression models
analogous to equation (B.1) that include fixed effects for trooper race and interactions between
motorist and trooper race. We limit the analysis to stops conducted by troopers that we identify
as black, Hispanic, or white.
   Table B11 presents coefficient estimates, where columns (1) through (5) are analogous to the
same columns in Table B2. The black-white search disparity for black troopers is about 20%
smaller than the same disparity for white troopers, and about 35% smaller than the same disparity
for Hispanic troopers. The Hispanic-white disparity is similar for white and Hispanic troopers and
smaller for black troopers.




                                                 56
                                       Figure B1
                      Comparing Estimates of Trooper Search Rates




Note: This figure compares unadjusted trooper search rates (sp ) to estimates of trooper search rates that
adjust for additional stop and motorist characteristics (~
                                                         sp ). Stops characteristics include the month and specific
highway of the stop. Motorist characteristics include race, gender, log of neighborhood median income, vehicle-
based expected log income, stop history, non-drug arrest history, and drug arrest history. The construction of
trooper search rates is described in Section IV.B. The red dashed line is a 45 line. The slope of the best fit line
is 0.99.




                                                      57
                                         Figure B2
                       Distribution of P (SEARCH|Xit ) Across Stops




Note: This figure plots the distribution of P(SEARCH | Xit ), search probability for each stop based on observable
motorist characteristics. P(SEARCH | Xit ) is estimated from equation (B.2) described in Section B.4.1.




                                                     58
                                     Figure B3
                 Distribution of Motorist Selection Across Troopers




Note: This figure plots the distribution of p estimates derived from equation (B.3), described in more de-
tail in Section B.4.1. The p terms are trooper by location fixed effects from a Poisson regression model for
P (SEARCH|Xit ), the search probability for each stop based on observable motorist characteristics. They summa-
rize the degree to which motorist characteristics for those stopped by a given trooper in a given location deviate
from what one would expect based on the time and location of their stops alone.




                                                     59
                                Figure B4
 Stability of Pooled Search Productivity Curve Slope For Varying Trooper
                                Exclusions




Note: This figure plots the slope of the relationship between trooper search rates (~  srp ) and unconditional hit
       ~ p ) for varying samples of troopers using the fixed effects (FE) approach described in IV.D. For varying
rates (h r

X , we remove the X % of troopers with compositions of stopped motorists that deviate most from their expected
composition given the time and location of their stops. We discuss how we identify these troopers in more detail
in Section B.4.1.




                                                     60
                                  Figure B5
  Stability of Race-Specific Search Productivity Curve Slopes For Varying
                             Trooper Exclusions




Note: This figure plots the slope of the relationship between trooper search rates (~   sr
                                                                                         p ) and unconditional hit
       ~ p ) by motorist race and for varying samples of troopers using the fixed effects (FE) approach described
rates (h r

in IV.D. For varying X , we remove the X % of troopers with compositions of stopped motorists that deviate most
from their expected composition given the time and location of their stops. We discuss how we identify these
troopers in more detail in Appendix B.4.1.




                                                     61
                                    Figure B6
                Between-Trooper Search Productivity Curve, Arrests




Note: In this figure we plot adjusted trooper unconditional arrest rates against trooper search rates (~sp ) using
two approaches described in Section IV.D: the fixed effects (FE) approach and the quantile (Q) approach. In the
fixed effects approach we net out location fixed effects from both s ~p and adjusted trooper unconditional arrest
rates and plot the residuals. From the FE approach, the figure includes 95% confidence bands for the local linear
relationship between adjusted trooper search rates and unconditional arrest rates and the best linear fit and its
slope. The local linear fit is derived using a Gaussian kernel with a rule-of-thumb bandwidth. In the Q approach
within locations we divide troopers into quantiles by search rate, group quantiles across locations, and then plot
the relationship between search rates and unconditional arrest rates across quantiles. From the Q approach, the
figure includes the mean values for each decile and the best linear fit and its slope.




                                                     62
                              Figure B7
  Between-Trooper Search Productivity Curve, by Motorist Race, Arrests

             (a) White Motorists                                        (b) Black Motorists




                                          (c) Hispanic Motorists




Note: In this figure we plot adjusted trooper unconditional arrest rates against trooper search rates (~sp ) using
two approaches described in Section IV.D: the fixed effects (FE) approach and the quantile (Q) approach. In the
fixed effects approach we net out location fixed effects from both s ~p and adjusted trooper unconditional arrest
rates and plot the residuals. From the FE approach, the figure includes 95% confidence bands for the local linear
relationship between adjusted trooper search rates and unconditional arrest rates and the best linear fit and its
slope. The local linear fit is derived using a Gaussian kernel with a rule-of-thumb bandwidth. In the Q approach
within locations we divide troopers into quantiles by search rate, group quantiles across locations, and then plot
the relationship between search rates and unconditional arrest rates across quantiles. From the Q approach,
the figure includes the mean values for each decile and the best linear fit and its slope. Panel A, Panel B, and
Panel C plot the search productivity curve (SPC) for white motorists, black motorists, and Hispanic motorists,
respectively.




                                                     63
                                  Figure B8
          Map of Highway-Border Intersections Included in RD Analysis




Note: This map depicts in blue the 424 intersections between state/interstate highways and sergeant area borders
that define the spatial RD sample. The set of state and interstate highways associated with these intersections is
superimposed in green. Sergeant areas included in the RD sample are shaded yellow.




                                                     64
                                       Figure B9
                        Within-Trooper Variation in Search Rates

                                              (a) First Stage




                                            (b) Reduced Form




Note: These figures summarize the relationship between deviations in coworker search rates and deviations in
troopers' own search rates (Panel A) and unconditional hit rates (Panel B). Observations are at the trooper-
year level. Both plots include bin scatters where observations at grouped into ventiles based on the deviation in
coworker search rates. The construction of these deviations is described in Section V.A.


                                                     65
                                         Figure B10
                              Troopers Vary in Screening Ability

                                                      (a)




                                        (b) Split Sample Hit Rates




Note: These figures establish that hit rates vary systematically across troopers. Panel A plots adjusted search
rates (~                                              ~ p ), where each marker represents a trooper by location pair.
       sp ) against adjusted unconditional hit rates (h
Panel B plots trooper by location hit rates in one randomly selected half of stops against the same trooper by
location hit rates in the remaining half of stops.


                                                       66
                                             Table A1
                                          Sample Selection

                                                                                            Observations
Sample step                                                                           Dropped       Remaining

1. All stops conducted by Texas Highway Patrol between 2009 and 2015                                15,956,460
2. Retains stops made on state and interstate highways                                4,134,057     11,822,403
3. Drop stops with missing location information                                        532,933      11,289,470
4. Drop stops in the state capitol region                                                 63        11,289,407
5. Retain stops of motorists with Texas addresses                                     1,624,350     9,665,057
6. Retain stops of passenger cars, pick-up trucks, and SUVs                            779,841      8,885,216
7. Drop stops with missing motorist information                                        587,605      8,297,611
8. Retain stops of motorists that are white, black, or Hispanic                        171,790      8,125,821
6. Retain stops with at least one associated speeding violation                       3,187,592     4,938,229
3. Drop stops with missing trooper ID or stop outcomes                                  6,907       4,931,332


                                        Table B1
                       Detailed Search Outcomes by Motorist Race

                                                    Black     Hispanic      White        All

               Consent                              45.19        57.71       48.70      51.80
               Incident to Arrest                   4.223        4.993       5.079      4.881
               Inventory                            8.315        11.70       11.74      11.08
               Probable Cause                       42.27        25.60       34.48      32.24


               Conditional on Contraband :
               Currency                             0.501        1.135       0.168      0.564
               Drugs                                56.68        49.31       51.50      51.80
               Weapon                               5.217        3.004       3.751      3.792
               Other                                37.61        46.55       44.58      43.85


               Arrest                               24.31        23.83       25.04      24.48
               Felony Arrest                        9.254        8.122       7.165      7.911
               Charge Severity (Days)
                 Mean                               98.35        88.07       90.70      91.35
                 90th Percentile                    253.83      243.11      246.61     246.61
                 This table summarizes detailed search outcomes by motorist race. `Charge
                 Severity' refers to the average incarceration sentence associated with convic-
                 tion for that arrest charge. Charge Severity is set to zero for searches that do
                 not lead to an arrest.


                                                     67
                                          Table B5
              Motorist Selection into Stops by Trooper Unconditional Hit Rate

                                                                                         Excluding Most Selective Troopers

                                       100 ×                100 ×        100 ×           100 ×                100 ×         100 ×
                                   CONTRABANDit              h- it        ~ -it
                                                                          h          CONTRABANDit              h- it         ~ -it
                                                                                                                             h
                                                              p             p                                   p              p
                                        (1)                  (2)           (3)            (4)                  (5)            (6)

Black                                      0.273             0.042        0.029              0.221              0.017        0.010
                                         (0.028)           (0.010)       (0.010)           (0.024)            (0.005)      (0.005)
Hispanic                                   0.020             0.010         0.006             0.014             0.001        -0.001
                                         (0.009)           (0.004)       (0.003)           (0.009)            (0.003)      (0.003)
Female                                    -0.157            -0.009        -0.007            -0.140             -0.004       -0.004
                                         (0.010)           (0.002)       (0.002)           (0.009)            (0.001)      (0.001)
Log Median Income                         -0.040            -0.002        -0.002            -0.031              0.002        0.000
                                         (0.009)           (0.002)       (0.002)           (0.009)            (0.002)      (0.002)
Expected Log Income Given                 -0.092            -0.011        -0.011            -0.074             -0.004       -0.004
Vehicle (Standardized)                   (0.005)           (0.002)       (0.002)           (0.005)            (0.001)      (0.001)
1-2 Prior Non-Drug Arrests                 0.256             0.006         0.005             0.228             0.000         0.000
                                         (0.029)           (0.002)       (0.002)           (0.030)            (0.002)      (0.002)
3+ Prior Non-Drug Arrests                  0.406             0.010         0.009             0.352             0.005         0.005
                                         (0.051)           (0.003)       (0.003)           (0.051)            (0.002)      (0.002)
1 Prior Drug Arrest                        1.400             0.011         0.009             1.280             -0.000       -0.001
                                         (0.086)           (0.003)       (0.003)           (0.085)            (0.002)      (0.002)
2+ Prior Drug Arrests                      2.144             0.015        0.012              1.806              0.002        0.000
                                         (0.123)           (0.005)       (0.005)           (0.118)            (0.003)      (0.003)
Prior Stop, No Search                     -0.050            -0.006        -0.004            -0.034             -0.004       -0.002
                                         (0.009)           (0.002)       (0.002)           (0.009)            (0.002)      (0.002)
Prior Search, No Contraband                0.337             0.021        0.019              0.361              0.007        0.007
                                         (0.072)           (0.006)       (0.005)           (0.075)            (0.004)      (0.004)
Prior Search, Contraband                   7.611             0.094         0.092             6.619              0.062        0.063
                                         (0.609)           (0.014)       (0.014)           (0.599)            (0.012)      (0.012)

Location by Time FEs

Joint F-Statistic                         48.74              7.59          7.32             43.87              5.86          5.62
Observations                            3,280,250         3,280,250     3,280,171         2,739,955         2,739,955     2,739,899

  This table presents coefficients from estimates of equation (7), where in columns (2) and (3) we replace the outcome
  SEARCHit with CONTRABANDit , h-            it             ~ -it
                                           p(i,t) (i,t) and hp(i,t) (i,t) , leave-out trooper unconditional hit rates corresponding to
  the trooper who conducted the stop. Columns (4)­(6) exclude stops conducted by the 20% of troopers with the most
  selected set of stopped motorists. Standard errors are clustered at the motorist level. `Joint F-Statistic' refers to an F-test
  for the joint significance of all motorist characteristics.




                                                            68
                                                                Table B2
                                          What Predicts Odds of Searches and Contraband Yield?

     Outcome:                                               Motorist/Vehicle Searched                                    Contraband Found | Search
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)       (10)
     Black                                   3.00          2.70          2.20          1.87          1.86        0.86       0.85       0.91      0.90       0.91
                                            (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.03)        (0.03)        (0.03)      (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.03)
     Hispanic                                1.58          1.68          1.45          1.45          1.44        0.59       0.68       0.71      0.72       0.73
                                            (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)      (0.01)     (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.02)     (0.02)
     Female                                  0.38          0.39          0.41          0.50          0.50        0.98       0.99       0.99      1.03       1.03
                                            (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)      (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.03)
     Log Median Income                                                   0.68          0.74          0.74                              1.26      1.27       1.27
                                                                        (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)                            (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.03)
     Expected Log Income Given                                           0.65          0.68          0.69                              1.00      1.01       1.01
     Vehicle (Standardized)                                             (0.00)        (0.00)        (0.00)                            (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.01)
     1­2 Prior Non-Drug Arrests                                                        1.79          1.76                                        1.00       1.00
                                                                                      (0.03)        (0.03)                                      (0.03)     (0.03)
     3+ Prior Non-Drug Arrests                                                         2.06          2.00                                        0.87       0.87
                                                                                      (0.04)        (0.04)                                      (0.03)     (0.03)




69
     1 Prior Drug Arrest                                                               3.05          2.74                                        1.48       1.41
                                                                                      (0.06)        (0.05)                                      (0.06)     (0.05)
     2+ Prior Drug Arrest                                                              4.04          3.37                                        1.47       1.36
                                                                                      (0.08)        (0.07)                                      (0.06)     (0.05)
     Prior Stop, No Search                                                                           0.82                                                   1.10
                                                                                                    (0.01)                                                 (0.03)
     Prior Search, No Contraband                                                                     2.15                                                   0.63
                                                                                                    (0.06)                                                 (0.04)
     Prior Search, Contraband                                                                        4.83                                                   3.45
                                                                                                    (0.13)                                                 (0.18)
     Time FEs
     Location FEs
     Month FEs
     White Mean                             0.757         0.757         0.757         0.757         0.757        37.24     37.24     37.24      37.24     37.24
     Observations                         4,931,332     4,438,416     4,438,416     4,438,416     4,438,416     52,203     46,485    46,485     46,485    46,485
       This table presents odds ratio estimates for the logistic regression model (B.1). In columns (1) through (5) the outcome is SEARCHit , an indicator of
       whether the stop of motorist i at time t led to a search. In columns (6) through (10) the outcome is CONTRABANDit , an indicator for whether a search
       yields contraband. For these specifications, the sample is limited to stops that result in a search (i.e., where SEARCHit = 1). Standard errors are clustered
       at the motorist level.
                                                       Table B3
                                Traffic Stop Descriptive Statistics, Pooled SPC Sample

                                                              All Stops                                 All Searches
                                           Black      Hispanic       White         All      Black     Hispanic   White       All
     Black                                   100           0            0         10.40       100         0          0       21.10
     Hispanic                                 0           100           0         35.22         0        100         0      39.74
     White                                    0            0           100        54.38         0         0         100     39.16
     Female                                 39.25        32.79        38.16       36.38      17.12      15.75      20.87    18.04
     Log Median Income                      10.71        10.73        10.97       10.86      10.59      10.62      10.89    10.72
                                          (0.501)      (0.497)       (0.467)     (0.495)    (0.491)   (0.469)    (0.473)   (0.495)
     Expected Log Income Given             -0.149       -0.063        0.087       0.009      -0.525    -0.456     -0.365    -0.435
     Vehicle (Standardized)               (1.025)      (0.983)       (1.023)     (1.013)    (0.884)   (0.849)    (0.894)   (0.876)

     Stop History :
     No Prior Stops                        61.74        59.74         57.84      58.91      59.39      58.51     54.95     57.30
     Prior Stop, No Search                 36.60        38.91         41.31      39.97      31.22      33.81     36.66     34.38




70
     Prior Search, No Contraband           1.078        1.027         0.528      0.761      4.560      3.961     3.625     3.956
     Prior Search, Contraband              0.584        0.325         0.323      0.351      4.835      3.719     4.759     4.361

     Non-Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Non-Drug Arrests             87.04        89.42         93.34      91.30      65.28      72.12     71.63     70.49
     1-2 Prior Non-Drug Arrests            7.306        6.940         4.422      5.609      15.18      14.71     14.61     14.77
     3+ Prior Non-Drug Arrests             5.657        3.641         2.237      3.087      19.53      13.17     13.76     14.74

     Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Drug Arrests                 93.95        96.30         97.45      96.68      73.55      81.75     79.19     79.02
     1 Prior Drug Arrest                   2.810        2.173         1.429      1.835      10.31      9.075     9.729     9.591
     2+ Prior Drug Arrests                 3.240        1.531         1.119      1.485      16.14      9.172     11.08     11.39

     Search Rate                           2.244        1.248         0.796      1.106       100        100       100       100
     Unconditional Hit Rate                0.763        0.337         0.299      0.361      33.70      26.77     37.22     32.33
     Observations                         341,083     1,155,385     1,783,782   3,280,250   7,653      14,414    14,205    36,272
       Sample restrictions are described in Section II and Section IV.B.
                                                     Table B4
                           Traffic Stop Descriptive Statistics, Race-Specific SPC Sample

                                                             All Stops                                 All Searches
                                           Black      Hispanic       White        All      Black     Hispanic   White       All
     Black                                   100           0           0         12.94        100        0          0       25.02
     Hispanic                                 0           100          0         28.32         0        100         0      33.39
     White                                    0            0          100        58.73         0         0         100     41.59
     Female                                 40.30        33.01       39.22       37.60       17.28    15.63       21.32    18.41
     Log Median Income                      10.71       10.81        10.97       10.89      10.59      10.68      10.91    10.75
                                          (0.503)      (0.494)      (0.468)     (0.490)    (0.490)   (0.470)    (0.470)   (0.494)
     Expected Log Income Given             -0.155       -0.017       0.086       0.025      -0.531    -0.422     -0.366    -0.426
     Vehicle (Standardized)               (1.030)      (1.018)      (1.034)     (1.032)    (0.880)   (0.869)    (0.906)   (0.890)

     Stop History :
     No Prior Stops                        61.76        63.97        58.73      60.60      59.57      62.04     55.84     58.84
     Prior Stop, No Search                 36.57        34.98        40.42      38.38      31.21      31.35     36.01     33.25




71
     Prior Search, No Contraband           1.084        0.738        0.530      0.661      4.576      3.039     3.694     3.696
     Prior Search, Contraband              0.584        0.319        0.326      0.357      4.639      3.571     4.453     4.205

     Non-Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Non-Drug Arrests             87.01        90.37        93.31      91.66      65.69      73.68     71.63     70.83
     1-2 Prior Non-Drug Arrests            7.354        6.471        4.445      5.396      15.28      14.44     14.71     14.76
     3+ Prior Non-Drug Arrests             5.631        3.157        2.243      2.940      19.03      11.88     13.66     14.41

     Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Drug Arrests                 93.96        96.67        97.38      96.74      73.76      82.33     78.83     78.73
     1 Prior Drug Arrest                   2.807        1.949        1.464      1.775      10.30      8.431     9.875     9.500
     2+ Prior Drug Arrests                 3.232        1.384        1.154      1.488      15.94      9.235     11.30     11.77

     Search Rate                           2.239        1.365        0.820      1.158       100        100       100       100
     Unconditional Hit Rate                0.766        0.413        0.308      0.397      34.04      30.00     37.32     34.06
     Observations                         283,012     619,360      1,284,325   2,226,319   6,337      8,457     10,532    25,326
       Sample restrictions are described in Section II and Section IV.B.
                         Table B6
  Robustness of Search Productivity Curve Slope Estimates

                                     Pooled        White          Black        Hispanic
                                                 Motorists      Motorists     Motorists

Unadjusted Rates                      0.347        0.375          0.400          0.312
                                     (0.016)      (0.022)        (0.028)        (0.022)
Covariate-Adjusted Rates              0.345        0.372          0.398          0.318
                                     (0.016)      (0.022)        (0.028)        (0.021)

EB-Adjusted Rates                     0.348        0.381          0.404          0.309
                                     (0.016)      (0.024)        (0.029)        (0.023)

Split Sample (2SLS), First            0.348        0.366          0.443          0.335
                                     (0.017)      (0.031)        (0.037)        (0.026)
Split Sample (2SLS), Second           0.351        0.383          0.378          0.334
                                     (0.019)      (0.026)        (0.036)        (0.029)
  This table presents the slope of the relationship between trooper search rates and un-
  conditional hit rates conditional on location fixed effects for several specifications and
  for varying samples of motorists. Trooper-by-location combinations are weighted by
  number of stops. For the split sample models, we randomly split stops into two samples
  and estimate s~p and h ~ p separately in each sample. In each sample, we regress h  ~ p on
  s
  ~p , instrumenting for s~p using its pair estimate from the other sample.




                                           72
                                                 Table B7
                    Traffic Stop Descriptive Statistics, Pooled Within-Motorist Sample

                                                           All Stops                                    All Searches
                                           Black     Hispanic      White         All        Black     Hispanic   White       All
     Black                                   100          0           0          9.67          100        0          0       19.91
     Hispanic                                 0          100          0         32.88           0        100         0       37.23
     White                                    0           0          100         57.45          0         0        100       42.86
     Female                                 34.70      27.40        33.70       31.72         14.74     12.98     17.68      15.35
     Log Median Income                     10.68        10.71       10.92       10.83         10.57     10.62     10.89     10.73
                                          (0.494)     (0.483)      (0.447)     (0.476)      (0.491)   (0.474)    (0.455)   (0.490)
     Expected Log Income Given             -0.196      -0.083       0.055       -0.015       -0.556    -0.418     -0.328    -0.407
     Vehicle (Standardized)               (1.000)     (0.940)      (0.964)     (0.964)      (0.897)   (0.862)    (0.878)   (0.880)

     Stop History :
     No Prior Stops                        49.00       46.64        46.90       47.02       44.55      41.22     42.98     42.64
     Prior Stop, No Search                 48.67       51.39        52.04       51.50       38.30      42.63     42.65     41.78




73
     Prior Search, No Contraband           1.565       1.527        0.667       1.037       7.131      7.284     5.582     6.524
     Prior Search, Contraband              0.770       0.444        0.389       0.444       10.02      8.869     8.783     9.060

     Non-Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Non-Drug Arrests             83.97       85.94        91.51       88.95       58.01      66.54     66.62     64.87
     1-2 Prior Non-Drug Arrests            9.079       9.123        5.654       7.126       18.83      17.27     18.65     18.17
     3+ Prior Non-Drug Arrests             6.954       4.934        2.835       3.923       23.16      16.20     14.74     16.96

     Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Drug Arrests                 92.92       95.18        96.98       96.00       68.19      75.84     76.40     74.56
     1 Prior Drug Arrest                   3.309       2.869        1.706       2.243       11.38      11.35     10.64     11.05
     2+ Prior Drug Arrests                 3.772       1.952        1.310       1.759       20.43      12.81     12.95     14.39

     Search Rate                           1.858       1.023        0.674       0.903        100        100       100       100
     Unconditional Hit Rate                0.625       0.290        0.261       0.305       33.17      27.89     38.26     33.39
     Observations                         67,157      228,256     398,833     694,246       1,248      2,334     2,687     6,269
       Sample restrictions are described in Section II, Section IV.B, and Section IV.E.1.
                                                 Table B8
                Traffic Stop Descriptive Statistics, Race-Specific Within-Motorist Sample

                                                           All Stops                                    All Searches
                                           Black     Hispanic      White         All        Black     Hispanic   White       All
     Black                                   100          0           0         13.20          100        0          0       26.08
     Hispanic                                 0          100          0         22.75           0        100         0       26.13
     White                                    0           0          100         64.04          0         0        100       47.79
     Female                                 36.36      29.50        35.98       34.55         15.23     15.09     19.81      17.38
     Log Median Income                     10.66        10.81       10.91       10.85         10.58     10.73     10.90     10.77
                                          (0.494)     (0.476)      (0.443)     (0.465)      (0.483)   (0.464)    (0.456)   (0.484)
     Expected Log Income Given             -0.217      -0.049       0.039       -0.015       -0.575    -0.391     -0.329    -0.410
     Vehicle (Standardized)               (0.999)     (0.989)      (0.975)     (0.985)      (0.875)   (0.902)    (0.898)   (0.899)

     Stop History :
     No Prior Stops                        48.52       50.72        47.43       48.32       46.01      45.48     42.53     44.21
     Prior Stop, No Search                 49.11       47.81        51.49       50.34       37.70      37.94     42.94     40.27




74
     Prior Search, No Contraband           1.612       0.991        0.676       0.871       7.348      6.164     5.578     6.193
     Prior Search, Contraband              0.754       0.479        0.411       0.471       8.946      10.41     8.948     9.331

     Non-Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Non-Drug Arrests             83.77       87.21        91.40       89.44       57.51      67.69     66.59     64.51
     1-2 Prior Non-Drug Arrests            9.179       8.529        5.687       6.795       20.02      16.47     18.59     18.41
     3+ Prior Non-Drug Arrests             7.055       4.261        2.912       3.766       22.47      15.83     14.82     17.08

     Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Drug Arrests                 92.89       95.76        96.85       96.08       67.31      74.60     75.48     73.12
     1 Prior Drug Arrest                   3.308       2.433        1.780       2.131       12.03      10.31     11.45     11.30
     2+ Prior Drug Arrests                 3.799       1.806        1.373       1.792       20.66      15.09     13.07     15.58

     Search Rate                           1.853       1.078        0.700       0.938        100        100       100       100
     Unconditional Hit Rate                0.643       0.400        0.264       0.345       34.08      36.77     37.42     36.38
     Observations                         50,672       87,323     245,777     383,772        939        941      1,721     3,601
       Sample restrictions are described in Section II, Section IV.B, and Section IV.E.1.
                                                      Table B9
                                Traffic Stop Descriptive Statistics, Spatial RD Sample

                                                              All Stops                                        All Searches
                                            Black      Hispanic       White          All        Black      Hispanic      White         All
     Black                                    100           0           0          11.16          100           0            0        22.96
     Hispanic                                  0           100          0          33.27           0          100            0        38.91
     White                                     0            0          100         55.57           0            0           100       38.13
     Female                                  39.52        33.74       38.96        37.29         15.89       14.72         21.18      17.46
     Log Median Income                       10.73        10.76       10.98        10.88        10.59        10.64         10.92     10.73
                                           (0.502)      (0.508)      (0.472)      (0.502)      (0.491)      (0.477)      (0.468)    (0.498)
     Expected Log Income Given              -0.133       -0.032       0.112        0.037        -0.517       -0.439       -0.354     -0.425
     Vehicle (Standardized)                (1.036)      (1.016)      (1.046)      (1.039)      (0.877)      (0.869)      (0.928)    (0.896)

     Stop History :
     No Prior Stops                         62.03        61.16        58.46         59.76        61.45       60.46        55.88      58.94
     Prior Stop, No Search                  36.26        37.52        40.68         39.14        29.47       32.88        35.91      33.25
     Prior Search, No Contraband            1.115        1.012        0.540         0.761        4.472       3.482        3.650      3.773




75
     Prior Search, Contraband               0.594        0.311        0.317         0.346        4.607       3.180        4.558      4.033

     Non-Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Non-Drug Arrests              87.46        90.25        93.47        91.73        65.49        74.79        72.91      71.94
     1-2 Prior Non-Drug Arrests             6.960        6.432        4.347        5.332        14.01        13.45        13.58      13.63
     3+ Prior Non-Drug Arrests              5.579        3.321        2.180        2.939        20.50        11.76        13.51      14.44
                                           (22.95)      (17.92)      (14.60)      (16.89)      (40.38)      (32.22)      (34.19)    (35.15)

     Drug Arrest History :
     No Prior Drug Arrests                  94.27        96.61        97.48         96.83        75.54       83.21        78.65      79.71
     1 Prior Drug Arrest                    2.703        2.005        1.421         1.758        9.213       8.426        9.732      9.105
     2+ Prior Drug Arrests                  3.027        1.380        1.100         1.408        15.25       8.362        11.61      11.18

     Search Rate                            2.246        1.277        0.749         1.092         100         100          100        100
     Unconditional Hit Rate                 0.759        0.313        0.282         0.345        33.27       24.32        37.24      31.30
     Observations                          165,237      492,524      822,611     1,480,372       3,712       6,290        6,165      16,167
       Sample restrictions are described in Section II and Section IV.E.2. These statistics refer to the first stop for each sequential pair of
       stops included in the analysis.
                 Table B10
Search and Hit Rates by Motorist and Trooper
                    Race

                            White         Black       Hispanic
                          Troopers      Troopers     Troopers

All Motorists
   Search Rate               1.15          0.83         0.89
   Hit Rate                  34.4          27.9         26.8


White Motorists
   Search Rate               0.81          0.62         0.62
   Hit Rate                  38.4          30.5         36.9


Black Motorists
   Search Rate               2.38          1.49         2.22
   Hit Rate                  35.3          28.6         31.6


Hispanic Motorists
   Search Rate               1.41          0.85         0.96
   Hit Rate                  29.3          24.2         20.6


Number of Troopers          1,465          216           744
  This table presents search and hit rates by motorist and trooper
  race. We identify trooper race from 2015 personnel records.




                              76
                                     Table B11
               Racial Disparities in Search Rates by Trooper Race

Outcome:                                               Motorist/Vehicle Searched
                                       (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)

Black                                  3.08           2.73        2.23          1.92         1.90
                                      (0.05)          (0.04)     (0.04)        (0.03)       (0.03)
Hispanic                               1.70           1.68        1.47          1.47         1.46
                                      (0.02)          (0.02)     (0.02)        (0.02)       (0.02)
Black Trooper                          0.83           0.80        0.82          0.81         0.80
                                      (0.03)          (0.03)     (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)
Hispanic Trooper                       0.75           0.80        0.80          0.81         0.81
                                      (0.02)          (0.02)     (0.02)        (0.02)       (0.02)
Black × Black Trooper                  0.79           0.81        0.80          0.79         0.80
                                      (0.04)          (0.04)     (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.04)
Black × Hispanic Trooper               1.21           1.17        1.16          1.14         1.15
                                      (0.05)          (0.05)     (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.05)
Hispanic × Black Trooper               0.75           0.71        0.71          0.72         0.72
                                      (0.04)          (0.03)     (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)
Hispanic × Hispanic Trooper            0.92           1.02        0.99          0.96         0.96
                                      (0.03)          (0.03)     (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)
Female                                 0.39           0.40        0.42          0.51         0.51
                                      (0.01)          (0.01)     (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)

Time FEs
Location FEs
Month FEs
Income
Arrest History
Stop History

Observations                        3,790,428    3,790,428     3,790,428     3,790,428    3,790,428
  This table presents odds ratio estimates for the logistic regression model (B.1) augmented with fixed
  effects for trooper race and interactions between motorist and trooper race. We identify trooper race
  from 2015 personnel records. We limit to stops conducted by black, Hispanic, and white troopers.
  Standard errors are clustered at the motorist level.




                                                 77
                    Table B12
Search Disparities, Citation Disparities, and Local
             Political Preferences

Black-White Gap
                               Black-White Search Odds Ratio
                                (1)         (2)             (3)

Citation Odds Ratio            0.531                       -0.152
                              (0.487)                     (0.544)
Republican Vote Share                     3.245            3.367
                                         (0.678)          (0.978)

Observations                    79          79               79
Adjusted   R2                  0.023      0.222            0.223


Hispanic-White Gap
                              Hispanic-White Search Odds Ratio
                                (4)         (5)             (6)

Citation Odds Ratio            0.573                       0.468
                              (0.220)                     (0.245)
Republican Vote Share                     0.674            0.416
                                         (0.381)          (0.400)

Observations                    79          79               79
Adjusted   R2                  0.051      0.032            0.061
  This table presents estimates of linear regression models where the out-
  come is the sergeant area-specific black-white (Panel A) or Hispanic-
  white search odds ratio (Panel B) derived from equation (12). `Citation
  Odds Ratio' refers to sergeant-area specific black-white (Panel A) or
  Hispanic-white citation odds ratio (Panel B) derived from equation (12)
  where the outcome is replaced with an indicator for whether the stop
  results in a citation rather than a warning. `Republican Vote Share'
  refers to the Republican vote share in the 2016 presidential election.
  For sergeant areas that cover multiple counties, we take a weighted
  average of the county-level Republican vote shares where weights re-
  flect the share of sergeant area stops conducted in each county. Robust
  standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                  78
