                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE IMPACT OF MIGRATION CONTROLS ON URBAN FISCAL POLICIES AND
THE INTERGENERATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF HUMAN CAPITAL IN CHINA

                                         Holger Sieg
                                        Chamna Yoon
                                        Jipeng Zhang

                                      Working Paper 27764
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27764


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




We would like to thank Hanming Fang, Shihe Fu, Xintong Han, Shengzhi Mao, Jiawei Mo, Andy
Postlewaite, Ruichao Si, Wei You, Qinghua Zhang, as well as seminar participants at numerous
universities and conferences for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Holger Sieg, Chamna Yoon, and Jipeng Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Migration Controls on Urban Fiscal Policies and the Intergenerational Transmission
of Human Capital in China
Holger Sieg, Chamna Yoon, and Jipeng Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 27764
September 2020
JEL No. E6,H7,I25,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

Using newly available data, we document that internal migrants do not enjoy the same access to
local public goods and services as city residents in China. We estimate a spatial overlapping
generations model with heterogeneous households to quantify the impact of the Hukou system on
urban fiscal policies and access to educational opportunities. We find that migrants provide large
fiscal externalities to all major cities. We show the feasibility of alternative internal migration
policies that offer the potential of decreasing the inequality within China while at the same time
increasing the overall level of human capital in the economy.


Holger Sieg                                     Jipeng Zhang
Department of Economics                         Research Institute of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                      and Management
3718 Locust Walk                                Southwestern University of
Philadelphia, PA 19104                          Finance and Economics
and NBER                                        55 Guanghuacun Street
holgers@econ.upenn.edu                          Chengdu, China 610074
                                                jpzhang@swufe.edu.cn
Chamna Yoon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology
Republic of Korea
chamna.yoon@gmail.com
1         Introduction

This paper studies the impact of internal migration controls on urban fiscal policies, access
to educational opportunities, and the intergenerational transmission of human capital in
China. We use new data to document differences in outcomes between migrants and city
residents. We find that migrants do not enjoy the same access to local public goods and
services as residents, which, among others, creates a gap in educational attainment. We
develop and estimate a new spatial overlapping generations model that is consistent with
the main institutional features that characterize fiscal decentralization in China. We find
that migrants provide large positive fiscal externalities to all major cities ranging between 6
and 15 percent of total local revenues. We then evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of
alternative internal migration policies that offer the potential of decreasing inequality within
China while at the same time promoting growth via increasing the overall level of human
capital in the economy. We find that there is much scope for reallocating households from
rural areas and small cities to tier 2 and tier 3 cities. Our analysis, therefore, suggests that
it is feasible to grant equal access to local public goods for migrants in most major cities in
China. These policies, however, require significant increases in local taxes.

        Our empirical analysis is based on a combination of newly available data sets including
the China Household Finance Survey (CHFS) and the Migrants Dynamic Monitoring Survey
(MDMS). The CHFS provides detailed information on residency status, household income,
consumption, housing and locational choices. Moreover, the structure of this data set allows
us to follow migrant households over time and study the change of a household's Hukou status.
In contrast to the MDMS, the CHFS allows us to study the transition of Hukou status as well
as the lifetime behavior of migrants with and without Hukou. Besides, the MDMS provides
additional important information about the behavior of temporary migrant households and
the constraints that they face.1 Using these novel data sets, we show that migrant households
    1
        The micro sample of 2000 census is used to characterize the initial distribution of population and housing
endowment. We also use data from the 2018 fiscal year central and local public finance data and the China
City Statistics Yearbook to measure heterogeneity in local fiscal policies across city tiers.


                                                          1
consume lower levels of public goods and services while contributing relatively higher tax
revenues than city residents. These discrepancies arise for two reasons. On the expenditure
side, migrants often do not have equal access to local primary and secondary schools and
other local public goods and services. On the revenue side, the housing demand of migrants
drives a large fraction of new housing construction, which is an important source of local
revenues in growing cities in China. As a consequence, migrants provide large positive fiscal
externalities for all major cities in China.

   We document that internal migration policies have a large impact on access to and af-
fordability of educational opportunities within the country. These policies designed around
the Hukou registration system affect where households live and how much cities can spend
on education and other public goods. Not surprisingly, there are large differences in school
quality among Chinese cities, towns, and rural areas. Internal migration controls, therefore,
affect the intergenerational transmission of human capital.

   Our empirical analysis suggests that there are two important channels. First, a majority
of migrants bring their children when they move, but children of migrant workers do not have
the same access to educational opportunities as children of residents. Hence, these children
accumulate less human capital than children of residents holding parental skills constant.
Hence, there is a significant achievement gap or wedge between children of migrants and
children of residents in the same city. Second, many migrants leave their children behind
with grandparents or relatives. Average school quality is much higher in major cities than
in less developed areas in China. As a consequence, children that are left behind do not
have access to the same educational opportunities as children that attend schools in major
cities. Hence, these left-behind children receive, on average, a lower quality of education,
which also slows down the human capital accumulation in the overall economy and reduces
aggregate growth. While migration increases the overall human capital accumulation, the
inequalities built into the Hukou system imply that there is much scope for increasing the
overall accumulation of human capital of migrant children and children left behind in less
developed parts of the economy.


                                               2
      To quantify the effects of internal migration controls on human capital accumulation and
to assess the feasibility and desirability of potential reforms, we develop and estimate a new
overlapping generations model with heterogeneous households. The quantitative model cap-
tures the observed migration patterns within China since the era of housing market reforms in
the late 1990s. Our model builds on the pioneering research on overlapping generations mod-
els with endogenous local fiscal policies developed by B´
                                                        enabou (1996, 2002) and Fernandez
and Rogerson (1996, 1998, 2003).2 We combine the insights from this class of spatial OLG
models with those obtained from modern Rosen (1979) & Roback (1982) models.3 Finally,
we use fiscal and housing market wedges to capture important distortions faced by migrants
in the economy as suggested by Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007).

      Our model has multiple locations that differ by local labor and housing market conditions
as well as local tax and expenditure policies. Households, therefore, have strong incentives to
migrate to higher productivity cities that pay higher wages and have a higher quality of local
public good provision. Migrant households face mobility costs, wedges in housing markets,
and restricted access to local public goods. These wedges make migration less attractive and,
thus, lead to an inefficient allocation of labor among cities. Moreover, migrant households
must decide whether or not to leave their children behind with relatives in less developed
areas. As a consequence, the endogenous spatial sorting of households and the heterogeneity
of educational quality among cities significantly affect human capital accumulation.

      We can only compute equilibria of the model numerically. Hence we estimate the model's
parameters using a method of moments estimator. Since we condition on observed housing
prices, local tax rates, and fiscal wedges in the estimation, the implied equilibrium is unique,
which allows us to use a nested fixed-point algorithm in estimation. Some parameters can
be estimated without computing the equilibrium of the model. Hence we use a sequential
  2
      These models are dynamic extensions of Tiebout style models discussed in Epple and Romer (1991) and
estimated in Epple and Sieg (1999). See Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2012) for a literature review.
   3
     For a survey of the literature see Moretti (2011). The most recent research is discussed by Diamond
(2016) and Coen-Pirani and Sieg (2019).




                                                    3
estimator and compute standard errors using a bootstrap algorithm.

   Our quantitative model focuses on migration between tier 1, tier 2, and tier 3 cities as
well as less developed cities and rural places in China. One period in our quantitative model
corresponds to the length of the working life of a household. We, therefore, focus on the long-
run transmission of human capital. We find that the parameter estimates are reasonable and
that the model fits the data well. In particular, our model captures the heterogeneity in
fiscal policies across city types, the differences in housing market conditions, and the broad
migration patterns observed in the data.

   Our findings suggest that migrants of all types produce significant positive fiscal exter-
nalities for all cities. The difference between total revenues paid by migrants and total local
expenditures on migrants accounts for 6 to 15 percent of total city revenues. Not surprisingly,
high-skill migrants provide a higher externality than low-skill migrants. While high-skill mi-
grants tend to have better access to local public goods and services than low-skill migrants,
they also pay significantly higher taxes. Moreover, the fiscal externality per migrant decreases
by city tier, with tier 1 cities benefiting the most from migrants. We, therefore, conclude
that migrants provide large fiscal subsidies to residents in all major cities in China.

   Our analysis suggests that the current Hukou system increases inequality, suppresses
human capital accumulation, and reduces economic growth. The Chinese central government
has taken steps to address these problems. Since 2016 it has urged local governments to
grant full residency rights to 100 million temporary migrants that currently live in small
and medium-sized cities. In the spirit of this policy directive, we study the feasibility and
effectiveness of alternative reforms of the current Hukou system. Since tier 1 cities are
already large and may have limited scope for population growth under the current government
regulation, we fix the Hukou policy of tier 1 cities at the current level. However, there is a
large potential for population growth in tier 2 and tier 3 cities.

   We find that granting full residency rights to migrants in tier 3 cities is likely to achieve
the target of 100 million migrants that has been proposed by China's State Council in 2016.


                                               4
This policy change significantly increases the college attainment of children born in rural
and less developed areas, but it requires equivalently an increase in the consumption tax
by approximately 1.3 percentage points. Even larger achievement gains can be obtained by
including tier 2 cities in the set of cities that grant full residency rights to migrants. A policy
that includes all tier 2 and tier 3 cities requires an equivalent consumption tax increase of
approximately 3.3 percentage points. Our counterfactual analysis predicts that more than
200 million migrants will receive residency rights under this policy. In conclusion, there exists
feasible reforms of the Hukou system that could significantly increase the college attainment
of migrant children and reduce inequality by closing the educational gap between migrants
and residents. By enlarging the pool of high-skill labor, these policies also promise to increase
overall economic growth in the future.

   Our paper is related to numerous strands of the literature. First, a number of previous
papers in urban economics have studied rural-urban migration and city size in China. Au and
Henderson (2006), Bosker, Brakman, and Garretsen (2012), and Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg
(2013) find that most major Chinese cities are too small. We do not study the optimal size
of cities. Instead, we focus on feasible reforms of internal migration and urban fiscal policies
that promise to reduce inequality and increase aggregate human capital accumulation.

   Second, our paper is related to the literature on the impact of the Hukou system on spatial
allocation of labor and inequality. It is well understood that Hukou residency restrictions lead
to an inefficient allocation of labor among cities as well as higher inequality as documented
by Whalley and Zhang (2013), Ngai, Pissarides, and Wang (2018), and Piketty, Yang, and
Zucman (2019). Similarly, Hao, Sun, Tombe and Zhu (2020) have studied the effect of internal
migration policies on growth, structural change, and regional inequality using a trade model.
They find that migration cost changes account for the majority of the reallocation of workers
out of agriculture and the drop in regional inequality. Wu and You (2020) focus on the welfare
implications of the Hukou system. There has been much less research that has studied the
impact of internal migration controls on urban fiscal policies and the overall level of human
capital accumulation in the economy. In contrast to the papers above, we use a different


                                                5
model that focuses on differences in urban fiscal policies and fiscal decentralization on sorting
and access to economic opportunities.

   Third, there is a literature in macroeconomics that has studied the economic growth
of the Chinese economy. Several previous studies found severe misallocation of production
factors in China and large economic gains from eliminating the underlying distortions. Hsieh
and Klenow (2009) have studied manufacturing, Song, Storesletten and Zilibotti (2011) the
allocation of inputs among private and state-owned enterprises, Brandt et al. (2017) the
allocation of input factors across regions. In contrast, we focus on the relationship between
human capital accumulation and economic growth. Hence our paper is also related to Fang
and Herrendorf (2020) who highlight the importance of high-skill workers for the development
of a high value-added service sector in the economy. Our paper complements these studies
and evaluates policy reforms that can be used to increase the fraction of high-skill workers
in the whole economy.

   Finally, our paper is related to previous empirical studies on the access to local public
schools by migrant children (Chen and Feng, 2013), the cognitive achievement of left-behind
children (Zhang et al., 2014), the human capital accumulation of migrants (Heckman, 2005),
and the intergenerational mobility (Fan, Yi, and Zhang, 2019). None of these papers have
provided a comprehensive analysis of these issues within the context of an estimated spatial
overlapping generations equilibrium model with heterogeneous households.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides some institutional back-
ground information about fiscal decentralization and the Hukou system in China. Using the
CHFS and other novel data sets, we document how the migration controls affect the flow of
households over time from lower-tier to higher-tier cities. We also document important differ-
ences in access to local public goods and services between migrants and residents. Section 3
develops our overlapping generations model. Section 4 discusses our parameter estimates and
the goodness of fit of our model. Section 5 provides our estimates of the fiscal externalities
of migrants. We turn to counterfactual policy analysis in Section 6 and study alternatives to
the current Hukou policy. Section 7 offers some conclusions drawn from the analysis.

                                               6
2         Institutional Background

2.1         Fiscal Decentralization and Urban Fiscal Policies

Cities play an important role in the intergeneration transmission of human capital. In a
decentralized system of provision of education, such as the one in China, there are often
large differences in school quality among cities. As a consequence, we need to understand
urban fiscal policies, i.e. we need to characterize the differences in revenues and expenditures
among local governments. In this chapter, we show that Chinese cities primarily rely on
three sources of revenues: 1) own source revenues that arise due to local taxes and fees
as well as tax sharing agreements with the central government, 2) revenues from land and
housing development, and 3) intergovernmental transfers from the central government. As a
consequence, the central government plays a large role in determining city finances.

        To illustrate the importance of tax sharing agreements and intergovernmental transfers,
it is useful to consider the aggregate budgets of the central and local governments. For
the central government, we focus on the general public budget.4 Table 1 reports the latest
publicly available statistics from the 2018 fiscal year compiled by China's Ministry of Finance.

        Table 1 shows that the central government spends 32% of total expenditures for public
goods and services such as national defense, science and technology, public security, and
education. In contrast, 68 % of general budget expenditures are earmarked for transfers to
local governments. That is a much larger fraction than in most comparable countries.

        Central government revenues mainly come from two sources: 1) domestic value-added
    4
        There are three other budgets: 1) the government managed fund, 2) the state capital fund, and 3) the
social security fund. These three funds are relatively small at the central level of government and do not
play a role in our analysis. At the local level, the government fund and the social security funds can be
substantial. The state capital funds, which are related to state-owned enterprises, are relatively small at the
local and central levels compared with the other three funds. The social security fund is mostly managed by
local governments. We ignore state capital and social security funds in our analysis since they do not play
an essential role in our model.


                                                       7
      Table 1: Revenues and Expenditures in 2018

      Central Government: General Public Budget
                                        Total      Share
Total Revenues                          8544       100%
­ VAT & Consumption Taxes               4138        48%
­ Corporate & Personal Income Taxes     3056        36%
­ Other Revenues                        1350        16%
Total Expenditures                     10238       100%
­ Central Spending                      3270        32%
­ Intergovernmental Transfers           6967        68%
      Local Governments: General Public Budget
                                        Total      Share
Total Revenues                         17990       100%
­ Local Revenues                        9791        54%
­ Intergovernmental Transfers           6967        39%
­ From Government Fund                  1232         7%
Total Expenditures                     18819       100%
­ Education                             3044        16%
    Local Governments: Government-Managed Fund
                                        Total      Share
Total Revenues                          8580       100%
­ Land Sales                            6509        76%
Total Expenditures                      7747       100%
­ Urban Development Related             6814        88%
The unit is billion Chinese Yuan.
Data source: annual report of China's Mistry of Finance.




                           8
taxes and consumption taxes (48%), and 2) corporate and personal income taxes (36%). As
we discuss in more detail below, consumption and income taxes are shared between the central
and local governments. We thus conclude that an important role of the central government
is to collect revenues and to transfer these revenues to local governments.

       Table 1 also presents the aggregate budget of local governments in China. We focus
on the two most important local budgets: the general public budget and the government-
managed fund.5 The general budget of local governments is financed by local revenues (54%),
central transfers (39%), and transfers from government-managed fund (7%). In addition, local
governments receive significant revenues from the government-managed funds, 76% of which
comes from the sale of land use rights.

       Tax sharing agreements between the central and local governments are an essential part
of fiscal decentralization in China. These agreements are based on fixed sharing rules. The
current structure of tax sharing arrangements goes back to a reform of the fiscal system in
1994. Taxes were classified as central, local, and shared taxes. Table 2 illustrates the taxing
sharing arrangement in the fiscal year 2018. Central taxes include customs duties, vehicle
purchase taxes, and some consumption taxes. The value-added tax is the main shared tax.
Note that VAT tax revenues are shared equally between the central and local governments.6
Personal and corporate income taxes are also shared taxes. The corporate income tax is
25%, and the personal income tax ranges between 5% and 45%. Local governments receive
approximately 40 percent of all income tax revenues. The progressive nature of the income
tax system implies that top-tier cities can generate much higher revenues from income taxes
than lower-tier cities. Local taxes also include a variety of real estate and property transaction
taxes, land use and urban development tax, and other consumption taxes.

       Equally important are expenditure assignments between the central and local govern-
ments. These assignments determine the responsibility of the central and local governments
   5
       The third important budget at the local level is the social security fund which accounted for another 7.7
trillion Yuan in expenditures in 2018.
    6
      The current VAT tax rate is 16 percent.



                                                        9
                              Table 2: Tax Sharing Arrangements

                                            Central    Local   Share of    Share of
                                                                  Taxes       GDP
               Central Taxes                   100%               20.2%        3.8%
               Shared Taxes                                       67.1%      12.6%
               ­ Domestic VAT                   50%     50%       35.7%        6.7%
               ­ Corporate Income Tax           63%     37%       20.5%        3.8%
               ­ Personal Income Tax            60%     40%        8.1%        1.5%
               Local Taxes                             100%       12.6%        2.4%



for the provision of certain public goods and services. Not surprisingly, the central govern-
ment is primarily responsible for national defense, foreign affairs, and national transportation
projects. In contrast, local governments are primarily responsible for education, urban de-
velopment, social security, health, housing, community affairs, and the environment.

   In our quantitative model, we distinguish among tier 1, tier 2, tier 3, and less developed
cities as well as rural areas. To capture the essential components of fiscal decentralization in
China we consider three sources of local revenues: 1) transfers from the central government
as well as revenue sharing from the VAT, 2) revenues from land and housing sales, and 3)
own-source revenues excluding VAT, which primarily include personal and corporate income
taxes, fees, and charges. China's City Statistical Yearbook provides statistics that allow us to
estimate the relevant revenue shares by city tier. As shown in Table 3, own-revenues account
for 34% of total local revenues in tier 1 cities. Land and housing-related revenues account for
35 % of total revenues. The remaining revenues come from VAT sharing and other central
government transfer accounting for 31% of the total local revenues in tier 1 cities. Revenue
shares of tier 2 cities are similar to those of tier 1 cities. Tier 2 cities generate fewer revenues
from own-source revenues but obtain higher revenues from land sales than tier 1 cities. Tier
3 cities received 56% of their revenues from central government transfers.


                                                10
                      Table 3: Revenue Shares and Expenditures by City Tiers

                                                                   Tier 1     Tier 2   Tier 3
                Own-source Revenues excluding VAT                   34%        24%      16%
                Land and Housing Revenues                           35%        45%      28%
                VAT Revenues & Governmental Transfers               31%        31%      56%
                Educational Expenditures per Capita                 5,995     2,183    1,553
                Other Expenditures per Capita                      40,447    13,080    8,653



       Since there are large differences in total fiscal capacity and total revenues, it is not sur-
prising that there are also large differences in expenditures among cities. We can measure the
quality of local education using public education expenditures per capita. The data is again
provided by China's City Statistical Yearbook, which reports expenditures for both the urban
core and the whole prefecture.7 We proxy rural expenditures using the total expenditures of
the whole prefecture minus the expenditures for city proper in a prefecture.

       Table 3 shows the median educational expenditures and expenditures on other public
goods per capita by city tier. Not surprisingly, tier 1 cities have much higher expenditures
per capita than tier 2 and tier 3 cities. Note that, in 2017, rural educational expenditures
and expenditures on other public goods were 791 and 3,485 Chinese Yuan per capita respec-
tively. In summary, there are pronounced differences in both educational and other public
expenditures among cities and less developed places in China.



2.2        The Hukou System, Temporary and Permanent Migrants

China's current Hukou system was formally established in 1958 as a means of population
registration to control internal migration. Individuals who stay in a location that is not their
   7
       A prefecture is an administrative unit below a province and consists of a city proper (an urban core,
similar to a metropolitan area) and a mostly rural area (typically called counties).



                                                      11
registered residence, need to acquire a temporary residence permit to get limited access to
local public goods and services. By design, the Hukou registration system had a profound
impact on the economic development of the People's Republic of China. It restricted labor
mobility and, therefore, affected the spatial allocation of labor, capital, and other mobile
production factors in the economy.

   Before the start of China's transition to a market economy in 1978, the central government
formulated and implemented the Hukou policy. Local governments played a limited role
during that time. Since 1990s local governments have gradually been given the power to
decide the registration rules under the guideline from the central and provincial governments.
As a consequence, the importance of local governments in granting Hukou status has grown
steadily. Hukou has become a critical policy tool for local governments to manage local public
finance and city growth, and to attract investment and high-skilled workers.

   Currently, the Hukou status of a person is primarily defined by two characteristics: the
location and the type. Location refers to the legal address of the registration. There are two
types of residential status, which are commonly referred to as rural (agricultural) and urban
(non-agricultural) Hukou. Each citizen is registered at birth. The location and the type of a
new-born child are determined by either the mother's or the father's Hukou status.

   The Hukou system is managed by the local police department at the township level. It is
possible to change the Hukou status from rural to urban in most prefectures. However, the
change of residency status is tightly controlled by local governments, especially in tier 1 and
tier 2 cities of the country. To accomplish a change in residency status a person must apply
to the local police department. A change is only granted if the person meets certain require-
ments, which are linked to the following categories: investments, tax payments, real estate
purchases, employment status, college status, joining relatives, and special contributions. All
tier 1 and most tier 2 cities set high criteria for migrants to obtain local urban Hukou. The
requirements of these cities have become more stringent over time. In contrast, lower-tier
cities tend to have weaker requirements (Zhang, Wang, and Lu, 2019).



                                              12
       Based on the institution of Hukou, one can define the concepts of permanent and tempo-
rary migration in China. Temporary migrants are individuals whose place of residence differs
from their place of registration. Most rural-urban migrants are temporary migrants. Perma-
nent migrants are those who have changed their registration and obtained an urban Hukou
in the new city of residence. It is where an individual is registered, rather than the intended
duration of stay, that defines an individual as a permanent or temporary migrant. Previ-
ous studies mostly focused on temporary migrants. Taking advantage of the data on Hukou
changes of individuals, we can account for permanent and transitory migrants to evaluate the
impact of Hukou policy changes on migration decision and educational achievement.8

       The quantitative version of our model considers four locations with three tiers of cities
and one rural, less-developed area. Hence, a migrant in our analysis is a household who moves
across these four location types.9 Hukou registration may have slowed, but has not prevented
the migration of hundreds of millions of households from rural areas to the cities in China
during the past two decades. When households move from a rural region to a city, or from a
lower tier city to a higher tier city they often cannot obtain a local urban Hukou registration.
As a consequence, there exists a large group of migrants in tier 1 and tier 2 cities who work
and live in a location without local urban Hukou.

       Table 4 shows the status of residents and migrants by city tier using data from the CHFS
in 2017, which has more than 40,000 households. We use can use detailed information on
migration histories in the CHFS to document the pattern of migration dynamics. Comparing
with commonly used Census and migrants survey data, the CHFS contains detailed Hukou
information, especially the record of Hukou changes from rural to urban and from one location
   8
       Appendix A explains in detail how we measure Hukou status and Hukou transitions in our data set.
   9
       Our analysis abstracts from mobility within tier 1, tier 2, or tier 3 cities. Thus, we deviate from the
previous literature that defines a migrant as somebody who moves across townships or counties, and focus on
only the moves across the four locations in our model. Importantly, all moves from rural to urban including
those within a prefecture are counted as migrants in our quantitative analysis. Thus, our model highlights the
migrants flows across city tiers, but still accounts for the large scale of rural-urban migration during China's
rapid urbanization since 1990s.



                                                       13
                                   Table 4: Migration by City Tier

                                   Share of Migrants and Residents
                                                                   Tier 1   Tier 2    Tier 3
              Permanent Migrants (with urban Hukou)                 13.5     15.8      20.3
              Temporary Migrants (without urban Hukou)              25.7     30.7      32.2
              Residents                                             60.8     53.5      47.5
                           Share of Migrants that Changed Hukou Status
                                                                   Tier 1   Tier 2    Tier 3
              Low-skill Migrant                                     26.0     27.5      31.5
              High-skill Migrant                                    47.0     52.5      67.1



to another. Migrants with a change in Hukou status (permanent migrants) account for
a considerable proportion in the total population. The transition of Hukou status is an
important feature in our analysis. Note that migrants constitute 40 to 50 percent of the
population in tier 1, tier 2, and tier 3 cities. Residents are those households that live in the
city in which they obtained urban Hukou at birth or change their Hukou status from rural
to urban due to the expansion of cities (without having to relocate).10

      One key criterion that affects the likelihood of obtaining the local urban Hukou for mi-
grants is the level of education or skill. We divide the population into two types. Low-skill
households have a head who has at most a high school degree. High-skill household heads
attended, at least, a two-year college. Table 4 reports the fraction of low- and high-skill
permanent migrants, i.e. households that migrated to a major city and obtained local urban
status in the destination city. These calculations are also based on the CHFS 2017. Table 4
shows that the fraction of migrants that changed Hukou status is lowest in tier 1 cities and
highest in tier 3 cities. Not surprisingly, the fraction of households that became permanent
migrants is larger for high-skill than low-skill households.
 10
      Appendix B contains a more detailed analysis of Hukou change by age and time period.


                                                    14
                 Table 5: Characteristics of Residents and Migrants

                                            Fraction
                  City     Age    Years         Rural   Household   Annual    Annual
                                  of Edu    Hukou         Size      Income    Consump
Residents         Tier 1   51.9    12.4          0        2.69      176,351   103,779
Permanent Migr    Tier 1   46.6    13.4          0        2.92      209,166   106,397
Temporary Migr    Tier 1   41.1    10.9         71.7      3.08      169,251   101,768
Residents         Tier 2   50.1    11.7          0        2.88      128,317    79,889
Permanent Migr    Tier 2   46.9    12.1          0        3.08      142,850    80,043
Temporary Migr    Tier 2   43.5    9.6          87.3      3.20      95,814     68,273
Residents         Tier 3   49.3    11.1          0        3.15      104,303    68,799
Permanent Migr    Tier 3   47.4    11.4          0        3.43      114,659    70,032
Temporary Migr    Tier 3   45.1    8.6          97.4      3.68      79,989     62,377
Residents         Rural    51.4    7.58          1        3.78      65,862     47,800
Income and consumption are in 2017 Chinese Yuan.




                                           15
       Residents and migrants differ along many observed dimensions. Socio-economic and de-
mographic information on different types of households is reported in Table 5. It shows that
residents tend to be older and thus have smaller household sizes, on average, than migrants.
Moreover, they tend to have higher levels of education, higher income, higher consumption,
and higher wealth than temporary migrants. Permanent migrants have, on average, the high-
est level of education and income. They have similar levels of wealth than residents. The
majority of temporary migrants have a rural Hukou registration.

       An important feature of the Hukou system is that it regulates access to a variety of
local public goods and services. For example, the Hukou status restricts access to local
schools, health insurance, pension, unemployment insurance, maternity benefits, and housing
providence funds. Access to these public goods affects investment decisions in human capital,
inequality, and social development.

       We have seen that there are important differences in educational spending across juris-
dictions in China. Hence, there are also significant and persistent differences in educational
attainment. We can measure educational achievement using college attainment. Local gov-
ernments are required to provide free primary and middle school education for migrant chil-
dren. However, local governments often impose strict rules that prevent migrant children
from attending better local schools. These restrictions are even more severe in high school.
Students without local Hukou are not allowed to participate in college entrance exams unless
strict requirements are met, even if they can manage to attend a local high school.

       Table 6 documents the educational achievement of children, whose parents are either low-
or high-skill, by migration status. These statistics are based on the 2017 CHFS data, for
the age group 19 to 39. In total, 40.8% of all children in the CFHS receive some college
education.11 Moreover, migrant children have significantly lower college attainments than
children of residents, even after conditioning on parental education levels. Not surprisingly,
  11
       Note that this fraction is higher than the fraction reported in 2015 Census which is approximately 30
percent for the comparable group. That is because CHFS sample is slightly older than the census and has a
higher fraction of educated households.


                                                      16
                         Table 6: Share of Children with College Attainment

                                          Residents                  Migrants
                        Parents     Low-skill   High-skill    Low-skill    High-skill
                        Tier 1        67.7          96.3         29.5         93.5
                        Tier 2        52.9          91.0         24.2         90.9
                        Tier 3        41.9          89.3         21.9         87.4
                        Rural         23.0          78.2
                                    Permanent Migrants        Temporary Migrants
                        Parents     Low-skill   High-skill    Low-skill    High-skill
                        Tier 1        59.8          94.5         23.6         92.8
                        Tier 2        38.9          93.2         19.8         88.7
                        Tier 3        32.1          88.5         18.0         85.8



attainment also decreases by city tier, with tier 1 cities producing the highest fraction of
college-educated children. Children of permanent migrants have much higher achievement
than children of temporary migrants, holding parental skills constant.

       Table 7 shows that a significant share of migrants' children not enrolled in local public
schools. Children of low-skill households are less likely to attend local schools than children of
high-skill households. These statistics are based on the 2011 Migrants Dynamic Monitoring
Survey (MDMS), for which there are detailed information on the coverage of public services.12
Table 7 also reports the proportion of children who are not living with their migrant parents,
based on the 2011 version of the MDMS. The fraction of left-behind children of low-skill
households ranges between 47.9 percent in tier 1 cities to 38.7 percent in tier 2 cities. For
  12
       This is a large scale representative survey on temporary migrants who moved out of Hukou registration
county for more than 6 months. The sample has around 126,000 household observations. To match the
migration definition in our model, we use only the households who moved across prefectures. Similarly, we
impose the same age restrictions (20-65) for parents and keep only the households with children at schools.



                                                      17
                             Table 7: Access to Educational Opportunities

                   Share of Temporary Migrant Children in Local Public Schools
                   Parents     Low-skill                     High-skill
                   Tier 1        71.8                           84.3
                   Tier 2        83.9                           87.0
                   Tier 3        89.1                           87.2
                          Share of Temporary Migrant Children Left Behind
                   Parents     Low-skill                     High-skill
                   Tier 1        47.9                           19.3
                   Tier 2        38.7                           30.5
                   Tier 3        42.1                           45.0



high-skill households, the fraction ranges from 19.3 percent to 45 percent. We conclude that
a significant number of migrants leave children behind.

       Migrants also do not have equal access to a variety of other local public goods and services.
For example, residents have better access to public housing and housing subsidies via the
housing providence fund than migrants. As a consequence, migrants face higher housing
costs than residents. Table 8 reports some statistics that summarize access to public goods
by migrants. It is also based on the 2011 version of the MDMS

       Table 8 provides some useful insights into this problem. All employers in China are
required by law to pay social security contributions for their employees regardless of their
Hukou status. Temporary migrants, however, are often not protected by the law or unwilling
to join the social insurance program because of high job uncertainty. Similar access problems
arise for medical insurance programs.13
  13
       All employees are supposed to have access to the Urban Employee Medical Insurance. Also, cities have
an Urban Resident Medical Insurance program that primarily covers households with local urban Hukou.
Similarly, rural areas offer the Rural Medical Cooperative Insurance program. Many migrants only have


                                                     18
               Table 8: Fraction with Access to Other Public Goods and Services

                    Housing Providence             Social Security           Medical Insurance
                             Fund
                    Low-skill    High-skill    Low-skill     High-skill     Low-skill   High-skill
         Tier 1        3.6          34.6          24.3          66.8          29.9        68.4
         Tier 2        3.2          20.8          14.4          46.7          17.4        48.0
         Tier 3        1.6          19.2           8.3          38.9          12.2        45.1



    In summary, the Hukou system primarily affects access to local public good and services
and thus should be viewed as part of urban fiscal policies. We will demonstrate that a reform
of the Hukou system requires significant changes in how cities are financed.



3     A Model

We develop an overlapping generations model with a system of cities to study the impact of
internal migration controls on urban fiscal policies, access to educational opportunities, and
the accumulation of human capital. The model captures the key institutional arrangements
of fiscal decentralization and local Hukou policies discussed in the previous section.

    The economy consists of J cities and one rural, less developed area, denoted by location 0.
Each location has an exogenous amenity j . Each city has a local government that provides
two public goods, educational quality (gj ) and other local public goods (oj ). We model
public goods as expenditures per household accounting for congestion which is common in
cities.14 Local public goods are financed by a combination of local revenues: a proportional
access to these programs in their Hukou registration place.
  14
     We abstract from non-fiscal congestion externalities in this paper. See, for example, Au and Henderson
(2006) and Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2013) for models that include non-fiscal congestion externalities into
the analysis. We discuss these issues in more details in the conclusions.



                                                     19
local income tax with rate tw
                            j , revenues from land sales and new housing construction, and

transfers from the central government. Let pj denote the price of a unit of housing in the
local housing market of city j . Cities differ in their Hukou policies as described below.

       There is a continuum of individuals each of whom lives for two periods, one period as a
child and one period as an adult. A household consists of an adult and a child. At each point
in time the economy, therefore, consists of two overlapping generations.

       There are K discrete skill types. Each adult is characterized by a measure of skills, denoted
by sk , k = 1, ..., K . The fraction of adults with skill k living in city j at the beginning of the
period is given by qjk . Each adult with skill k living in city j has an endowment of housing
denoted by ejk .15

       Each child attends a public school within a city. Expenditures per child are denoted by
gj . The achievement of a child is a function of gj and parental skills sk . In our quantitative
model, we use the following specification:

                                                         1 1-1
                                        a(gj , sk ) = 0 gj sk                                            (1)

The transition probability that a child with educational achievement a will have skills s as
an adult in the next period is given by P r{s | a}. Hence, the skill distribution in the next
period is a function of household sorting by skill and local expenditures. In our quantitative
model, we have two skill types: low- and high-high skill households. High-skill households
have attended, at least, two years of college. We use a Logit distribution for the transition
probability in the quantitative model.

       Household utility is defined over child achievement a, numeraire consumption b, the quan-
tity of housing services h, noneducational public goods o, and city amenities  . Preferences
also depend on the child arrangement. Let c = 1 denote the event that the child lives with the
parent, and c = 0 characterizes the event when the child is left behind. The utility function
  15
       The housing endowment is in the location in which the adult grew up as a child. In the quantitative
model, we assume that each type k has the same endowment conditional on j when the economy starts, which
is broadly consistent with the initial privatization of the housing stock in China (Zhang, Fan and Mo, 2017).


                                                     20
is denoted by U (a, b, c, h, o,  ). The household utility is increasing, twice differentiable, and
concave in (a, b, h, o) for c = 0, 1. In our quantitative model we use the following specification:

                                                                          c     c
                  U (a, b, c, h, o,  ) =  + a a + o o + (h - hc ) b1-                          (2)

where h1 > h0 , since housing demand is higher when the child lives with the parent.

   Adults can relocate to a city that is different for the city in which they were born as
a child. Adults decide whether to stay or move, and if move, whether to bring the child
along or leave their child behind. As in B´
                                          enabou (1996) and Fernandez and Rogerson (1996,
1998) adults make all decisions in the model, i.e. children are passive and do not make any
decisions.

   Residents, denoted by r, are households that are born in city j and decide to stay in city
j . Migrants, denoted by m, are households that are born in location j and decide to move to
a different city l = j . We first solve the decision problem of each household conditional on
having chosen a city as an adult. We then solve the optimal location problem. The timing
of decisions is as follows:


   1. Adult household members make migration decisions given correct expectations of prices,
      wages, taxes, and public goods in each city.

   2. After households move, they learn whether or not they obtain Hukou status in the
      destination city.

   3. Wages are determined, consumption is realized, housing markets clear, government
      budgets are balanced, and the achievement of children is realized in each city.

   4. Children become adults, inherit housing from their parents, and obtain a skill realization
      conditional on achievement. Adults die and new children are born.


   A resident with skills k who decides to stay in city j receives labor income equal to
wjk . Labor income is taxed by the city. Let tw
                                              j denote the income tax rate. The value of



                                                21
the housing endowment is given by pj ejk . The household allocates resources among owner-
occupied housing (h) and consumption goods (b). Let tb denote the consumption tax rate
imposed by the central government. Residents are eligible for housing subsidies, denote by
sh
 j . The budget constraint is, therefore, given by:


                          (1 - sh                b            w
                                j ) pj h + (1 + t ) b = (1 - tj ) wjk + pj ejk                            (3)

The right-hand side of equation (3) is the total after-tax household income including asset
income from the initial endowment of housing. Note that all households own their houses.16
The left-hand side of equation (3) is the sum of after-tax consumption expenditures.

       A household maximizes utility subject to the budget constraint and the achievement
constraint. In our quantitative model, we use the Stone-Geary utility function in equation
(2). Hence, the demand functions for housing and consumption are given by:

                                     c
                        hr
                         jk =                   [(1 - tw                           c 1
                                                       j ) wjk + pj ejk ] + (1 -  )h                      (4)
                                 (1 - shj ) p j
                                 1 - c
                         br
                          jk   =         [(1 - tw                            h      1
                                                  j ) wjk + pj ejk - (1 - sj ) pj h ]
                                 1 + tb

Substituting the demand and achievement functions into the utility function, we obtain the
indirect utility of a household that was born in j and stays in j . It is given by:

                                   Vjjk = U (ar     r            r
                                              jk , bjk , c = 1, hjk , oj , j )                            (5)

where the achievement of a resident child is given by: ar
                                                        jk = a(gj , sk ).


       Next, consider the decision problem of a household that has decided to migrate from city
j to city k . The decision problem of a migrant differs from the problem above in four ways.
First, some migrants move with their children while others leave their children behind.17
Children that are left behind have a different achievement than children that accompany
their parents. Second, some migrants receive the urban Hukou in their destination city, while
  16
       Children inherit the houses purchased by the parents which then fully endogenizes the law of motion for
the initial conditions of the economy.
  17
     We assume that children always live with parents (c = 1) if parents are residents.


                                                       22
others do not. Migrants that do not receive Hukou do not have the same access to public
goods. We use fiscal wedges to capture the distortions faced by migrants in the economy
as suggested by Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007). In particular, we assume that there
exists a wedge for educational public goods, denoted by g
                                                        jk  1, and a wedge for other public

goods, denoted by o
                  jk  1. Third, migrants that do not obtain local urban Hukou are not

eligible for the housing market subsidies. Finally, migrants do not have housing endowments
in the destination city but can sell their housing endowments in their birth location.

   Hence, there are four types of migrants in our model: 1) with Hukou (y ) and with children
c = 1; 2) with Hukou (y ) and without children c = 0; 3) without Hukou (n) and with children
c = 1; 4) without Hukou (n) and without children c = 0; We derive the the housing demand
and achievement functions for each type of migrant in Appendix C. Substituting these demand
and achievement functions into the utility function yields the indirect utility functions (net
of migration costs):
                 y,c
               Vijk  = U (ay,c    y,c       y,c                c
                           ijk , bijk , c, hijk , oj , j ) - mcjk i = j, c = 0, 1
                 n,c
               Vijk  = U (an,c    n,c       n,c   o               c
                           ijk , bijk , c, hijk , jk oj , j ) - mcjk i = j, c = 0, 1       (6)

Note that we assume that mobility costs depend on the destination city, skill types, and the
mobility status of the children. In our quantitative model, we adopt the following functional
form specification:

                       mcc                           c
                         jk = mcj + mck 1{k = 2} + mc 1{c = 1}                             (7)

where 1{·} is an indicator function. The timing assumption implies that migrants find out
whether or not they obtain local Hukou or not after they move. City j gives Hukou status
to a fraction of migrants, denoted by rjk . The migrant's expected conditional value function
is given by

                                c          y,c                n,c
                              Vijk = rjk Vijk  + (1 - rjk ) Vijk                           (8)

   Now that we have characterized all conditional value functions, we can characterize opti-
mal location decisions. Note that each households must decide where to live and whether to

                                                 23
bring the child along when moving. In our model there are J + 1 locations and two child care
                                                                                               c
arrangements for migrants. As a consequence the choice set has 2 × J + 1 elements. Let         ijk

and   jjk   denote additively separable random utility shocks which are type 1 extreme value
distributed. Hence, the probability that a household of type k moves from city i to city j
with child arrangement c is given by:
                                                        c
                         c
                                                  exp(Vijk / )
                       Pijk =     1                     d
                                                                                              (9)
                                  d=0     l=i,l=0 exp(Vilk / ) + exp(Viik / )

where  is the scale parameter of the random utility shocks. The probability of staying is:
                                                        1
                                                                  c
                                   Pjjk = 1 -                    Pjlk .                      (10)
                                                       c=0 l=j


   Given that we have characterized the households' decision problems, we can now close
the model and define the equilibrium for our model. Let us denote the number of resident
households living in city j for each skill type k by nr
                                                      jk and note that:


                                         nr
                                          jk = qjk Pjjk .                                    (11)

Recall that qjk is the initial share of type k households in city j . The total number of migrants
moving to city j for each skill type k with child arrangement c is given by:

                                nm,c
                                 jk  =                c
                                                qlk Pljk =             nm,c
                                                                        ljk .                (12)
                                          l=j                    l=j

                                                               m,1   m,0
Define the fraction of migrants of skill k in city j as nm
                                                         jk = njk + njk . Summing across

residents and migrants, we can define the number of households of type k living in city j ,
denoted by njk = nr     m
                  jk + njk .


   The aggregate demand for housing in city j is defined as the sum of the demand by the
residents, the migrant households with Hukou, and the migrants without Hukou:

                                  d    dr    dy    dn
                                 Hj = Hj  + Hj  + Hj                                         (13)

It is straightforward to derive each of these terms and details are reported in Appendix C.
The aggregate supply of housing in city j is defined as the sum of the supply of the existing

                                                  24
housing stock and new construction:

                                     s    es    ns
                                    Hj = Hj  + Hj                                       (14)

The existing housing stock in city j is given by:
                                                   K
                                        es
                                       Hj     =            qjk ejk                      (15)
                                                  k=1

New housing is supplied by the local government (in combination with some housing devel-
opers). We assume that there is an upward sloping housing supply function which captures
land supply constraints and building technology. In our quantitative model, we assume that
new housing supply in city j is given by:

                                        ns                     
                                       Hj  (pj ) = lj pj j                              (16)

where lj is a constant and j is the housing supply elasticity in city j . Housing market
equilibrium requires that:

                                              d    s
                                             Hj = Hj                                    (17)

for all cities.

    Local governments receive revenues from three sources. First, local governments generate
own revenues from local taxes, shared taxes, fees, and charges. We model these revenues as
proportional to income and denote these revenues by Tjw :
                                                       K
                                 Tjw    =    tw
                                              j            njk wjk                      (18)
                                                   k=1

Second, cities generate revenues from land sales and new housing construction. We denote
these revenues by Tjh . These revenues are proportional to the value of new housing supply:

                                       Tjh = th     ns
                                              j pj Hj                                   (19)

Notice that migrants tend to bear a larger burden of this tax than residents, since they do
not benefit form local housing endowments. Finally, cities received additional transfers from

                                                  25
the central government, denoted by Tjtr . These transfers are financed by a consumption tax.
Transfers are given by:
                                     J       K
                                                                      y
                 Tjtr = j tb                     (nr   r     m                         n
                                                   jk bjk + njk (rjk bjk + (1 - rjk ) bjk )    (20)
                                    j =1 k=1

where j is the share of the city j . This specification allows us to account for the fact that
the central government provides larger transfers to rural areas and lower tier cities. Hence,
total city revenues are given by:

                                         Tj = Tjw + Tjh + Tjtr                                 (21)

Local governments subsidize new housing purchases of residents and migrants with Hukou.
Total government housing subsidies are given by

                                                            dy
                                         S j = sh      dr
                                                j pj (Hj + Hj )                                (22)

Hence, the net fiscal revenues of cities are given by Tj - Sj .

   Local governments provide education and other public goods and services. Expenditures
on education are given by:

                g
               Ej =       nr
                           j +              nm, 1
                                             jk rjk    gj +          nm, 1          g
                                                                      jk (1 - rjk ) jk    gj   (23)
                                    k                            k

The first term captures expenditures for children with Hukou. The second term captures
expenditures for children without Hukou. The Hukou policy affects the fraction of migrants
that receive Hukou (rjk ) and the fiscal wedge (g
                                                jk ). Equilibrium requires that education

expenditures are equal to the fraction of tax revenue earmarked for that purpose:

                                                             g
                                             j (Tj - Sj ) = Ej                                 (24)

where j is the share of net tax revenue that is devoted to education. Similarly, expenditures
on other public goods are given by:

                  o
                 Ej =        nr
                              j +            nm
                                              jk rjk   oj +          nm             o
                                                                      jk (1 - rjk ) jk   oj    (25)
                                        k                        k


                                                        26
Note that the only difference between equation (23) and equation (25) is that migrants with-
out children also consume other public goods and services. A balanced budget requires that
that expenditures for other public goods and services equals net revenue that are earmarked
for these purposes:

                                                         o
                                  (1 - j ) (Tj - Sj ) = Ej                                 (26)

Migrants also provide a positive fiscal externality to the city since they require lower expen-
ditures, especially on education. One of the key contributions of the quantitative analysis
below is that we estimate the magnitude of these fiscal externalities.

   To close the model we need to specify an aggregate production function which depends
on the fraction of each skill type in the city. In our quantitative model we assume that
production function in city j is given by:

                                                   k
                                     Y j = Aj K
                                              k=1 njk                                      (27)

where Aj denotes total factor productivity.

   We can also include agglomeration effects into our model. When households and firms
operate in close proximity in cities, efficiency gains primarily arise due to "sharing," "match-
ing," and "learning" as discussed in detail in Duranton and Puga (2004). In our setting, we
assume that the productive amenity Aj increases in density. Formally, productive amenities
take the following form:
                                                        A1j
                                                   nj
                                    Aj = A0j                                               (28)
                                                   lj

where lj is a measure of the fixed land area of the city. Alternatively, we could assume that
the externality depends only on the density of high-skill households as suggested by Moretti
(2011). As we explain in detail below, our estimation approach only allows us to identify Aj .
As a consequence, our estimated model is consistent with the notion that externalities may
be important at the city level. To capture these externalities in our counterfactual analysis
we need to make an additional assumption that allows us to decompose Aj into an exogenous

                                              27
and an endogenous component (Coen-Pirani and Sieg, 2019).18

       Earnings of skill k in city j are equal to the marginal product of labor:

                                                   k -1
                                      wjk = Aj k njk    i=k nji
                                                               i
                                                                                                       (29)

Note that migration to the city affects the earnings of local residents because of the concavity
of the production function. Agglomeration externalities act as multipliers since migration
increases density of major cities and hence overall productivity.19

       We are now in a position to define the equilibrium of the model:


Definition 1 Given a transfer policy for the central government (tb , j ), as well as an initial
distribution of types and endowments, (qjk , ejk ), local tax policies, (tw    h h
                                                                          j , tj , sj ), local expenditure

rules (j ), local Hukou policies (rjk , g    o
                                        jk , jk , ), and total factor productivity (Aj ) for each city

j , an equilibrium consists of expenditure policies (gj , oj ) and housing prices (pj ) in each city,
                                                  m,c
an allocation of households across cities (nr
                                            jk , njk ), for c = 0, 1, j = 0, .., J and k = 1, ..K ,

and earnings (wjk ) for j = 0, .., J and k = 1, ..K , such that:


   1. resident and migrants maximize utility subject to the relevant constraints;

   2. housing markets clear in all communities;

   3. local budgets are balanced in all communities; and
                                                                                           1
  18                                                                                   n
     Similarly, we could model congestion effects in amenities assuming that j = 0j ljj
  19
     Labor market wedges can also be incorporated into the analysis. For example, firms mays pay migrants
lower wages than residents holding skills constant. Labor market discrimination lowers the attractiveness of
cities for migrants and reduces the overall migration flows. Define a wage wedge w
                                                                                 jk < 1 and assume that

lifetime earnings of migrants satisfies:

                                             m
                                            wjk   =    w
                                                       jk wjk


Since there is no consensus in the literature about the magnitude of these labor market wedges, we do not
account for them in our quantitative analysis. Some research that has documented the existence of labor
market discrimination for migrants are Meng and Zhang (2001) and Demurger et al. (2009).


                                                      28
    4. earnings are determined by marginal products of labor for each type in all communities.


Note that the structure of the model allows us to define an equilibrium period by period since
we assume that parents make all decisions on behalf of their children. As a consequence,
we can also compute equilibria period by period using a forward iteration algorithm. The
equilibria are linked by the law of motion for the initial distribution of types and their
endowments. This structure has the advantage that we can study the long-term transitions
of the economy without having to assume stationary or that the economy is on a balanced
growth path.

    Given a specification of all relevant functions of interest, parameter values, and initial
conditions, we can compute the expenditure policies (gj , oj ), housing prices (pj ), and earnings
(wjk ) that satisfy the housing market equilibrium conditions (17), local budget constraints
(24), (26), and first-order conditions of local labor markets (29). There are (K + 3)(J + 1)
unknowns and (K + 3)(J + 1) conditions. Thus, the solution can be found using standard
numerical methods. Since we can only solve the model numerically we need to parametrize
all relevant functions and estimate the parameters of our model.



4     Estimation

The first step of the estimation procedure is to determine the initial conditions of the model.
After the founding of the People's Republic of China, all land was nationalized and all new
housing units were owned by the state. Since 1978 China has undergone successive market
reforms and major urban reforms were initiated in the early 1990s, including the privatization
of some state-owned enterprises and public housing. A milestone in the housing reform was the
23rd Decree issued by the State Council in 1998, which stated that work units, mostly state-
owned enterprises, were no longer allowed to develop residential housing for their employees
(Wu, Gyourko, and Deng, 2010). By the end of the 1990s, a private housing market has
gradually developed, so we use the state of the economy in 2000 to determine the initial


                                               29
conditions for our model.

   One of the nice features of the CHFS is that it contains a variety of retrospective questions
that allows us to characterize the initial distribution of household types. In particular, the
CHFS reports the household head's prior location of residence, which is useful to distinguish
among migrants and residents. We use this retrospective information together with the
observed college achievement of the household head to estimate the initial distribution of
skill types in each city. Similarly, we use the 2000 Census to estimate the initial distribution
of housing endowments by skill type. Table 9 summaries the estimated initial distribution of
skills and endowments.

                                  Table 9: Initial Conditions

                            Share of Skill Type (qjk )    Endowments (ejk )
                            Low-skill    High-skill      Low-skill   High-skill
                  Tier 1      3.52          2.11            62          72
                  Tier 2      9.70          5.31            62          72
                  Tier 3      8.87          4.29            67          78
                   Rural     59.90          6.30            80          84
                  Housing endowments are measured in square meters.



   Note that tier 1 cities comprised 5.6 percent of the population in 2000. Tier 2 cities
accounted for 15 percent, while tier 3 cities a 13.2 percent share of the total population. The
remaining 66.2 percent of the population lived in less developed cities and rural area. Not
surprisingly, the average education is declining by city tier, with tier 1 cities accounting the
largest share of high-skill households. Average housing endowments that resulted from the
initial privatization of the housing stock were fairly uniformly distributed among households
in major cities with high-skill households receiving slightly larger housing units than low-skill
households. Average initial housing endowments were larger in rural parts of the country
than in major cities, however, housing in major cities was much more valuable than housing

                                               30
in rural areas in 2000.

       We treat revenue policies as predetermined in our model and measure the average tax
rate in each city as the ratio of own source revenues to local GDP. Table 10 shows that the
estimated income tax rate ranges between 2 percent and 9.7 percent. The most developed
tier 1 cities have the highest capacity to generate own-source revenues.20

                              Table 10: Local Government Policy Parameters



              Income         Share of        Housing            Education                       Other
                Tax         Education        Subsidy           Expenditure                 Expenditure
                Rate      Expenditures         Rate                 Wedge                       Wedge
                                                          Low-skill     High-skill    Low-skill     High-skill
 Tier 1        0.098           0.156           0.024        0.717         0.843         0.325           0.705
 Tier 2        0.058           0.156           0.029        0.839         0.869         0.188           0.505
 Tier 3        0.028           0.167           0.038        0.891         0.872         0.143           0.481
 Rural         0.020           0.208



       Tax revenues from land sales and new housing construction are proportional to the value
of housing stock. Using the share of land revenues reported in Table 3, a reasonable estimate
of the housing tax rate, denoted by th
                                     j , is 40 percent for all cities. Recall from our discussion

in Section 2 of this paper that the value-added tax was 16 percent in 2018. Since the central
and local governments equally share this tax, we set the consumption tax rate of the central
government at 8 percent in our model.

       The share of expenditures that are allocated to education, denoted by j , can be estimated
by the average ratio of educational expenditures and total expenditures reported in Table
  20
       Tier 1 and tier 2 cities attract more firms than tier 3 cities and rural areas in generating corporate income
tax revenues. The progressive nature of the income tax system and tax sharing agreement also imply that
cities with a larger share of high-income households can generate more income tax revenues.


                                                         31
3. Different public good wedges play an important role in our analysis. We estimate the
educational wedge g
                  jk based on the share of migrant children in local public schools as

reported in Table 7. We estimate the wedge for other public goods o
                                                                  jk based on the fraction

of migrants who have access to social security or medical insurance as reported in Table 8.

      Next, we discuss the estimation of the production function. There are two types of labor
in our model: high-skill and low-skill. We allow the share of low-skill labor to be city-specific.
Using local wages for each type wjk and labor inputs njk in the CHFS, the parameters of the
production function can be estimated using the first-order conditions in equation (29) that
characterize competitive wages in each city. In total, we can estimate eight parameters of
the production function ­ namely the TFP parameters (Aj ) and the share of unskilled labor
(j 1 ) ­ using a minimum distance estimator.21 Table 11 reports our production function
parameter estimates and estimated standard errors. We find that more developed cities have
higher TFP estimates than lower tier cities. In contrast, the labor share of unskilled labor is
increasing in city tier, with tier 1 cities having the lowest share of unskilled labor.

      Given our functional form assumption, the housing demand function for residents is given
by equation (4). The demands for migrants are derived in Appendix C. We can measure
the permanent income and housing consumption of migrants and residents households using
the CHFS.22 Hence, we can estimate the parameters of the housing demand function using a
moments estimator. Table 11 summarizes our parameter estimates and the standard errors.
We find that households with children have a higher level of minimum housing consumption
(h), but are less responsive to changes in income ( ). High-skill households have stronger
preferences for housing than low-skill households. Overall, our estimates imply that the
housing shares are highest in tier 1 cities typically ranging between 34 and 46 percent of
permanent income. Migrants with children have shares exceeding 50 percent, which shows
that homeownership in tier 1 cities has become excessively expensive for migrants. Housing
shares in tier 2 (3) cities are range between 13 (6) and 22 (12) percent. Housing shares are
 21
      Assuming constant returns to scale we have j 2 = 1 - j 1 .
 22
      Details are reported in a data appendix that is available from the authors upon request.



                                                      32
                   Table 11: Structural Parameters

Parameter    Estimate    Std Error         Parameter   Estimate Std Error
          Utility Function                         Housing Demand
                                              1
   1            4.27         (0.27)           0          0.087      (0.014)
                                              0
   2            2.40         (0.14)           2          0.037      (0.009)
                                              1
   3            -0.10        (0.83)           1          0.045      (0.003)
                                              1
   0            0.00          --              2          0.011      (0.001)
   g            0.29         (0.03)           h0
                                               1         19.63      (6.61)
   o            0.98         (0.30)           h0
                                               2         62.43      (8.23)
   a            1.55         (0.04)           h1
                                               1         57.93      (1.08)
                                              h1
                                               2         83.41      (1.26)
        Production Function                         Mobility Cost
   A1          10.45         (0.35)          mc1         11.42      (0.21)
   A2           6.93         (0.14)          mc2         7.38       (0.08)
   A3           5.49         (0.16)          mc3         4.43       (0.07)
   A0           2.02         (0.06)          mck         -1.95      (0.12)
   11           0.43         (0.02)          mcc         -0.05      (0.13)
   21           0.53         (0.01)              Achievement Function
   31           0.62         (0.02)           0          5.25       (0.04)
   01           0.92         (0.01)           1          0.23       (0.01)
                                                         3.73       (0.15)




                                      33
even lower in rural areas and small cities.23

      The remaining parameters of the utility and achievement functions are also identified
given observed outcomes. The parameter a captures the relative weight that households
place on children's achievement. Migrants partially move to obtain access to better schools
for their children. The larger a the more locational decisions are driven by local school
quality. The parameter o is the relative weight on non-educational public goods in the
utility. It determines the migration decisions of all households including those that leave
their children behind. The larger this parameter the more locational decisions are driven by
other spending. j captures locational amenities that are not explained by fiscal policies.

      We also need to identify the variance terms of the idiosyncratic shocks of the random
utility function,  . The model implies that the larger the variance the more important
are the random shocks in determining relocation decisions. Identification of the parameters
of the achievement follows from the fact that we observe college attainment for children of
residents and migrants in each city. Mobility costs determine the magnitude of the flows of
different migrant types migrants. Moving cost parameters are primarily identified from the
net migration rates observed in the CHFS and the fraction of households that move without
children observed in the MDMS.

      This discussion above suggests that we can estimate the remaining parameters of the
model using a nested fixed-point algorithm. We compute the equilibrium for the model in
the inner loop and search over the parameters in the outer loop. Since we condition on
observed housing prices, local tax rates, and fiscal wedges in the estimation, the implied
equilibrium appears to be unique. Moments are based on the net migration flows, college
attainment rates of children, the share of children left behind, the relative levels of housing
consumption, and the lifetime expenditures on education and other goods per capita. Table
11 reports the remaining parameter estimates and estimated standard errors for our preferred
specification of the model.24
 23
      We follow Wang and Zhang (2014) and set the housing supply elasticity j = 2.1 for all three city tiers.
 24
      We explored models with different tax structures and skill types to arrive at this specification.


                                                      34
                          Table 12: Model Fit

               Net Migration Rates        Migrant Children Left Behind
           Low-skill       High-skill       Low-skill       High-skill
         Data    Model   Data    Model    Data    Model   Data    Model
Tier 1   0.055   0.055   0.034   0.033    0.478   0.439   0.193   0.213
Tier 2   0.187   0.186   0.080   0.082    0.387   0.389   0.305   0.309
Tier 3   0.172   0.175   0.053   0.051    0.421   0.429   0.450   0.376
Rural    0.404   0.403   0.012   0.014
         College Attendance: Residents    College Attendance: Migrants
           Low-skill       High-skill       Low-skill       High-skill
         Data    Model   Data    Model    Data    Model   Data    Model
Tier 1   0.774   0.791   0.927   0.987    0.519   0.570   0.842   0.956
Tier 2   0.656   0.623   0.890   0.955    0.447   0.498   0.905   0.915
Tier 3   0.591   0.523   0.927   0.917    0.389   0.431   0.901   0.872
Rural    0.321   0.320   0.735   0.742
          Housing Demand: Residents        Housing Demand: Migrants
           Low-skill       High-skill       Low-skill       High-skill
         Data    Model   Data    Model    Data    Model   Data    Model
Tier 1    65       61     80         85    40      43      68      80
Tier 2    72       72     95         90    60      60      91      88
Tier 3    87       91     100     100      85      86     105      107
Rural    130      123     120     119




                                     35
    Table 11 shows that all parameters of the utility function have the expected sign and are
estimated relatively precisely. There are significant differences in amenities across city tiers.
Tier 1 cities are twice as attractive as tier 2 cities, while tier 3 cities are similar to the rest
of the country. Households also value education and other expenditures. The parameters of
the achievement function are positive. Not surprisingly, better schools translate into a higher
probability of obtaining a college degree.

    As expected, there are significant moving costs. Note that the moving costs capture all
other reasons why migrants may not want to move to major cities, that we do not explicitly
model. The estimates show that it is more costly to move to tier 1 and tier 2 cities than tier
3 cities. High-skill households face lower mobility costs than low-skill households.

    Table 12 evaluates the goodness of fit. We find that our model matches closely the observed
and predicted net-migration flows. The predicted share of households who leave their children
behind is quite precise. Table 12 also reports college attendance rates observed in the data
and predicted by our model by skill type and city tier. Overall, our model captures these
spatial patterns of human capital accumulation nicely. Human capital accumulation increases
as households move to more attractive cities. Moreover, residents tend to have higher college
attainment than migrants. Finally, Appendix D shows that our model also fits the observed
revenue and expenditure policies in each city. We thus conclude that our model fits the key
dimensions of the data very well.



5     The Fiscal Externalities of Migration

Recall that migrants pay, on average, higher local taxes, but receive lower levels of public
goods and services than residents. Hence, migrants provide positive fiscal externalities and
subsidize residents. We can use our estimated model to quantify the magnitude of these
fiscal externalities. Columns A-C of Table 13 report the revenues generated from income,
land sales, and consumption taxes for the four different migrant types in our model. Total



                                                36
revenues are reported in Column D. Educational expenditures and expenditures for other
public goods are reported in Columns E and F. Housing subsidies are reported in column
G. Total expenditures are reported in Column H. Subtracting total expenditures from total
revenues then yields our measure of fiscal externalities reported in Column I.

    Table 13 suggests that the fiscal externalities reported in the last column are positive
for all migrant types. The fiscal externalities are declining by city tier, with tier 1 cities
generating the highest externalities.

    Comparing the externalities for different types of migrants, we find that fiscal externalities
are larger for high-skill than low-skill households. While high-skill households require higher
expenditures than low-skill households, they pay much higher taxes and consume more land.
The revenue effect dominates the expenditure effect. Households with children generate
similar externalities than households without children. The higher schooling expenditures
are more or less offset by the higher land taxes that households with children pay.

    We thus conclude that residents in all major cities are heavily subsidized by migrants.
They enjoy higher levels of public good provision and/or pay lower taxes due to the positive
fiscal externalities generated by migrants. The Hukou system, therefore, has a significant
effect on urban fiscal policies. Aggregating these fiscal externality measures at the city level,
we find that the estimated aggregate fiscal externality ranges between 6 and 15 percent of
total revenues. As a result, all major cities in China increase their fiscal capacities due to
migration, which largely benefits residents.



6     Reforming the Hukou System

Our analysis of the Hukou system implies that migrants do not have the same access to local
public goods and services as residents. In particular, children of transitory migrants tend
to have access to lower-quality schools than children of residents and permanent migrants.
Moreover, a large fraction of migrant children are left behind and attend lower-quality schools


                                               37
                                 Table 13: Fiscal Externalities

         Income   Land      Sales     Total    Edu      Other   Housing   Total    Total
          Tax     Sales     Tax      Revenue   Exp      Exp     Subsidy   Exp       Dif
           A           B     C          D           E    F        G        H      I=(D-H)
Low-skill, no child
Tier 1    332         430   195        958          0    566       7      573       385
Tier 2    145         143   157        445          0    228       3      231       214
Tier 3     60         99    135        294          0    141       3      144       150
Low-skill with child
Tier 1    332     1041       54       1427      169      566      16      751       676
Tier 2    145         218   142        505      86       228       4      318       187
Tier 3     60         106   132        298      58       141       3      202       96
High-skill no child
Tier 1    719     1172      368       2259          0    955      33      988      1271
Tier 2    293         264   324        881          0    424      10      434       447
Tier 3    126         144   304        574          0    284       9      293       281
High-skill with child
Tier 1    719     1497      287       2503      195      955      42      1192     1310
Tier 2    293         280   313        886      91       424      11      526       360
Tier 3    126         119   293        538      60       284       8      351       188
All variables are in 1,000 Chinese Yuan and in per capita.




                                               38
in rural areas and less developed cities. Hence, our analysis suggests that the Hukou system
increases inequality, suppresses human capital accumulation, and in all likelihood reduces
economic growth.

       China's State Council has taken steps to address these problems and urged local govern-
ments to grant Hukou to approximately 100 million temporary migrants.25 The new policy
directive acknowledges that first-tier cities have limited scope to grow in population. How-
ever, tier 2 and tier 3 cities are encouraged to ease urban Hukou registration requirements.
The new policy directive also asks many small and medium cities to completely remove re-
strictions on Hukou registration. The central government also provides financial incentives
to complying cities by subsidizing infrastructure and the construction of affordable housing.
Land use quotas for urban construction are also linked to the size of registered migrants. The
new policy reforms promote the creation of a residential permit system to manage migrants'
access to public service aiming to reduce the gap between migrants and residents in basic
local public services.

       In the spirit of these policy directives advocated by the central government, we simulate
the impact of policy changes that extend full residency rights to all migrants in tier 3 cities
and potentially also tier 2 cities. Recall that tier 1 cities are already so large that it may be
difficult to increase their populations. Hence, additional migration to tier 1 cities may neither
be feasible nor desirable. We, therefore, keep the current Hukou policies in place in tier 1
cities. Tier 2 and tier 3 cities are better candidates for population growth induced by a more
generous Hukou policy. Lifting the restriction of the current Hukou policy is undoubtedly
expensive since migrants provide large positive fiscal externalities. We close the model by
introducing a surcharge on the consumption tax to finance the required transfers.

       We consider two different policies in our counterfactual analysis. Policy 1 only lifts the
residency requirements in tier 3 cities. In contrast, Policy 2 extends full residency rights
  25
       In March 2014, the National Urbanization Plan (2014-2020) emphasizes urban Hukou reform to ensure
that 100 million non-Hukou migrants can get urban Hukou registration. Zhang, Wang and Lu (2019) and
An, Qin Wu and You (2020) provide an analysis of this policy change.


                                                    39
to migrants in both tier 2 and tier 3 cities. We consider both policies with and without
agglomeration externalities.26 To implement the analysis, we fix the quality of public goods
and local income tax rates in all cities. We then compute a new equilibrium that imposes
a surcharge on the central consumption tax to finance the additional expenditures. Both
policies distribute the costs of expanding the Hukou system to all residents including those
in tier 1 cities as well as residents in rural areas.

       Table 14 summarizes the main impact of the policy experiments. Policy 1 opens access
to public goods in all tier 3 cities, which leads to a significant increase in the overall popu-
lation share of these cities. Agglomeration externalities act as a multiplier since the inflow
of households increases the population density, which makes tier 3 cities more productive.
Hence, the overall effects on achievement are slightly larger in the model with agglomeration
externalities than in the model without agglomeration. Overall, we use a fairly conservative
estimate of the magnitude of the agglomeration externality here. If we use a larger estimate,
we can generate larger multiplier effects than the ones reported in Table 14.

       Our model predicts that Policy 1 can be financed by a consumption tax surcharge of
approximately 1.3 percentage points. Note that the number of migrants with Hukou stays
approximately the same in tier 1 and tier 2 cities. The number of low-skill migrants with
hukou in tier 3 cities ranges from 147 to 156 million. Note that the 91 million of these
households are temporary migrants and 41 million are permanent migrants in tier 3 cities in
the baseline equilibrium. Thus the net increase in migrants to tier 3 cities ranges between 15
and 24 million.

       As a consequence of the policy changes of relaxing the Hukou registration, an additional
10 to 14 million children of migrants to tier 3 cities would receive a college education. We
thus conclude that Policy 1 achieves the stated objectives of the State Council issued in 2016
and significantly increases college attainment of migrant children.
  26
       To assess the impact of agglomeration externalities on our outcomes, we set A1j = 0.4 for all cities and
adjust A0j such that Aj is equal to the estimated baseline value.




                                                       40
        Table 14: Equal Access to Local Public Goods

                Baseline         Policy 1               Policy 2
Agglomeration                  no       yes      no           yes
     City                  Low-skill Migrants with Hukou
    Tier 1        7.40         7.29     7.14     7.16         7.00
    Tier 2        35.18       34.15    33.43    149.00       156.75
    Tier 3        41.00       147.93   155.75   142.36       144.04
     City                 Low-skill Migrants without Hukou
    Tier 1        21.07       20.74    20.31    20.38        19.94
    Tier 2        92.73       90.03    88.15      0            0
    Tier 3        91.34         0        0        0            0
     City                  High-skill Migrants with Hukou
    Tier 1        8.36         8.25     7.94     7.96         7.46
    Tier 2        24.06       23.30    22.39    49.26        51.66
    Tier 3        21.52       34.13    36.19    32.37        32.08
     City                 High-skill Migrants without Hukou
    Tier 1        9.43         9.30     8.95     8.98         8.41
    Tier 2        21.77       21.08    20.26      0            0
    Tier 3        10.55         0        0        0            0
     City        Children of Low-skill Migrants: College Degree
    Tier 1        16.23       16.06    15.76    15.85        15.55
    Tier 2        63.72       62.04    60.74    77.88        81.85
    Tier 3        57.58       65.90    69.34    63.49        64.21
     City       Children of High-skill Migrants: College Degree
    Tier 1        17.02       16.80    16.17    16.22        15.20
    Tier 2        41.98       40.68    39.09    45.39        47.60
    Tier 3        27.99       29.97    31.79    28.44        28.17
All numbers in million.

                                 41
    Policy 2 also conveys full access to public goods in tier 2 cities. Policy 2 is more costly
than Policy 1 and requires a tax surcharge of approximately 3.3 percentage points. However,
the achievement gains are approximately twice as large under Policy 2 as the gains under
Policy 1. This follows from the fact that schools are better in tier 2 cities than in tier 3 cities.



7     Conclusions

We have explored the impact of migration controls on urban fiscal policies and intergener-
ational transmission of human capital accumulation in China. Using a novel data set that
allows us to track migrants and residents over time, we have documented that migrant chil-
dren do not have the same access to local public schools as resident children. Moreover,
many migrants leave their children behind with relatives in less developed cities and rural
areas. These children also obtain a lower quality of education than children of residents. As a
consequence, migrant children accumulate less human capital than resident children holding
parental skills constant. We conclude that the Hukou system has a large impact on access to
educational opportunities.

    We have developed and estimated a new spatial overlapping generations model that cap-
tures the fact that the Hukou system implies unequal access to a variety of local public goods
and services. The model is rooted in the institutional design of fiscal decentralization in
China. We have shown that our approach yields reasonable parameter estimates and fits the
data well. We show that migrants provide large positive fiscal externalities to major cities.
The fiscal externality ranges between 6 and 15 percent of total local revenues. Hence, the
Hukou system has a large impact on urban fiscal policies of all major cities in China.

    There is another important fiscal externality generated by internal migration that we do
not explicitly model. This externality arises because social security is administered at the
local level in China. Workers and firms contribute to a social security account, which is
shared by all residents with Hukou living in the same city. Retired workers obtain pensions



                                                42
that are financed using a pay-as-you-go system. Migrants are, on average, much younger than
residents and, therefore, are net contributors to the social security account. Older residents
benefit from migrants, because they did not pay much social security taxes when they were
young, and experience a windfall gain from the introduction of the pay-as-you-go system.
These gains are larger in cities with large migration inflows. Our estimates of the fiscal
externalities of migrants do not account for this externality and are, therefore, lower bounds
of the total externalities. We leave it as future research to estimate the magnitude of the
fiscal externality generated by the social security system.

   We have evaluated the feasibility and effectiveness of alternative migration policies that
offer the potential of decreasing inequality within China while at the same time promoting
growth via increasing the aggregate level of human capital in the economy. Our analysis
suggests that it is feasible to accomplish the policy goals that were formulated by China's
State Council in 2016 and to provide equal access to local public good and services for, at
least, 100 million migrants. However, the implementation of these policy changes requires
significant tax increases and additional intergovernmental transfers to local governments.

   Our paper provides ample scope for future research. In our model congestion arises in the
provision of public goods since we measure public goods as expenditures per capita. There
may be other forms of congestion that affect the benefits of local amenities that we have not
explicitly modeled. Hence, some form of migration controls may be necessary and desirable,
especially in tier 1 cities. Tier 2 and tier 3 cities, however, do not appear to be excessively
large and offer some scope for population growth via migration. Our policy analysis may
overstate the benefits of reforming the Hukou system if these additional congestion costs are
sufficiently large to make it undesirable for tier 2 and tier 3 cities to increase their populations.
However, the analyses in Au and Henderson (2006), Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2013) and
Tombe and Zhu (2019) suggest that, if anything, most Chinese cities are currently too small.
It seems reasonable to conclude that reforms to the current Hukou policies in tier 2 and tier 3
cities are feasible. These reforms offer the potential of decreasing the inequality within China
while at the same time increasing the overall level of human capital in the economy.


                                                 43
References

An, L., Y. Qin, J. Wu, and W. You (2020). The Local Labor Market Effect of Relaxing
Internal Migration Restrictions: Evidence from China. Working Paper.


Au, C.C. and V. Henderson (2006). Are Chinese cities too small? The Review of Eco-
nomic Studies, 73 (3), 549-576.


B´
 enabou, R. (1996). Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth: Macroeconomic Effects of
Community Structure. American Economic Review, 86, 584-609.


B´
 enabou, R. (2002). Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Economy: What
Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency? Econometrica, 70 (2), 481-517.


Bosker M., S. Brakman, and H. Garretsen (2012). Relaxing Hukou: Increased Labor Mobility
and China's Economic Geography, Journal of Urban Economics, 72 (2-3): 252-266.


Brandt, L., G. Kambourov, and K. Storesletten (2017). Barriers to Entry and Regional
Economic Growth in China. Working Paper.


Chari, V.V., Kehoe, P. and E. McGrattan (2007), Business Cycle Accounting, Economet-
rica, 75 (3), 781-836.


Chen, Y. and S. Feng (2013). "Access to Public Schools and the Education of Migrant
Children in China." China Economic Review no. 26:75-88.


Coen-Pirani, D. and H. Sieg (2019), The Impact of the Tax Cut and Jobs Act on the Spatial
Distribution of High Productivity Households and Economic Welfares. Journal of Monetary
Economics, 105, 44-71.

                                           44
Combes, P. , Sylvie, D., and S. Li (2015). Migration externalities in Chinese cities. Eu-
ropean Economic Review, 76, 152-167.


Demurger, S., Gurgand, M., Li, S. and X. Yue (2009). Migrants as Second-class Workers
in Urban China? A Decomposition Analysis. Journal of Comparative Economics, 37, 610-
628.


Desmet, K., and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2013). Urban accounting and welfare. American Eco-
nomic Review, 103 (6), 2296-2327.


Diamond, R. (2016), The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers' Diverg-
ing Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000, American Economic Review, 106 (3), 479-524.


Duranton, G. and D. Puga (2004). Micro-Foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies.
In: Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics 4, 2063-2117.


Epple, D., R. Romano, and H. Sieg (2012). The Intergenerational Conflict over the Pro-
vision of Public Education." Journal of Public Economics, 96 (3-4), 255-268.


Epple, D. and T. Romer (1991). Mobility and Redistribution. Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 99 (4), 828-858.


Epple, D. and H. Sieg (1999). Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdictions. Journal
of Political Economy, 107 (4), 645-681.


Fan, Yi, J. Yi, and J. Zhang (2019), Rising Intergenerational Income Persistence in China,
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.



                                            45
Fang, L. and B. Herrendorf (2020). High-skilled Services and Development in China, Working
paper.


Fernandez, R. and R. Rogerson (1996). Income Distribution, Communities, and the Quality
of Public Education. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (1), 135-164.


Fernandez, R. and R. Rogerson (1998). Public Education and Income Distribution: A Dy-
namic Quantitative Evaluation of Education-Finance Reform. American Economic Review,
88 (4), 813-833.


Fernandez, R. and R. Rogerson (2003). Equity and Efficiency: An Analysis of Education
Finance System. Journal of Political Economy, 111, 858-97.


Gordon, R. H. and W. Li (2011), Provincial and Local Governments in China: Fiscal In-
stitutions and Government Behavior, NBER working paper w16694.


Hao, T., R. Sun, T. Tombe and Z. Zhu (2020). The Effect of Migration Policy on Growth,
Structural Change, and Regional Inequality in China, Journal of Monetary Economics, forth-
coming.


Heckman, J. (2005), China's Human Capital Investment, China Economic Review, 16 (1),
Pages 50-70.


Hsieh, C. and P. Klenow (2009). Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 74, 1403-1448.


Meng, X. and J. Zhang (2001). The Two-Tier Labor Market in Urban China: Occupa-



                                           46
tional Segregation and Wage Differentials between Urban Residents and Rural Migrants in
Shanghai. Journal of Comparative Economics, 29, 485-504.


Moretti, E. (2011). Local Labor Market, in: Handbook of Regional and Labor Economics,
4b, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds), 1238-1312.


Ngai, R., Pissarides, C. A. and J. Wang (2020). China's Mobility Barriers and Employ-
ment Allocations. Journal of European Economic Association, 1-37.


Piketty, T., Y. Li, and G. Zucman (2019). Capital Accumulation, Private Property, and
Rising Inequality in China, 1978-2015, American Economic Review, 109 (7): 2469-2496.


Song, Y. (2014). What Should Economists Know about the Current Chinese Hukou Sys-
tem? China Economic Review, 29, 200-212.


Song, M., Storesletten, K. and F. Zilibotti (2011). Growing like China, American Economic
Review, 101, 202-241.


Tiebout, C. (1956). A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures. Journal of Political Economy, 64
(5), 416-424.


Tombe, T. and X. Zhu (2019). Trade, Migration and Productivity: A Quantitative Analysis
of China, American Economic Review, 109 (5):1843-1872.


Wang, Z. and Q. Zhang (2014). Fundamental Factors in the Housing Markets of China.
Journal of Housing Economics, 25, 53-61.


Wingender, P. (2018), Intergovernmental Fiscal Reform in China, IMF Working Paper No.



                                           47
18/88.


Whalley, J. and S. Zhang (2013). Inequality Change in China and Hukou Labor Mobil-
ity Restrictions, NBER Working Paper 10693.


Wu, J., Gyourko, J. and Y. Deng (2010). Evaluating Conditions in Major Chinese Hous-
ing Markets, NBER Working Paper 16189.


Wu, W. and W. You (2020). The Welfare Implications of Internal Migration Restrictions:
Evidence from China, Working Paper.


Zhang, H., Behrman, J., Fan, S., Wei, X. and J. Zhang (2014). Does Parental Absence
Reduce Cognitive Achievements? Evidence from Rural China, Journal of Development Eco-
nomics, Volume 111, 181-195.


Zhang, J., Fan, J. and J. Mo (2017). Government Intervention, Land Market, and Urban
Development: Evidence from Chinese Cities. Economic Inquiry, 55 (1), 115-136.


Zhang, J., Wang, R. and C. Lu (2019). A Quantitative Analysis of Hukou Reform in Chinese
Cities: 2000-2016. Growth and Change, 50 (1), 201-221.




                                           48
A      Definition of Migration Status

In our model, there are four locations: tier 1 cities, tier 2 cities, tier 3 cities, as well as less
developed cities and rural places. Hence, we need to assign each household observed in the
2017 CHFS sample to one of these locations as initial condition and infer the Hukou status at
birth. The 2017 CHFS survey did not ask respondents to state the place of birth or the Hukou
status at birth. Instead, it asked households to report the previous place of residence and
previous Hukou status. We, therefore, use that information on previous residence and Hukou
status to infer the initial condition for all households in our sample. While this imputation
is reasonable for most migrants, it may be problematic for those who move multiple times
during their lives.

    Based on these survey questions, we then can define residence and migration status for
all households in the sample. Rural (Hukou) residents who never moved across locations are
treated as rural residents (or residents in location 4); urban Hukou residents in tier 1-3 who
never moved across location tiers are treated as urban residents in tier 1-3. Permanent mi-
grants are those moved across city tiers and changed Hukou status to local urban. Transitory
migrants are those moved across city tiers and have no local Hukou status.

    As a sensitivity check, we also analyzed the 2019 wave of the CHFS. The main advantage
is that all respondents were asked retrospective questions about the place of birth and the
Hukou status at birth, so that we can define migrants and Hukou status in the initial period
more cleanly as in the 2017 wave of the CHFS. We do not use the 2019 wave since it is much
smaller than the 2017 wave.



B      Hukou Transitions by Age and Calendar Year

One of the key advantages of the CHFS is that it allows us to measure and analyze Hukou
transitions. In this section, we report some stylized facts characterizing the population with
Nong-Zhuan-Fei (rural to urban) Hukou change based on 2017 CHFS data. The upper panel

                                                49
of Figure 1 shows the distribution of the year of the Hukou change for the Nong-Zhuan-Fei
population. The majority changed their rural Hukou to urban after the 1990s. This can be
explained by the gradual relaxation of Hukou registration, especially for the status change
from rural to urban Hukou, and the urbanization process during that period.

    The lower panel of Figure 1 shows the distribution of age at the time of the Hukou change.
We find that most individuals in the sample obtained their urban Hukou through Nong-
Zhuan-Fei between the ages of 15 and 40. This reflects the preferences for young workers by
city industries and governments and the expectation of higher returns on migration among
younger rural households. These facts are broadly consistent with our modeling strategy
which assumes that Hukou transitions happen between the first and the second period of life.



C       Modeling Details

C.1     The Decision Problem of Migrants

Next, consider the consumption decisions of a household that decides to migrate to a different
city. There are two decisions that the household must take. First, the household needs to
decide where to relocate. Second, the household needs to decide whether to take the child
with them (c = 1) or leave it behind (c = 0). The trade-off here is the following. If the parent
leaves the child behind, the parent has lower housing needs and faces lower mobility costs.
However, a child's achievement is potentially lower if schools are better in the destination
city.

    We capture the disadvantages of migrants without urban residency status using wedges.
In particular, we assume that there exists a wedge for educational public goods, denoted by
g                                                     o
jk  1, and a wedge for other public goods, denoted by jk  1. Effectively, migrants

have to pay higher housing prices and their children obtain a lower quality education than
residents. Lower quality education can be modeled straight forward as discussed below.



                                              50
 Figure 1: Distribution of Age and Year of Rural-Urban Hukou Change
          .04
          .03
Density
 .02      .01
          0




                1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                         year_hukou_change
          .06
          .04
Density
          .02
          0




                 0    5   10   15   20   25 30 35 40        45   50   55   60   65
                                         age_hukou_change




                                             51
   The decision problem of a migrant of skill type k that was born in location i, has chosen
to move to location j = i, brings the child along (c = 1) and has not received urban residency
status can be written as:

                       maxb,h U (a, b, c = 1, h, o
                                                 jk o, j )                                (30)

                         s.t.      pj h + (1 + tb ) b = (1 - tw
                                                              j ) wjk + pi eik

                                   an, 1    g
                                    ijk = a(jk gj , sk )


Similarly, the decision problem of a migrant of skill type k that was born in location i and
that has chosen to move to location j = i, does not bring the children along (c = 0) and has
not received urban residency status can be written as:

                       maxb,h U (a, b, c = 0, h, o
                                                 jk o, j )                                (31)

                         s.t.      pj h + (1 + tb ) b = (1 - tw
                                                              j ) wjk + pi eik

                                   an, 0
                                    ijk = a(gi , sk )


Solving these decision problems, we obtain the optimal demand for housing and other goods
along the lines we discussed above. In the case of the Stone-Geary utility function, we obtain:

                                  c
                       hn,c
                        ijk =        [(1 - tw                            c c
                                             j ) wjk + pi eik ] + (1 -  )h                (32)
                                  pj
                                  1 - c
                       bn,c
                        ijk     =       b
                                          [(1 - tw                        c
                                                  j ) wjk + pi eik - pj h ]
                                  1+t

   The main difference here is that migrants face higher housing prices than residents. Also,
children of migrants that move from lower-tier to higher-tier cities obtain lower achievement
than the children of residents holding parental skills constant since they are either educated
at home or attend a school in the destination city that is of lower quality.

   Some migrants obtain residency rights when they move. The decision problem of a migrant
of skill type k that was born in location i, has chosen to move to location j = i, brings the




                                                   52
child along (c = 1) and has received urban residency status can be written as:

                    maxb,h U (a, b, c = 1, h, o, j )                                      (33)

                      s.t.      (1 - sh                b            w
                                      j ) pj h + (1 + t ) b = (1 - tj ) wjk + pi eik

                               ay, 1
                                ijk = a(gj , sk )


Similarly, the decision problem of a migrant of skill type k that was born in location i and
that has chosen to move to location j = i, does not bring the children along (c = 0) and has
received urban residency status can be written as:

                    maxb,h U (a, b, c = 0, h, o, j )                                      (34)

                      s.t.      (1 - sh                b            w
                                      j ) pj h + (1 + t ) b = (1 - tj ) wjk + pi eik

                               ay, 0
                                ijk = a(gi , sk )


Solving these decision problems, we obtain the optimal demand for housing and other goods
along the lines we discussed above. In the case of the Stone-Geary utility function, we obtain:
                                   c
                    hy,c
                     ijk =                    [(1 - tw                           c c
                                                     j ) wjk + pi eik ] + (1 -  )h        (35)
                               (1 - shj ) p j
                                    c
                               1-
                     by,c
                      ijk    =      b
                                       [(1 - tw                             h     c
                                                 j ) wjk + pi eik - (1 - sj ) pj h ]
                               1+t
Notice that the children of migrants with Hukou obtain the same education as children of
residents (ay, 1   r
            ijk = ajk ).




C.2     Housing Demand

The different terms of the aggregate housing demand are given by:
                                            K
                                 dr
                                Hj  =            nr   r
                                                  jk hjk                                  (36)
                                           k=1
                                            K       1
                                dn
                               Hj     =                      nm,c             n,c
                                                              ljk (1 - rjk ) hljk         (37)
                                           k=1 c=0 l=j
                                            K       1
                                 dy
                                Hj    =                      nm,c      y,c
                                                              ljk rjk hljk                (38)
                                           k=1 c=0 l=j


                                                        53
C.3     Skill Accumulation

We use the following specification to capture the law of motion of skills conditional on achieve-
ment:
                                                         exp((ajk - 14)/a )
                      P r{sjk = high-skill | ajk } =                                        (39)
                                                       1 + exp((ajk - 14)/a )



D       Model Fit: Revenues and Expenditures

The table below shows that our model fits the observed fiscal revenue shares and the per
capita expenditures for education and other public goods.

                       Table 15: Model Fit: Revenues and Expenditures

                                              Revenue Shares
                          Income Tax          Housing Tax                Transfers
                        Data     Model        Data        Model      Data      Model
              Tier1      0.34     0.39         0.35        0.34      0.31       0.26
              Tier2      0.24     0.37         0.45        0.22      0.31       0.41
              Tier3      0.16     0.24         0.28        0.20      0.56       0.56
                                               Expenditures
                           Education       Education             Other         Other
                        Exp Per Capita       Quality      Exp Per Capita      Quality
                        Data     Model       Model        Data      Model      Model
              Tier 1     200      180          214        1093       974        1132
              Tier 2     73        79          97          413       426        554
              Tier 3     50        50          62          264       251        342
              Rural      24        27          22           93       101        101




                                                54
