                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          IMMIGRATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE UNITED STATES

                                        Pierre Azoulay
                                        Benjamin Jones
                                         J. Daniel Kim
                                        Javier Miranda

                                      Working Paper 27778
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27778


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




We thank Bill Kerr, Jonathan Vogel, and participants at the NBER Summer Institute
Entrepreneurship meeting for helpful comments. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau,
its staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The Census Bureau has reviewed this
data product for unauthorized disclosure of confidential information and has approved the
disclosure avoidance applied. Approval Numbers: CBDRB-FY20-CED006-0004 (Nov 2019);
CBDRB-FY20-CED006-0023 (June 2020), CBDRB-FY20-329 (June 2020); CBDRB-FY20-391
(August 2020).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pierre Azoulay, Benjamin Jones, J. Daniel Kim, and Javier Miranda. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Immigration and Entrepreneurship in the United States
Pierre Azoulay, Benjamin Jones, J. Daniel Kim, and Javier Miranda
NBER Working Paper No. 27778
September 2020
JEL No. J15,L26,M13,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

Immigration can expand labor supply and create greater competition for native-born workers. But
immigrants may also start new firms, expanding labor demand. This paper uses U.S.
administrative data and other data resources to study the role of immigrants in entrepreneurship.
We ask how often immigrants start companies, how many jobs these firms create, and how these
firms compare with those founded by U.S.-born individuals. A simple model provides a
measurement framework for addressing the dual roles of immigrants as founders and workers.
The findings suggest that immigrants act more as "job creators" than "job takers" and that non-
U.S. born founders play outsized roles in U.S. high-growth entrepreneurship.


Pierre Azoulay                                  J. Daniel Kim
MIT Sloan School of Management                  University of Pennsylvania
100 Main Street, E62-487                        Wharton School
Cambridge, MA 02142                             3620 Locust Walk
and NBER                                        2029 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
pazoulay@mit.edu                                Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                                jdkim@wharton.upenn.edu
Benjamin Jones
Northwestern University                         Javier Miranda
Kellogg School of Management                    U.S. Bureau of the Census
Department of Management and Strategy           Economy-Wide Statistics Division
2211 Campus Drive                               4600 Silver Hill Road
Evanston, IL 60208                              Washington, DC 20233
and NBER                                        javier.miranda@census.gov
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1    Introduction

    Economic perspectives of immigration often emphasize its role in expanding labor supply (e.g.,
Isaac 1947, Borjas 1994, Dustmann et al. 2016). From this starting point, immigrants may
primarily appear to compete with native workers, leading to reduced employment or lower wages
(e.g., Altonji and Card 1991, Borjas 2003). Native workers and their representatives may then
oppose immigration on the grounds that immigrants "take jobs" (e.g., Reder 1963, Briggs 2001).
However, this perspective, while common in economic research and powerful in policy, does not
appear to be the whole story. For example, studies of immigration shocks--including the Mariel
Boatlift and others--often do not find negative effects on local wages (Card 1990, Hunt 1992,
Friedberg 2001). And studies of mass migration to the United States have found substantial and
persistent gains in per-capita income in regions that experience greater immigration (Tabellini 2020;
Sequeira et al. 2020). The tension between a labor supply orientation and the broader empirical
findings suggests that additional economic forces are at work.

    This paper works to fill in the picture through the lens of entrepreneurship. We consider how
immigrants not only expand labor supply (as workers) but also expand labor demand (as founders of
firms). Using administrative data for the U.S. economy, we study the extent to which immigrants
start new firms, and we study the employment in the firms they found. By looking in a more
comprehensive manner at the U.S. economy, the analysis helps balance the ledger in assessing
immigrants' economic roles.

    To provide a coherent analysis of supply and demand, we first present a simple general equilib-
rium model of the economy. This model, building on Lucas (1978), considers how individuals sort
into workers and founders. We extend the model to consider the role of immigration. Intuitively,
if immigrants start many firms but these are small firms, their effect on labor demand will still
be small, so that immigration mainly expands labor supply and on net reduces wages. However,
if immigrant-founded firms tend to be large firms, then immigration may substantially expand
labor demand, raising wages. The theory makes this explicit. The model also generates specific
predictions for the distribution of firm size, including Zipf's Law, that can be brought to the data.




                                                 1
    The empirical work then builds from three data sets. First, we use administrative records to
study every firm founded in the U.S. between 2005 and 2010. Second, we use the U.S. Census's
Survey of Business Owners to study a representative sample of all U.S. firms. Third, we examine
the Fortune 500, allowing us to focus on the very largest firms in the U.S. economy. In all cases,
we code founders as either U.S. born or immigrant based on their place of birth. Using any of
these data sets, we find similar results. First, reflecting existing research, immigrants start firms
at higher rates than native-born individuals do (e.g., Kerr and Kerr 2020). Second, immigrants
do not simply start small firms. Rather, they tend to start more firms at every size, compared to
U.S.-born individuals. This is the key finding of the paper. There is effectively a "right shift" in
entrepreneurship for immigrants, with immigrants playing relatively large roles as employers rather
than employees, compared to U.S. born individuals.

    Overall, the findings suggest that immigrants appear to "create jobs" (expand labor demand)
more than they "take jobs" (expand labor supply) in the U.S. economy. By studying immigrants as
both entrepreneurs and workers, one produces a fuller picture of the impact of immigration. The
new facts can help resolve existing puzzles where empirical evidence, including natural experiments
and longer-run historical analysis, often suggests more positive economic effects from immigration
than labor-supply oriented perspectives produce.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 further motivates our study of immigrant entrepreneur-
ship. Section 3 presents a simple model, generating key intuitions and clarifying basic empirical
constructs. Section 4 presents the data and empirical measures. It further presents our key
findings. Section 5 considers interpretations and extensions, including patenting behavior. Section
6 concludes.



2    The Immigrant Entrepreneur

    While researchers often study immigrants as workers, a recent stream of scholarship emphasizes
the role of immigrants as innovators and entrepreneurs. For example, immigrants currently repre-
sent about 14% of the U.S. workforce but account for closer to one-quarter of U.S. patents (e.g.,
Bernstein et al. 2019). Related, immigrants to the U.S. are also disproportionately likely to hold
STEM degrees (Kerr and Kerr 2020).


                                                 2
    Immigrants further appear to be highly entrepreneurial. Immigrants start firms at higher rates
than native-born individuals in several countries (Fairlie and Lofstrom 2015), with recent evidence
suggesting that approximately 25% of recent start-ups in the U.S. are founded by immigrants (Kerr
and Kerr 2020). At the same time, such entrepreneurial tendencies may largely reflect businesses
with limited growth prospects, perhaps because immigrants are "pushed" into entrepreneurial
activity due to poor labor market opportunities (Light and Roach 1996, Constant and Zimmerman
2006). On the other hand, evidence also points to the substantial presence of immigrant founders
in Silicon Valley (e.g., Saxenian 2002), and examples such as Alexander Graham Bell and Sergei
Brin suggest that immigrants have started firms that grow to employ large numbers of people, with
large effects on the economy.

    Ultimately, the economic effects of immigration will depend not just on whether immigrants
start firms, but on how successful these firms tend to be. In this paper, we will provide systematic
evidence on this question. Intuitively, examining the size distribution of businesses, and comparing
this for immigrant and native founders, can shed light on the impact of immigrant entrepreneurship.
We will examine the size distributions using administrative data and other data resources. To
provide intuition and make the measures precise, we first develop a simple conceptual framework.



3     Model

    Immigrants can expand both labor supply (as workers) and labor demand (as employers).
Immigrants, as earners of income, also create more demand for final goods. The following model
builds on Lucas (1978) to introduce such general equilibrium reasoning. We extend this classic
model to consider the net effect of immigration on the economy and provide explicit constructs
that can be examined empirically.


3.1   Assumptions

    Let there be N people in the economy, where individuals can choose to either work in a firm
("workers") or start a firm ("founders"). Each person is endowed with 1 unit of labor. Each
person is also endowed with some level of entrepreneurial acumen. The entrepreneurial acumen for




                                                 3
individual i is ai  0, which is distributed f (a). The (endogenous) number of founders is E and
workers is L, where E + L = N

   Firms maximize profits. They produce with a decreasing returns-to-scale technology, and
productivity depends on the entrepreneur's skill. These features allow for positive profits and
a size distribution of firms in equilibrium. Specifically, a firm's output is

                                                         
                                                yi = ai li                                        (1)

where   (0, 1) and li is the labor employed. The profit maximization problem is

                                        
                                        i = arg max [yi - wli ]                                   (2)
                                                  li

where the final good price is taken as numeraire (there is only one type of output).

   Individuals choose their career to maximize income. The individual's choice is to work for a
                                          . Individuals choose to become entrepreneurs if    w
wage, w, or start a firm and earn profit i                                                i

and choose to be workers otherwise. Utility is strictly increasing in consumption of the final good.
Individual-level consumption is thus equated to individual-level income, and total consumption is
equated to GDP.

   Finally, we consider two sub-populations, indexed j  {0, 1}, to represent the native-born and
immigrants, respectively. The total population is partitioned as N = N0 + N1 and we similarly
partition L = L0 + L1 and E = E0 + E1 . The distribution of entrepreneurial acumen for each
group is f0 (a) and f1 (a). The overall distribution of acumen in the economy is the summation of
these two sub-population distributions, each weighted by its population share. Results below will
(eventually) specialize to consider Pareto distributions,
                                                aj
                                     fj (a) =          ,  > 0, a  aj                              (3)
                                                a +1
where the parameter aj acts as a distributional shifter.


3.2   Equilibrium Results

   We emphasize two sets of results, helping frame the empirical work to follow. The first set
provides more general statements about equilibrium outcomes in light of immigration. The second
set considers Pareto distributions of entrepreneurial talent, which provide a close match to the data.


                                                       4
       To solve for the equilibrium allocation, we have firm-level profit maximization and the individual
career decision. These are the choices in the economy. We close the model through the resource
constraints, which are the total available population and, most importantly, the distributions of
entrepreneurial acumen for the native-born and for immigrants.

       First, from profit maximization, profits are strictly increasing in the individual acumen, ai .1
The entrepreneurial choice decision then implies a unique threshold value a , where individuals
choose entrepreneurship if ai  a and choose to be workers otherwise. This threshold level of
acumen is
                                                                            1-
                                                          w        
                                                   a =                                                         (4)
                                                                  1-
for any distribution of talent, f (a). This equilibrium condition provides a monotonically increasing
relationship a (w). This produces an upward sloping labor supply relationship; namely, a higher
wage means that more people choose to be workers.2

       Second, the share of entrepreneurs in the population is
                                                               
                                                    E
                                                      =              f (ai ) dai                               (5)
                                                    N         a

which is decreasing in a . Fewer founders means less labor demand, other things equal, leading to
a second and decreasing relationship between a and w. The above two conditions together can
thus pin down the equilibrium wage and entry threshold decisions.

       Aggregates follow by adding up the firm level variables. Total output per capita is
                                                              
                                                   Y               
                                                     =            yi f (ai ) dai                               (6)
                                                   N       a

where the firm-level outputs follow from profit maximization. We can similarly add up firm-level
                 , and profits,   to produce aggregate labor, L , and aggregate profit,  .3
labor demands, li               i

Aggregate GDP is constant returns to scale in the population, conditional on a fixed distribution
of talent. Equating total income to GDP, it follows, for any f (a), that the labor share of total
income is wL/Y =  and the aggregate profit share of total income is /Y = 1 -  .
   1                                                                                                          
       Firm-level outcomes follow from profit-maximization, (2), given the wage. These are the labor demands li =
          1                    1                                     1                  
 ai      1-                                                                        
 w
              , outputs yi = ai1-   w
                                        1-
                                             , and profits i = ai1- (1 -  )        w
                                                                                       1-
                                                                                            .
 2
    Rather than a choice between work and leisure, here we mean the choice between being a worker (L) and a
business owner (E ). The phrases "labor supply" and "labor demand" in this construct refer to workers.
                                                                             1
   3
     The firm-level outcomes all aggregate similarly in the term ai1- and their aggregates are linear in population
size.



                                                                 5
3.2.1     Immigration and Equilibrium

   The influence of immigration can by understood by analyzing how immigration shifts the overall
distribution f (a). Consider three informative cases.


  1. Immigration causes no shift in the distribution f (ai ).

  2. Immigration creates a left shift in the distribution f (ai ) such that f (ai ) decreases for all
        ai  a .

  3. Immigration creates a right shift in the distribution f (ai ) such that f (ai ) increases for all
        ai  a .


We can then produce the following results for income in the economy.

Proposition 1. The threshold for entrepreneurial entry, a , is unchanged in case 1, decreasing in
case 2, and increasing in case 3. The equilibrium wage (w ), GDP per capita (Y  /N ), and total
profits per capita ( /N ) move in the same direction as a .


Proof. See appendix.


   These results are intuitive. Take the first case. Here immigrants are just like the native born.
They split into workers and entrepreneurs just like the native born do, and immigrants have no
net effect on the equilibrium between labor supply and demand. Immigrants increase the scale of
the economy, by increasing total population, but they don't change wages or other outcomes per
person.

   In the second case, immigrants tend to have less entrepreneurial acumen. Compared to the
native born, a relatively high share of immigrants will become workers (pushing out labor supply)
rather than entrepreneurs (pushing out labor demand), and equilibrium wages will fall. This case
corresponds to often-expressed fears that immigration will worsen wages for native workers.

   Finally, consider the third case. Here immigrants tend to have more entrepreneurial acumen
than the native born. Although many immigrants may become workers, a relatively high share will



                                                 6
now become business founders, so that the labor demand effect outweighs the labor supply effect,
causing the wages of native workers to rise. More generally, GDP per capita and profits per capita
will also rise.4

       An equilibrium with explicit solutions follows using Pareto distributions. To encapsulate these
results, first define a constant

                                                                            1/
                                      am = [a              
                                             0 (N0 /N ) + a1 (N1 /N )]           .

This constant is a weighted combination of the Pareto floor parameters (see (3)) for the native-born
and immigrant distributions of entrepreneurial acumen. Further, consider the (natural) case where
both the native-born and immigrant populations produce some workers and some entrepreneurs.5

Proposition 2. With the Pareto distributions of entrepreneurial acumen (3), the economy-wide
equilibrium outcomes are
                                                               1
                                                -1             
                             a     = am                                                                             (7)
                                              (1 -  ) - 1
                                                               1
                                              -1               
                            w = am                                 (1 -  )1-                                        (8)
                                            (1 -  ) - 1
                                             
                            E =          1-        N                                                                (9)
                                            -1
                                                               1
                                                -1                                   
                            Y   
                                   = am                              (1 -  )1-          N                          (10)
                                              (1 -  ) - 1                            -1

and other economy-wide entities follow as  = (1 -  ) Y  and L = N - E  .


Proof. See appendix.


       In the empirical work, we will separately examine the entrepreneurial outcomes for native born
and immigrant workers. The first result concerns the rate of entrepreneurship.
   4
      This third case is not, however, a Pareto improvement without a transfer. Although workers are better off,
and although total profit per capita goes up, an individual native-born entrepreneur sees his/her profit fall. This
follows because, given that entrepreneur's ai , the profits of his/her firm are declining when the wage increases. That
said, from an inequality point of view, this is a case where the individuals who see less income (without a corrective
transfer) are those who are relatively well off.
    5
      That is, we consider the case where the equilibrium a is finite and strictly greater than the floor parameters for
both acumen distributions, so that workers and founders emerge within each group. This is of course the natural
empirical case.




                                                           7
Corollary 1. The equilibrium rate of entrepreneurship within a given group is
                                                         
                                          Ej        aj            
                                             =               1-                                            (11)
                                          Nj        am            -1

Proof. See appendix.


   The second result concerns the distribution of firm size. Again, we look separately within the
native born and within immigrants. Specifically, we count the number of firms of a given size from
the group's founders, normalized by the size of that group's population. We can consider firm size
either in terms of employment or output, and here we use employment. Define the count of firms
                                    ) within group j .
of a given employment size as nj (li

                                                                               is
Corollary 2. The (log) fraction of people of type j who start a firm of size li
                                            )
                                       nj (li                               
                                 log          = log C - ( (1 -  ) + 1) log li                              (12)
                                        Nj

             aj                                      - (1- )
                                               1-                                               =    
where C =    am      1-     -1   (1 -  )                       and the smallest firm has size li    1- .



Proof. See appendix.


   The firm size distribution is thus a power law--Zipf's Law (Axtell 2001). Namely, the slope
of the log frequency on the log firm size is a negative constant. The Pareto distribution approach
may thus be useful in matching Zipf's Law in the data. Moreover, through an entrepreneurial
lens, differences in these normalized frequency distributions can inform the role of immigration.
Immigration produces a right shift in the economy's entrepreneurial acumen distribution if a1 > a0 .
This feature will be seen as a right shift in the firm size frequency per group member, (12), and an
increased rate of entrepreneurship, (11), when comparing the immigrant and native populations.
From Proposition 1, such a right shift increases the wages of domestic workers, as well as GDP per
capita.

   Finally, one can aggregate the total employment created by firms from a given population of
founders. This creates a simple and intuitive metric, comparing jobs created with the number of
workers of a given type.



                                                         8
Corollary 3. The total number of jobs created by immigrants is greater than the number of
immigrants in the workforce if a1 > a0 . The total number of jobs created by immigrants is less
than the number of immigrants in the workforce if a1 < a0 .


Proof. See appendix.


    This corollary is another way of seeing the net labor market implications of immigration. The net
labor demand effect (quantity) from immigration, like the net wage effect (price) from immigration,
is increasing in immigration if immigrants have an advantageous distribution of entrepreneurial
acumen.



4     Empirical Evidence

    This section presents empirical evidence about new venture creation in the U.S. economy. We
compare native-born and immigrant founded firms. The analysis focuses on the rate of new venture
creation and the employment distribution in the firms that results. This section describes the
primary data sets analyzed, defines the specific empirical measures, and presents the findings.


4.1     Data

    We look at three independent data sets. Our primary analysis uses administrative data to
study all new firms in the United States from 2005-2010 ("administrative data"). Our second
analysis studies the U.S. Census Bureau's 2012 Survey of Business Owners (SBO) to examine a
representative sample of all U.S. businesses and their founders ("representative sample"). Our third
analysis, drawing on public sources, studies the Fortune 500 to consider the country's largest firms
and their founders ("Fortune 500"). We describe these data sets here, with additional detail in the
appendix.

4.1.1    Administrative Data

    This data set links the U.S. Census Bureau's Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), population-
wide W-2 tax records, and the U.S. Census demographic files (Numident). Business-level informa-
tion comes from the LBD, which tracks U.S. businesses and their establishments over time. The


                                                  9
LBD includes all non farm private sector firms in the U.S. with at least one employee. Our focus
in the LBD is on startups, to examine entrepreneurship by native and immigrant populations. We
define startups as de novo firms that have no prior activity at any of their establishments. The
founding year is the year the firm first appears in the LBD.

   To study founders, we integrate employment and demographic records. We use a "founding
team" definition, identifying the top three earners (via W-2 records) in each new venture in its
founding year (Kerr and Kerr 2017; Azoulay et al. 2020). We then classify each founding team
member as either U.S.-born or immigrant, based on the country of birth (via Census Numident).
Using W-2 records and Census Numident, we similarly classify all workers in the economy as U.S.-
born or immigrant. We will also consider alternative measures of the immigrant population.

   To examine employment in the new ventures, we study the firm size five years after founding
and compare the firm size distributions for U.S.-born and immigrant founded firms. Given data set
availability, our main analysis considers all firms founded from 2005-2010 that survive for five years.
We thus analyze employment in 1.02 million new businesses. A benefit of the administrative data
is that it covers all new employer firms in the economy. The limitation is that we see employment
outcomes only in the early years of the business. This motivates our second data set, which is a
representative sample of U.S. business owners, regardless of the business age.

4.1.2   Representative Sample

   The Survey of Business Owners (SBO) collects information from a representative sample of
U.S. business owners. The SBO is the only source of representative information on economic and
demographic characteristics for business owners by gender, ethnicity, race, and veteran status.
Included in the collection is information for owners of employer and non-employer businesses. We
limit our analysis to employer businesses. The SBO is collected every 5 years. For our exercise we
use data from the 2012 SBO.

   When looking at business owners, the SBO provides information on the number of owners of
the firm but collects detailed information only for the top four owners including their ownership
shares, founder status, whether they are native or immigrant, and whether they play an active role
in the day-to-day management of the firm. We include all firms regardless of the number of owners



                                                  10
and limit our analysis to businesses with at least one founder amongst the top four owners. Our
analysis is strictly limited to the founders (i.e., we exclude investor-owners who did not found the
firm). Our analysis sample includes over 200,000 employer firms.

    For firm-level employment, we use the survey collected data.6 We define 10 size classes up
to a size class of 10,000 employees. Founding years in our SBO sample range from early 1800
to 2012. While the SBO provides a representative sample, the sample is thin at very large firm
sizes. Since a very small number of firms in the economy are extremely large and responsible for
substantial employment, we therefore turn additionally to a third data set, the Fortune 500, to
explicitly examine this upper tail.

4.1.3     Fortune 500

    We further collect data on firms listed in the 2017 edition of the Fortune 500 ranking. For each
firm, we capture, whenever possible, the year of incorporation, the name of the founders, and the
founders' immigration status. This process is straightforward for many firms, particularly those
that were founded in the recent past. For other firms, it is more challenging, since they can be the
offspring of many merged entities. Our approach is to trace the "genealogical tree" for each firm to
the earliest parent possible and then identify the founders of these parents as the founders of the
firm.7

    Among the Fortune 500, we were able to determine the immigrant status for the founders for
449 firms. The founding years range from 1743 to 2004. Further details regarding the compilation
of immigrant status for these firms (including 51 cases where this proved impossible) are provided
in the Online Appendix.


4.2      Measures

    We define individuals as immigrants if they are born outside the U.S.. For each data set,
we count the number of entrepreneurs from each population. We similarly examine the firms'
employment distribution, counting firms of a given size from founders in each population. We
   6
     We replace the survey employment with information from administrative sources when missing. Robustness
checks making full use of administrative data do not alter the results.
   7
     For instance, American Airlines has two parents, Colonial Air Transport (incorporated in 1926, one native-born
founder) and Robertson Aircraft Corporation (incorporated in 1921, two native-born founders).



                                                        11
then normalize these counts by the total size of each population. Together these measures produce
the rate of entrepreneurship (Ej /Nj ) and the fraction of individuals who start firms of a given
            ) /N ). In addition to being intuitive ways of characterizing entrepreneurship and labor
size (nj (li    j

demand, these empirical measures correspond to the corollaries above.

      Firms can have multiple founders, and these founders may mix U.S.-born and immigrant
individuals. Allocating firms as either native-founded or immigrant-founded can then be done
multiple ways. We therefore consider three different approaches to assigning firms to each sub-
population. The first approach, denoted Definition 1, counts the business as an "immigrant firm" if
anyone in this founding team is an immigrant. This method is most generous in counting immigrant
firms. The second approach, denoted Definition 2, counts the business as an "immigrant firm" only
if the "lead" individual is an immigrant. This approach is more conservative. We operationalize
the "lead" individual as the highest-paid on the founding team (administrative data) or the owner-
worker with the highest ownership share (SBO data).8 The final approach, denoted Definition 3,
uses proportional assignment. It collects all firms in a given employment size range and pools the
founding teams among this group of firms. It then allocates these firms proportionally (within the
given size range) as native-founded versus immigrant-founded, based on the share of founding team
members from each population. These three definitions produce alternative frequency distributions,
nj (l), and founder counts Ej for each population, acting as robustness checks.

      To produce appropriate population normalizations, Nj , for each group, we also have reasonable
alternatives.      We can consider all individuals who work (e.g., from all W-2 records) in each
group, or we can consider broader estimates to account for informal employment and unauthorized
immigration. Broader population measures also account for historical immigration levels, which is
especially relevant for the Fortune 500 data. In practice, the results appear robust to any plausible
estimate of the immigrant population (see Section 5.2).


4.3      Results

      The central results are presented in Figures 1, 2, and 3. Each figure shows the normalized
firm size distributions for immigrant-founded and native-founded firms. Figure 1 presents the
  8
      This second approach is not feasible for the Fortune 500 data.




                                                          12
administrative data, Figure 2 presents the representative sample, and Figure 3 presents the Fortune
500 data.

   The broad finding is clear, looking across each data set and across different ways of defining
immigrant and non-immigrant firms. Namely, immigrant entrepreneurship presents a "right shift"
in firm size. We see Zipf's Law appear for both immigrant-founded and native-founded firms, but
immigrants tend to start more firms per person of every size. Specifically, at each firm size, the
frequency of immigrant-founded firms per immigrant in the population tends to be larger than
the frequency of native-founded firms per native-born person in the population. These plotted
measures correspond to equation (12).

4.3.1   Administrative Data

   Figure 1A presents the administrative data, counting immigrant firms as those with at least one
immigrant founder (Definition 1). We see here a parallel right shift for immigrant-founded firms.
The rate of entrepreneurship looking at the 2005-2010 period shows that 0.83% of immigrants in
the workforce start a firm over this period, compared to 0.46% of native-born individuals in the
workforce. Immigrants thus exhibit a 80% higher entrance rate into entrepreneurship. Moreover,
immigrants start more firms of every size. They do not just start many small firms, but produce a
firm size distribution that looks very similar to native-born entrepreneurs.

   Figure 1B considers the administrative data again, but now counts immigrant firms only as those
where the highest-paid founding team member is an immigrant (Definition 2). The immigrant firms
defined this way are now a strict subset of those pictured in Figure 1A. Conceptually, Definition 1
suggests that each founding team member is necessary for the venture. Definition 2 suggests that
only one team member (the highest paid) is necessary for the venture. While the power law for the
immigrant-founded firms necessarily moves left compared to Figure 1A, we still see that, at every
firm size, immigrant-founded firms outpace the native-founded firms. Now the slope is slightly
steeper for immigrant-founded firms, so that they dominate relatively more among small firms, and
only slightly among the largest firms.

   Figure 1C considers a proportional assignment of immigrant and native-founded firms (Def-
inition 3). The result looks very similar to Definition 2. A small difference is that now, in



                                                 13
the very largest size bucket, immigrant-founded firms are slightly outpaced by native-founded
firms. Nonetheless, aggregating across firms, the total employment assigned to immigrant-founded
firms is greater than the total employment for native-founded firms (as shares of their respective
populations). Integrating across the firm size distributions for each population, the total number
of jobs created by immigrant-founder firms (per immigrant in the population) is 42% higher than
that of native-founder firms (per native-born in the population).

4.3.2    Representative Sample

    Figure 2 repeats the analyses of Figure 1, but now using the Survey of Business Owners (SBO).
The SBO population includes all firms regardless of age so our analysis is not restricted to young
firms. Figure 2A shows the normalized firm size distribution for immigrant vs. native founded
firms (Definition 1). As before, we see a right shift in the distribution for immigrant founded
firms. The estimated rate of entrepreneurship based on the 2012 set of businesses is 7.25% for
immigrants, compared to 4.03% for native-born individuals.9 Compared to the administrative
data, which considers the flow of new firms founded over 2005-2010, this SBO data comes closer to
the steady-state looking across the economy's firms. Remarkably, despite measurement differences
with the analysis in the previous section, we still find that immigrants exhibit the same 80%
higher entrance rate into entrepreneurship when compared to native-born individuals. As before,
immigrants disproportionately start more firms across the size distribution.10

    Figure 2B considers the SBO data again, but now counts immigrant firms as only those whose
largest owner-founder is an immigrant (Definition 2). We use the ownership share information to
make this determination. Once again we see a right-shift of the firm size distribution for immigrant
founded firms but now with a distinct tilt as we move towards the largest size classes. The size
distributions converge as we increase in size. This result is again similar to the administrative data,
and despite alternative constructs of the lead founder.11
    9
      The underlying immigrant and native population sizes are weighted averages of the respective popu-
lations across the founding years of the enterprise.          We use data from the Migration Policy Institute
for the underlying population counts, available at https://www.migrationpolicy.org/programs/data-hub/
charts/immigrant-population-over-time.
  10
      To comply with disclosure avoidance rules, we suppress data for firms above 10,000 employees as well as specific
cells in Figure 2.
  11
      The SBO definition, which is based on the largest current ownership share among the founders, might select
against immigrant founders to the extent that native-born founders are initially more affluent and have an ownership
edge.



                                                         14
         Figure 2C considers a proportional assignment of immigrant and native-founded firms (Defi-
nition 3). The right-shift of the log size distribution for immigrant founded firms remains. The
results are broadly similar as when using the prior definitions, and with continuing similarity with
the administrative data findings in Figure 1.

4.3.3        Fortune 500

         Figure 3 repeats the prior analysis on the set of firms in the Fortune 500 ranking, using only
the first and third definitions. This provides a close look at the very largest firms in the economy
and further allows for some historical comparison. In each case, we normalize the count of founders
using a count of native and non-native born individuals in the U.S. population in the decade during
which the firm was founded.12 Because the data is more sparse (449 firms with founder information,
96 of which have at least one immigrant founder), we create only three employment bins (using the
2017 employee count for each firm): Firms with less than 30,000 employees, firms with between
30,000 and 100,000 employees, and firms with more than 100,000 employees.

         The results of the analysis are depicted in Figures 3A and 3B (corresponding to founder counts
according to the first and third definitions, respectively). The patterns observed are consistent
with those obtained using the broader administrative and survey data: a right shift for immigrant-
founded firms. Among the Fortune 500, the native-born and immigrant slopes are of similar
magnitudes. Overall, the Fortune 500 findings indicate that the results extend to the very largest
U.S. businesses and to founding behavior over a broader sweep of U.S. business history.13



5         Discussion

         In this section, we first summarize the results and relate them to the theory. We then consider
further interpretations of the findings and related evidence.
    12
     The source of this information is the Migration Policy Institute tabulation of the U.S. Census Bureau's 2010-2017
American Community Surveys and 1970, 1990, and 2000 Census data, as well as Gibson and Lennon (1999).
  13
     In the appendix, we further consider these results focusing on the subset of 123 Fortune 500 firms founded since
1970. This has two advantages. First, the founder information is more comprehensive for this subset, and second the
recent subset is more relevant to contemporary immigration outcomes. The results for this recent sample are similar.




                                                         15
5.1   Summary

   Overall, immigrants appear highly entrepreneurial. We see a power law in the distribution of
firm size for each population, but immigrant entrepreneurship appears right-shifted. Specifically,
there are more immigrant-founded firms, per immigrant in the population, at each employment
size. This is true recently, where we can look at all new firms in the economy using administrative
data. It is also true for firms founded in earlier time periods, including when studying the Survey
of Business Owners and the Fortune 500.

   Relating to the theory, the higher rate of entrepreneurship (Corollary 1), the right shift in
the firm size distribution (Corollary 2), and the total count of jobs created per population mem-
ber (Corollary 3), all are consistent with immigrants presenting an advantageous distribution of
entrepreneurial acumen, compared to native-born individuals. According to Proposition 1, this
feature is consistent with increased wages and rising income per capita.


5.2   Unmeasured Immigration

   Empirically, the measures depend on estimates of the immigrant and native-born populations.
Immigrants who are unaccounted for in government statistics may lead immigrant population
measures to be understated. For the SBO and Fortune 500 analyses, our population estimates
already explicitly include foreign-born individuals who are residing in the U.S. without authorization
(Gibson and Campbell 1999). However, this issue may be particularly germane for populations
based on W-2 tax records, and more generally one can assess the scale by which the immigrant
population would need to be under-counted for the immigrant and native-born founding behavior
to look the same.

   As a simple metric to assess the robustness of the findings, we ask how much the underlying
immigrant population measure would have to be scaled up so that the aggregate employment in
immigrant-founded firms, per immigrant in the population, would decline to the equivalent rate
for the native-born. For the W-2 data, where a missing mass of immigrants is potentially more
relevant, the immigrant population would have to be scaled up by 42% using Definition 3. Using
the Fortune 500 data for founders since 1970, the immigrant population would have to be scaled up




                                                 16
by 64% using Definition 3.14 To put this required under-count in context, consider that there were
approximately 45.6m foreign-born individuals in the U.S. in 2017, which includes approximately
10.5m unauthorized immigrants (Pew Research Center 2018). Higher estimates suggest there are
as many as 12 million unauthorized immigrants (Kamarck and Stenglein 2019). Under-counting
the total immigrant population by 40-60% would mean that unauthorized immigrants total 30m
or more individuals, in comparison to standard estimates of 10.5-12m. There is no evidence that
immigration could be understated by anything close to this magnitude. Overall, immigration on
net appears to be a net job creator in the U.S. economy when including unauthorized immigrants.


5.3      Wages

       The conceptual framework has emphasized heterogeneity in entrepreneurial acumen and result-
ing outcomes in the firm size distribution. More generally, one can look at labor market impacts of
founders not just through the employment in firms they create, but also in the wages these firms
pay. Specifically, one might wonder whether immigrant-founders, although they create a large
number of jobs, perhaps do not create high-paying jobs.

       The appendix and Table A.1 use W-2 tax records to estimate worker-level wage regressions,
comparing the wages paid in immigrant-founded versus native-founded firms in the administrative
data. In a bivariate regression, workers in immigrant-founded firms receive 4.1% higher wages
on average. Controlling for founding year and county, however, the wages become identical for
workers in immigrant and native founded firms. Additionally controlling for sector as well as
worker characteristics, including age, gender, and immigrant status, the wage differences continue
to shift somewhat and can flip sign. With all the controls we find that the wages are similar, with
a slightly higher wage (0.7%) in immigrant-founded firms. Overall, these findings suggest that
immigrant-founders not only are substantial job creators but also do not appear to create lower
paying jobs.
  14
    The required scaling is similar using Definition 2, where Definition 2 is available. The required scaling is larger
using Definition 1.




                                                          17
5.4    Small Businesses

    The distributional right shift for immigrant-founded firms, while appearing across firm sizes,
can present a larger shift among small businesses. This feature is seen more with Definitions 2
or 3, where there is a steeper slope in the firm size distribution for immigrant-founded firms. As
one interpretation, the relatively large set of small businesses may be consistent with a "push"
mechanism for immigrant entrepreneurs (Light and Roach 1996; Fairlie and Lofstrom 2010). In
this view, immigrants may have relatively limited economic opportunities as workers, for example
due to limited social networks or discrimination, which can manifest itself as trouble finding jobs
or being paid less when they do. Such forces may push immigrants to start businesses at higher
rates. To the extent these individuals may have somewhat less business acumen, one may also
expect the resulting firms to remain relatively small. The preponderance of small businesses is
also consistent with ongoing limited opportunities as owners due to similar forces that limit labor
prospects. Related, the tilt in moving from Definition 1 to Definition 2 is consistent with immigrant
founders having fewer initial financial resources and a somewhat lower ownership share in the new
firm. Unpacking potential small-business-oriented mechanisms are important areas for further
work. At the same time, our central finding is a more systematic shift in the firm-size distribution,
suggesting the broader entrepreneurial orientation and success of immigrants in starting firms,
including high-growth firms.


5.5    Technology Businesses

    A different literature emphasizes that immigrants are disproportionately likely to hold STEM
degrees (Kerr and Kerr 2020) and play large roles in major entrepreneurial ecosystems like Silicon
Valley (Saxenian 2002). To study the technological and inventive orientation of immigrant versus
non-immigrant startups, we further consider patenting behavior. This analysis links the corpus of
U.S. patents to each firm in the administrative data, studying all firms founded over the 2005-2010
period. Figure 4 presents the results. Overall, firms with an immigrant founder are roughly 35%
more likely to have a patent than firms with no immigrant founders. Studying firms by size group,
immigrants are more likely to have patents at all sizes and especially at larger sizes.15
  15
     These results are largely consistent with Brown et al. (2020) who find higher rates of innovation linked to
immigrant-founded startups across several dimensions including R&D and trademarks.




                                                      18
         To the extent that inventive firms bring productivity gains beyond the bounds of the firm,
entrepreneurship can play additional welfare roles. Large literatures find substantial spillovers
and high social returns from innovation investments (e.g., Hall et al. 2010, Bloom et al. 2013,
Jones and Summers 2020) and emphasize that technology advances play critical roles in driving
rising standards of living (e.g., Solow 1956, Mokyr 1990, Cutler et al. 2006). Conceptually,
the model in Section 3 emphasized a general equilibrium allocation without innovative spillovers.
Adding productivity spillovers from inventive firms leads to the intuitive result that immigrant
entrepreneurship can further enhance productivity, wages, and per-capita income in the economy.16
In this context, pushing ahead the technology frontier of the economy acts as an additional benefit.


5.6         Immigration and Selection

         Overall, the picture is a rightward shift in the firm size distribution. While there is a poten-
tially rich set of underlying mechanisms, the findings appear consistent overall with immigrants
being positively selected on entrepreneurial acumen. Various forces may explain this. Low-ability
individuals may face difficulties migrating and immigration policy deploys many visa classes that
select on high ability (Chiswick 1999). The empirical literature on migration has come to mixed
conclusions but often suggests that immigrants are positively selected on ability from their home
communities (McKenzie et al. 2010, Hendricks and Schoellman 2018). More broadly, the act of
migration itself, with its attendant embrace of risk and the unknown, may suggest an entrepreneurial
orientation; for example, the historical literature in the United States emphasizes a "frontier" spirit,
associated with adventurous migrants and "a practical, inventive turn of mind" (Turner 1921), and
contemporary literature has found that migrants are less risk averse (Jaeger et al. 2010). These
various perspectives may all suggest a right-shift in entrepreneurial acumen among immigrants.



6         Conclusion

         This paper has studied the relative roles of immigrant and native-born individuals in new
venture formation in the United States. Using administrative data, a representative sample, and
Fortune 500 data, we present new findings on the size of firms these different founder populations
create. Across all three data sets, we find that immigrants present a "right shift" in new venture
    16
         A formal model that includes such spillovers is available from the authors upon request.



                                                             19
formation, where immigrants start more firms of each size per member of their population. A
simple theoretical framework provides intuition for thinking about these roles and helps make the
measures precise.

   Overall, the entrepreneurial lens suggests that immigrants appear to play a relatively strong role
in expanding labor demand relative to labor supply, compared to the native-born population. These
findings can help resolve the tension between labor supply oriented analyses (e.g., Isaac 1947, Borjas
1994, Dustmann et al. 2016), where immigrants are seen to compete with local workers and depress
wages, and natural experiments that often show more positive economic results of immigration for
native born workers (e.g., Card 1990, Hunt 1992, Friedberg 2001). At the same time, immigrants can
play broader economic roles than examined in this paper, and additional theoretical and empirical
approaches can frame further dimensions. For example, immigration can have fiscal implications
(e.g., Storesletten 2000), implications for the emigrant countries (e.g., Giuliano and Ruiz-Arranz
2009, Docquier and Rapoport 2012), and political economy implications (e.g., Tabellini 2020).
Embracing these dimensions in further research can help develop an increasingly full picture of
migration and its effects.




                                                 20
References

Altonji, Joseph G., and David Card. 1991. "The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market
        Outcomes of Less-skilled Natives." In John M. Abowd, and Richard B. Freeman (Eds.),
        Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market, pp. 201-234. Chicago, IL: University of
        Chicago Press.
Axtell, Robert L. 2001. "Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes." Science 293(5536): 1818-1820.
Azoulay, Pierre, Benjamin F. Jones, J. Daniel Kim, and Javier Miranda. 2020. "Age and High-
      Growth Entrepreneurship." American Economic Review: Insights 2(1): 65-82.
Bernstein, Shai, Rebecca Diamond, Timothy James McQuade, and Beatriz Pousada. 2019. "The
       Contribution of High-Skilled Immigrants to Innovation in the United States." Stanford
       Graduate School of Business Working Paper No. 3748.
Bloom, Nick, Mark Schankerman, and John van Reenen. 2013. "Identifying Technology Spillovers
       and Product Market Rivalry." Econometrica 81(4): 1347-1393.
Borjas, George J. 1994. "The Economics of Immigration." Journal of Economic Literature 32(4):
        1667-1717.
Borjas, George J. 2003. "The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the
       Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4):
       1335-1374.
Briggs, Jr., Vernon M. 2001. Immigration and American Unionism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
        Press.
Brown, J. David, John S. Earle, Mee Jung Kim, and Kyung Min Lee. 2020. "Immigrant
      Entrepreneurs and Innovation in the US High-Tech Sector." In Ina Ganguli, Shulamit
      Kahn, and Megan MacGarvie (Eds.), The Roles of Immigrants and Foreign Students in
      US Science, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship, pp. 149-171. Chicago, IL: University of
      Chicago Press.
Card, David. 1990. "The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market." Industrial
       and Labor Relations Review 43(2): 245-257.
Chiswick, Barry. 1999. "Are Immigrants Favorably Self-selected?" American Economic Review
       89(2): 1999.
Constant, Amelie, and Klaus F. Zimmermann. 2006. "The Making of Entrepreneurs in Germany:
      Are Native Men and Immigrants Alike?" Small Business Economics 26(3): 279-300.
Cutler, David, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006. "The Determinants of Mortality."
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(3): 97-120.
Docquier, Frédéric, and Hillel Rapoport. 2012. "Globalization, Brain Drain, and Development."
      Journal of Economic Literature 50(3): 681-730.
Dustmann, Christian, Uta Schönberg, and Jan Stuhler. 2016. "The Impact of Immigration: Why
      Do Studies Reach Such Different Results?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 30(4): 31-
      56.
Fairlie, Robert W., and Magnus Lofstrom. 2015. "Immigration and Entrepreneurship." In Barry
        R. Chiswick, and Paul W. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of International
        Migration, pp. 877-911. Amsterdam: Elsevier: North-Holland.

                                               21 
 
Friedberg, Rachel M. 2001. "The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market."
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4): 1373-1408.
Gibson, Campbell, and Emily Lennon. 1999. "Historical Census Statistics on the Foreign-Born
       Population of the United States: 1850 to 1990." Working Paper No. 29, U.S. Bureau of the
       Census, Population Division.
Giuliano, Paola, and Marta Ruiz-Arranz. 2009. "Remittances, Financial Development, and
       Growth." Journal of Development Economics 90(1): 144-152.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen. 2010. "Measuring the Returns to R&D."
       In Bronwyn H. Hall, and Nathan Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of
       Innovation, pp. 1033-1082. New York: North-Holland.
Hendricks, Lutz, and Todd Schoellman. 2018. "Human Capital and Development Accounting: New
       Evidence from Wage Gains at Migration." Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(2): 665-
       700.
Hunt, Jennifer. 1992. "The Impact of the 1962 Repatriates from Algeria on the French Labor
       Market." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 45(3): 556-572.
Isaac, Julius. 1947. Economics of Migration. New York: Oxford University Press.
Jaeger, David A., Thomas Dohmen, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Uwe Sunde, and Holger Bonin.
        2010. "Direct Evidence on Risk Attitudes and Migration." Review of Economics and
        Statistics 92(3): 684-689.
Jones, Benjamin, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2020. "The Social Returns to Innovation
       Investments." Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Kamarck, Elaine, and Christine Stenglein. 2019. "How many undocumented immigrants are in the
      United States and who are they?" Brookings Policy 2020. Available at https://
      www.brookings.edu/policy2020/votervital/how-many-undocumented-immigrants-are-
      in-the-united-states-and-who-are-they/.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and William Kerr. 2017. "Immigrant Entrepreneurship." In John Haltiwanger,
       Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar (Eds.), Measuring Entrepreneurial
       Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges, pp. 187-249. Chicago, IL: University of
       Chicago Press.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and William Kerr. 2020. "Immigrant Entrepreneurship in America: Evidence
       from the Survey of Business Owners 2007 & 2012." Research Policy 49(3): 103918.
Light, Ivan, and Elizabeth Roach. 1996. "Self-Employment: Mobility Ladder or Economic
       Lifeboat?" In Roger Waldinger, and Mehdi Bozorgmehr (Eds.), Ethnic Los Angeles, pp.
       193-214. New York: Sage.
Lucas, Robert. 1978. "On the Size Distribution of Business Firms." Bell Journal of Economics
       9(2): 508-523.
McKenzie, David, Steven Stillman, and John Gibson. 2010. "How Important is Selection?
     Experimental vs. Non-Experimental Measures of the Income Gains from Migration."
     Journal of the European Economic Association 8(4): 913-945.
Mokyr, Joel. 1990. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress. New
      York: Oxford University Press.
Passel, Jeffrey S., and D'Vera Cohn. 2018. "U.S. Unauthorized Immigrant Total Dips to Lowest
        Level in a Decade." Pew Research Center. Available at https://www.pewresearch.org/

                                              22 
 
       hispanic/2018/ 11/27/u-s-unauthorized-immigrant-total-dips-to-lowest-level-in-a-
       decade/.
Reder, Melvin W. 1963. "The Economic Consequences of Increased immigration." Review of
       Economics and Statistics 45(3): 221-230.
Saxenian, AnnaLee. 2002. "Silicon Valley's New Immigrant High-Growth Entrepreneurs."
       Economic Development Quarterly 16(1): 20-31.
Sequeira, Sandra, Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian. 2020. "Immigrants and the Making of America."
       The Review of Economic Studies 87(1): 382-419.
Solow, Robert M. 1956. "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth." Quarterly Journal
       of Economics 70(1): 65-94.
Storesletten, Kjetil. 2000. "Sustaining Fiscal Policy Through Immigration." Journal of Political
        Economy 108(2): 300-323.
Tabellini, Marco. 2020. "Gifts of the Immigrants, Woes of the Natives: Lessons from the Age of
       Mass Migration." The Review of Economic Studies 87(1): 454-486.
Turner, Frederick Jackson. 1921. The Frontier in American History. New York: Henry Holt &
       Co.




                                              23 
 
                                                   Figure 1
                               Immigrant and Native-Born Entrepreneurship:
                              Firm Size Distributions using Administrative Data

                            Panel A                                                   Panel B




                                                         Panel C




Notes: Each panel consider the firm size distribution, distinguishing between immigrant-founded and native-founded
firms, for all U.S. firms founded in the 2005-2010 period. The x-axis is the log of firm size measured as total employment
in the firm five years after founding. The y-axis is the log count of firms of a given size, with the count normalized by the
number of workers from the relevant population (immigrant or native born). The plotted measures correspond to
equation (12). Panel A counts a firm as immigrant-founded if any of the founding team members are immigrants
(Definition 1 in the text). Panel B counts a firm as immigrant-founded only if the highest paid member of the founding
team is an immigrant (Definition 2). Panel C assigns firms to immigrant and non-immigrant proportionally based on the
mix of immigrant and native-born individuals in the founding teams (Definition 3).




                                                             24
                                                 Figure 2
                             Immigrant and Native-Born Entrepreneurship:
                         Firm Size Distributions using Survey of Business Owners


                           Panel A                                                  Panel B




                                                        Panel C




Notes: Each panel consider the firm size distribution, distinguishing between immigrant-founded and native-founded
firms, using a representative sample of U.S. firms from the 2012 Survey of Business Owners. The x-axis is the log of
firm size measured as current total employment in the firm. The y-axis is the log count of firms of a given size, with the
count normalized by the population size of the relevant group (immigrant or native born). The population measure is
an average of the immigrant or native-born population size in the year of founding, weighted by the number of firms
founded in that year. The plotted measures correspond to equation (12). Panel A counts a firm as immigrant-founded
if any of the owner-founders are immigrants (Definition 1 in the text). Panel B counts a firm as immigrant-founded only
if the owner-founder with the highest current ownership share is an immigrant (Definition 2). Panel C assigns firms to
immigrant and non-immigrant founded proportionally based on the mix of immigrant and native-born individuals among
the owner-founders (Definition 3).




                                                           25
                                                    Figure 3
                                 Immigrant and Native-Born Entrepreneurship:
                                  Firm Size Distributions using the Fortune 500


                             Panel A                                                   Panel B




Notes: Each panel consider the firm size distribution, distinguishing between immigrant-founded and native-founded
firms. The x-axis is the log of firm size measured as current total employment in the firm, using the 2017 Fortune 500.
The y-axis is the log count of firms of a given size, with the count normalized by the population size for the relevant
group (immigrant or native-born). The population measure is an average of the immigrant or native-born population in
the decade of founding, weighted by the number of firms founded in that decade. The plotted measures correspond to
equation (12). Panel A counts a firm as immigrant-founded if any of the founders are immigrants (Definition 1 in the
text). Panel B assigns firms to immigrant and non-immigrant proportionally based on the mix of immigrant and native-
born founders of the initial business (Definition 3). Definition 2 is not available for the Fortune 500, as discussed in text.




                                                             26
                                             Figure 4
                    Technology-Based Immigrant and Native-Born Entrepreneurship




Notes: Using W-2 and LBD data combined with patenting records from the USPTO, this figure shows the share of
firms in each firm size bin that own at least one patent, distinguishing between native-founded versus immigrant-founded
startups, for all firms in the US between 2005 and 2010. Immigrant-founded startups are identified using Definition 1,
which equals 1 if at least one of the founders are foreign-born. Firms are grouped into six bins according to the number
of employees five years after founding.




                                                          27
                               Supplementary Online Material


                                          Appendix A: Data

U.S. Census Data
In this appendix, we describe the various data sets used in this study. Many of the data sets are Census-based products
which are available to researchers through Census-approved projects and accessible through Federal Statistical
Research Data Centers (FSRDC). Form W-2 data are currently accessible only by Census employees who have
been granted access through approved internal projects.

The Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The LBD is a panel dataset of all establishments in the U.S. with
at least one paid employee. This dataset begins in 1976 and currently runs through 2015. The coverage includes all
industries in the private non-farm sector and every state in the U.S.. The LBD is sourced from administrative income
and payroll filings and enhanced with other Census data sets, including the Economic Census and the Company
Organization Survey. The LBD contains information on the firm size, firm age, location, payroll, legal form of entity,
and other characteristics of the establishment.

Form W-2. Our annual individual earnings information are sourced from Form W-2, which is a tax form used
to report income paid to employees for their services rendered. Employers are linked to the LBD based on their
employer identification numbers (EIN). The W-2 database in the Census begins in 2005 and covers through 2016.
Key variables in Form W-2 include income, social security taxes, and Medicare taxes.

The Survey of Business Owners (SBO). Information on the immigrant vs native-born nature of entrepreneurs
is obtained from the 2012 Survey of Business Owners (SBO). The SBO collects information about characteristics of
the businesses and their owners from a representative sample of firms in the U.S. The random sample of businesses
was selected from a list of all firms operating during 2012 with receipts of 1, 000 dollars or more. The SBO universe
was stratified by state, industry, owner characteristics, and whether the company had paid employees in 2012. Large
companies were selected with certainty. The remaining universe was subjected to stratified systematic random
sampling. Each firm selected into the sample was asked the percentage of ownership, gender, ethnicity, race, and
veteran status for up to four persons owning the largest percentages in the business. The final sample includes over
200,000 employer businesses in the SBO. Each firm in the SBO sample is assigned a weight equal to the reciprocal
of the firm's probability of selection. Certainty cases are given a weight of one. Sample weights are used in the
calculation of the results reported in the paper as frequency weights to return the population totals.

Census Numerical Identification System File (NUMIDENT). In order to define immigrant entrepreneurs,
we use foreign-born status of individuals in the NUMIDENT. This Census database is originally sourced from the
Social Security Administration (SSA) applications for Social Security Numbers (Form SS-5). Other person-level
characteristics are contained in the NUMIDENT including gender, ethnicity, and date of birth.

The Patent Longitudinal Business Database Crosswalk (LPBD). The LPBD links patents data from the
U.S. Patents and Trademark Office (USPTO) to firms in the LBD. This database begins in 2000 and extends to
2015. Though both application and grant years of the patent are observed, only granted patents are included in this
sample. Other key variables include assignee location and type.



Fortune 500 Data
We collected founder and founding information for the firms listed in the 2017 edition of the Fortune 500 ranking.
For each firm, we capture, whenever possible, the year of incorporation, the name of the founder, and his/her country
of birth. This data collection builds on earlier efforts by the New American Economy Research Fund (2011, 2018)




                                                           i
and the Center for American Entrepreneurship (2017).i We extend their analysis by including all founders for these
firms, whether U.S.-born or immigrants.

This process is straightforward for many firms, particularly those that were founded in the recent past.ii For others,
it is more challenging, since they are the offspring of many merged entities. Our approach is to walk back the
genealogical tree of each firm to the earliest parent possible, and then to identify the founders of these parents. A
firm will therefore have potentially many founders because it has multiple parents.

There are also particular cases where we do not include the firm. For some firms (particularly railroads and power
utilities), there are very many mergers and it is not possible to trace the founders effectively. Further, web searches
and the Who's Who occasionally do not enable us to ascertain the place of birth of any of the firm's original founders.
If we cannot determine immigration status for any founder, the firm is dropped from the analysis. Separately, some
firms listed in the Fortune 500 were not created through acts of entrepreneurship, but rather by government fiat
(Fannie Mae is such an example; Delek U.S. holdings, the state-owned Israel oil company is another one). We exclude
these firms from the analysis since they cannot be said to have founders in the traditional sense.iii Overall, the sample
includes 449 firms and 730 founders for whom we can determine country of birth.

Post-1970 sample. As an additional check on the Fortune 500 analysis, we also consider firms founded since
1970. This includes 117 firms (and 223 founders with country of birth information) in the Fortune 500 ranking. We
additionally focus on this time period for two reasons. First, the ability to identify founders --and to ascertain their
country of birth --is greater when focusing on firms founded in the more recent past. Second, the recent subset may
be most relevant to understanding links between entrepreneurship and immigration in a contemporary setting.



Population Data
The firm size distributions and rate of entrepreneurship measures are normalized by the population size of the
relevant group (U.S.-born and immigrant individuals). To ascertain these population sizes we use two different
methods, depending on the data source. We also consider robustness tests.

For the administrative data, we use the underlying, complete population of W-2 workers. All individuals with W-2's
in the U.S. economy are matched to Census NUMIDENT to code U.S. born and foreign-born workers. This analysis
covers these populations of workers from 2005-2010 to match with the founding years we study.

For the SBO data and the Fortune 500 data, the founding years of the firms extend back over many decades. For
historical population estimates, we rely on numbers contained in U.S. censuses and collated by the Migration Policy
Institute.iv This data provides estimates of the immigrant population for each decade from 1850-2010 (and annual
estimates thereafter). These data explicitly include estimates of the unauthorized immigrant population.

Population weights. Since the immigrant population share changes over time, and the SBO and Fortune 500 data
include a wide range of founding years, we calculate a weighted population over the relevant distribution of founding
years. Specifically, for the firm size distributions, in each size bin × immigration status cell, we normalize the count
of firms by the group's population. This population is the weighted averaged across the distribution of founding years
of the firms in that size bin.

Unauthorized immigrant population. The census population data in each time period includes all individuals
present in the U.S., regardless of citizenship or legal immigration status. In practice, demographers have long
recognized that undocumented immigrants are less likely to participate in census surveys, a source of "coverage error"
that is then corrected for in these population counts (Van Hook and Bachmeier 2013; Pew Research Center 2018). Of
     i
       See https://startupsusa.org/fortune500/ and https://research.newamericaneconomy.org/report/new-american-
fortune-500-in-2018-the-entrepreneurial-legacy-of-immigrants-and-their-children/.
    ii
       Think for example of Hewlett-Packard: incorporated in 1939, with two founders, both native born. Or Google: incorporated
in 1998, with two founders, one native-born, the other an immigrant.
   iii
       A related example is that of Targa Resources. Warburg Pincus engineered a merger to create this firm in 2003, but it
would be wrong to list as its founder Eric Warburg, who created the investment bank back in 1900.
   iv
       Available at https://www.migrationpolicy.org/programs/data-hub/charts/immigrant-population-over-time. Immi-
gration figures for decades prior to 1970 stem from the work of Gibson and Campbell (1999).



                                                              ii
note, disagreements regarding estimates of the undocumented immigrant population occur within a relatively narrow
range.v

While there is no obvious bias in these population estimates, one may nonetheless consider how sensitive the results
in the paper could be to any under-count of the immigrant population. Specifically, how large would an under-count
need to be for the right-shift observed between the firm size distribution of immigrants and non-immigrants to vanish?

To analyze this question, we proceed as follows. We define a fixed percentage  by which the immigration population
is under-counted in each time period. We then compute the critical value 0 that would make the total employment
in the immigrant-founded firms as a proportion of the immigrant population equal to the total employment in the
native-founded firms as a proportion of the native population. This percentage scaling of the immigrant population,
0 , is reported in Section 5.2.




                               Appendix B: Additional Results

Fortune 500 firms, Post 1970
As an additional view of the Fortune 500 data, Appendix Figure B1 repeats Figure 3 but now focusing on the (2017)
Fortune 500 firms that are founded from 1970 onward. This subset includes 123 firms. As can be seen, the results
are similar.


Wages
The empirical results investigate employment and the firm size distribution for native-founded and immigrant-founded
firms. The empirical analysis in turn follows our conceptual framework, where individuals have heterogeneous
entrepreneurial acumen and, for simplicity, homogeneous labor.

Of additional interest may be the wages for the jobs that these founders create and how these wages compare between
immigrant and native-founded firms. The administrative data, with which we have integrated the W-2 records for
every individual working in these firms, provides an additional opportunity to examine wages in a systematic fashion.
We run OLS regressions of the form
                                  log(wi ) = ImmigrantF oundedf + Xi + Zf +             i

where wi is the individual worker i's annual W-2 earnings from employer f , Xi is a vector of the individual worker
characteristics, and Zf is a vector of the firm's characteristics. Individual worker characteristics include fixed effects
for age and indicators for gender and for being foreign-born. Firm characteristics include fixed effects for founding
year, fixed effects for county, and fixed effects for sector using NAICS 4-digit industry codes. Results are presented
in Table B1 and are discussed in Section 5.3.


Patenting
Figure 4 presents the patenting rate by firm size, comparing immigrant-founded and native-founded firms, in the
administrative data. This analysis uses Definition 1 for defining immigrant firms. That is, we consider firms as
immigrant-founded if at least 1 of the founders is an immigrant. Appendix Figure B2 repeats the analysis but uses
Definition 2 instead. In this definition, the firm is an immigrant-founded firm only if the highest-wage individual in
the founding team is an immigrant. (By construction, now the native-founded firms include some founding teams
that include immigrants.) Under this definition, immigrant-founded teams still have a higher rate of patenting in
each size bucket, although the difference is not as large.
   v
    Despite using slightly different data and assumptions, estimates from the Pew Research Fund, the Department of Homeland
Security, and the Center for Migration Studies have never differed by more than 1 million people, less than 10% of the total
unauthorized population.



                                                            iii
                                            Appendix C: Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1
This proof proceeds in two steps. First, we consider how a shift in f (a) influences the equilibrium a . Second, we
consider how other equilibrium outcomes shift. To clarify the comparative statics, we will write f (a|), where  is a
parameter that affects the distribution of entrepreneurial talent. In particular,  can be the fraction of immigrants
in the economy. Equilibrium outcomes will in general be functions of .



Comparative Statics on a
To begin, we look at a . There are two key equations to develop the relevant comparative statics. The first equation
comes from the free entry condition to entrepreneurship, defining a threshold value of entrepreneurial talent at which
people start firms as opposed to being workers. This relationship is (4)

                                                  w = a (1 -  )1-  

indicating that there is a monotonically increasing relationship w (a ).

The second equation comes from the resource constraint, which tells us that the number of entrepreneurs (E ) and
the number of workers (L) must add up to the total number of people, N . Given the distribution f (a|), we can
then write the mapping between the threshold value for founding a firm, a , and the number of entrepreneurs as in
(5)
                                                      
                                             E
                                                 =       f (ai |) dai
                                             N       a
where we are using the fact that anyone with ai  a will start a firm (because income as a founder then exceeds
income as a worker).

                                                                          1
                                                              ai         1-
Similarly, the number of workers at a given firm is li =      w
                                                                              ,where ai is the acumen of the founder. Integrating
                                                                                                                E       L
across all firms we have the total labor force L . We can then write that the resource constraint,              N
                                                                                                                    +   N
                                                                                                                            = 1, as
                                                          1
                                                                     1
                                                         1-
                                             1+                 ai1- f (ai |) dai = 1                                           (13)
                                        a            w


This gives us our second function for w (a ). Using the entrepreneurial entry condition, (4), we can then rewrite this
resource constraint to eliminate the wage and put everything in terms of a . Namely,


                                                                  1
                                                           ai    1-
                                             1+                           f (ai |) dai = 1                                      (14)
                                       a          1-       a

To interpret this expression, note that we are counting up the number of people at each firm, which must sum to all
the people in the economy. We have divided by N so we are counting people in terms of fractions of the population.
The term in square brackets is the number of people associated with a given firm. The 1 in square brackets is the
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                          ai 1-
entrepreneur ­ every firm has 1 entrepreneur. The second term in square brackets, 1-   a
                                                                                                 , is the number of
workers at that firm, which is increasing in the acumen of the entrepreneur. The f (ai ) then gives the mass of the
founder population associated with that firm.

The core result is then seen directly. By inspection, the term in square brackets is strictly positive. Therefore, if you
increase the mass of f (ai ) for all points ai > a , then the value of the integral would rise. The only way for the
integral value to remain constant is therefore for a to rise. And if a rises, then the wage has to rise, per (4).




                                                                iv
More formally, one can takes the comparative statics for a () using Leibniz's Rule. Differentiating (14) with respect
to , we find that
                                                                                                 1
                                                             
                                    1-                                                ai        1-   df (ai |)
                       a () =                 L
                                                                    1+                                         dai
                              f (a ()) + a1
                                          ( ) N             a ( )      1-            a ()               d


By inspection, the sign of a () depends on the sign of the integral. One can then generate necessary and sufficient
conditions for the comparative statics by evaluating the integral for known probability distributions and shifts in these
distribution. However, since the term in square brackets is strictly positive, we can also develop simple sufficient
conditions that generalize across f (a). In particular, consider the comparative static on the share of immigrants
in the economy, defined as  = n1 = N1 /N . The population distribution of entrepreneurial acumen is f (ai ) =
(1 - n1 ) f0 (ai ) + n1 f1 (ai ) and thus
                                              df (ai |n1 )
                                                           = f1 (ai ) - f0 (ai )
                                                 dn1

It then follows that

                                    a (n1 )      >     0 if f1 (ai ) > f0 (ai ) for all ai  a
                                    a (n1 )      =     0 if f1 (ai ) = f0 (ai ) for all ai  a
                                     
                                    a (n1 )      <     0 if f1 (ai ) < f0 (ai ) for all ai  a

which correspond to the three cases in the text and the first part of Proposition 1, as was to be shown.

The comparative statics on other equilibrium quantities are then as follows.



Comparative Statics on w
From (4), the equilibrium wage w is monotonically increasing in a . Hence, the effect of increased immigration on
equilibrium wages has the same sign as the comparative statics for a , as was to be shown.



Comparative Statics on Y  /N
From the income side, we can write GDP per capita, y = Y /N , as
                                                     a                       
                                            y=           wf (ai )dai +           i f (ai )dai
                                                  am                         a



Using Leibniz's rule, we have
                                            a                       a
                           y        w                                    f (ai )               a
                                =               f (ai )dai + w                   dai + wf (a )
                                        am                          am                         
                                                                     
                                            i                                f (ai )                    a
                                    +         f (ai )dai +               i           dai -  (a ) f (a )
                                        a                           a                                   


Noting that w =  (a ), the third and sixth terms cancel. Further, the first and the fourth terms will also cancel. In
particular, the first term solves as
                                                  
                                            w a                  w L
                                                    f (ai )dai =
                                             am                   N
                                                                    
                                                                    i         w
For the fourth term, from the envelope theorem we have              
                                                                         = -li 
                                                                                . This integral thus solves as
                                                     
                                                         i                w L
                                                           f (ai )dai = -
                                                  a                        N



                                                                    v
which cancels with the first integral.

The comparative statics on income per capita thus simplify to
                                                          a                             
                                         y                    f (ai )                           f (ai )
                                           =w                         dai +                 i           dai
                                                      am                               a         

                                                                                                         f (ai )
Now, consider the case of a right shift in the distribution f (ai ), where                                
                                                                                                                   > 0 for all ai  a .   Noting that
i (a ) = w and i > w for all ai > a , it follows that,
                                                                                   
                                                          f (ai )                          f (ai )
                                                      i           dai >                w           dai
                                               a                                   a        
and therefore                            
                                  a                                        
                        y            f (ai )              f (ai )             f (ai )
                           >w                dai + w              dai = w             dai = 0
                                 am                  a                    am    
Thus income per-capita is increasing with a right shift in the distribution of entrepreneurial acumen, as was to be
shown. Similar reasoning gives the other two cases.



Comparative Statics on  /N
The equilibrium profit rate is such that /Y = 1 -  . Thus comparative statics for profits per capita follow the
direction as the comparative statics for income per capita, which are shown above.



Proof of Proposition 2
Consider first the equilibrium a .

For a Pareto distribution, the share of founders is
                                                               
                                                  E                                         am    
                                                    =             f (ai ) dai =                      ,
                                                  N           a                             a
the share of workers is
                                                                                        1
                                     
                           L                                   am                      1-     (1 -  )          1
                             =           li f (ai ) di =                                                 (a ) 1- ,
                           N         a                         a               w             (1 -  ) - 1
and using the resource constraint, E + L = N , we then have
                                                                        1
                                             am                        1-        (1 -  )          1
                                  1=                  1+                                    (a ) 1-
                                             a                    w             (1 -  ) - 1


Using the entrepreneurial entry condition, (4), to replace w in this expression, we have (after some algebra)
                                                                                             1/
                                                                         -1
                                                     a = am
                                                                       (1 -  ) - 1
which is the first result in the proposition, as was to be shown.

The equilibrium wage, w , then follows using a in (4), giving
                                                                                   1/
                                                             -1
                                            w  = am                                       (1 -  )1-
                                                           (1 -  ) - 1


The equilibrium entry rate into entrepreneurship, E  /N , follows using a in (5), giving
                                                           E                   
                                                             =         1-
                                                           N                   -1


                                                                          vi
The equilibrium share of workers is therefore
                                                            L   
                                                              =
                                                            N   -1

Equilibrium GDP then follows, after some algebra, noting that
                                                                                1/
                                                             -1                                      
                            Y  = (w L ) / = am                                           (1 -  )1-      ,
                                                           (1 -  ) - 1                               -1
completing the proof.



Proof of Corollary 1
Now consider the equilibrium rate of entrepreneurship within a given group. We have
                                                                   
                                                      Ej
                                                         =                fj (a) da.
                                                      Nj           a

For the Pareto distributions, (3), this integrates as
                                               
                                              Ej               a  j               aj      
                                                 =                  da =                     .
                                              Nj          a    a +1               a
Given the equilibrium value of a this becomes
                                                                       
                                                  Ej          aj                
                                                     =                     1-
                                                  Nj          am                -1
as was to be shown.



Proof of Corollary 2
The firm size distribution within a given group follows from fj (a) and the relationship between the founder acumen
and the resulting firm size. The monotonic mapping between employment size and acumen is, where ai  a ,


                                                               1
                                                                                              1
                                                    ai        1-                   ai        1-
                                           li =                    =                                             (15)
                                                    w                     1-       a
                                                   
and the minimum firm size is therefore li =       1-
                                                     ,   as was to be shown.

                                                                                                               
Let the firm size distribution for group j be gj (li ) and note that the total count of firms from group j is Ej . The
fraction of firms of a given size, per member of the group's overall population size is then
                                                                  
                                                      nj (li )   Ej      
                                                               =    gj (li )
                                                       Nj        Nj
                                 
The firm size distribution, gj (li ), using the change-in-variables rule, is
                                                               
                                                         dai (li )          
                                          gj (li )=          
                                                                   fj (ai (li ) |ai  a )
                                                           dli
               
where fj (ai (li ) |ai  a ) = fj (ai (li
                                               
                                         )) / Ej /Nj . We can then write
                                                     
                                    nj (li )   dai (li )                          
                                             =     
                                                         fj (ai (li )) where li     .
                                     Nj          dli                             1-


Inverting the monotonic relationship (15), we have
                                                                             1-
                                                               1-                         1-
                                            ai (li ) = a                            
                                                                                  (li )          .
                                                                


                                                                   vii
The slope of acumen with firm size is then
                                                                         
                                                dai (li )           ai (li )
                                                    
                                                          = (1 -  )    
                                                                             .
                                                  dli                 li
And we can thus write
                                                                                    - (1- )
                      nj (li )     aj                                      1-                         - (1- )-1
                               =            1-              (1 -  )                           (li )
                       Nj          am            -1                         
Taking logs produces the result in the corollary, as was to be shown.



Proof of Corollary 3
Define the total number of jobs created by a given group j as Mj . This count is the total number of founders from
              
that group, Ej , plus the total number of wage workers in the firms these founders create, which we define as Lj  .
We are interested in whether Mj exceeds the population size of the group, Nj . We have
                                                                                    
                                    
                        Mj    =    Ej + Lj  = N j          fj (ai ) dai + Nj            
                                                                                       li (ai ) fj (ai ) dai .
                                                       a                           a
                                         
                                                  
                              =    Nj       [1 + li (ai )] fj (ai ) dai
                                        a



Performing the integral for the Pareto distribution equilibrium we find

                                                     aj
                                                           
                                                                                 aj
                                        Mj = Nj               = Nj
                                                     am                   a         
                                                                           0 n 0 + a1 n 1



Thus the number of jobs created by the group exceeds the group's size iff the Pareto threshold parameter for that
group is larger than the for the other group. In particular, for immigrants,

                                                  M1 > N1        if a1 > a0
                                                  M1 = N1        if a1 = a0
                                                  M1 < N1        if a1 < a0

as was to be shown.




                                                              viii
                                  Figure B1
               Immigrant and Native-Born Entrepreneurship:
    Firm Size Distributions using the Fortune 500 firms founded post-1970




Notes: Each panel consider the firm size distribution, distinguishing between immigrant-founded and native-
founded firms. The x-axis is the log of firm size measured as current total employment in the firm, using
the 2017 Fortune 500. The y-axis is the log count of firms of a given size, with the count normalized by the
population size for the relevant group (immigrant or native born). The population measure is an average of
the immigrant or native-born population in the decade of founding, weighted by the number of firms founded
in that decade. The plotted measures correspond to equation (12). Panel A counts a firm as immigrant-
founded if any of the founders are immigrants (Definition 1 in the text). Panel B assigns firms to immigrant
and non-immigrant proportionally based on the mix of immigrant and native-born founders of the initial
business (Definition 3). Definition 2 is not available for the Fortune 500, as discussed in text.




                                                    ix 
 
                                Figure B2
        Technology-Based Immigrant and Native-Born Entrepreneurship
                            using Definition 2




Notes: Using W-2 and LBD data combined with patenting records from the USPTO, this figure shows the
share of firms in each firm size bin that own at least one patent, distinguishing between native-founded
versus immigrant-founded startups, for all firms in the US between 2005 and 2010. Immigrant-founded
startups are identified using Definition 2, which equals 1 if the highest paid founder is foreign-born. Firms
are grouped into five bins along the x-axis based on the number of employees five years after founding. The
difference in firm size binning relative to Figure 4 is due to Census disclosure rules requiring the minimum
number of firms represented in each cell.




                                                     x 
 
             Table B1: Wages at Immigrant versus Native-Founded Firms

                                                                     DV = Ln(Annual Wages)
                                          (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)
    Immigrant-founded firm             0.041***       0.045***           -0.000      -0.040***      0.008***       0.007***
                                       (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
    Ln(Firm size)                                                                                                  -0.029***
                                                                                                                   (0.000)
                                                                                             ***            ***
    Male                                                                             0.337          0.245          0.246***
                                                                                     (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
                                                                                             ***            ***
    Foreign born                                                                     0.082          0.124          0.121***
                                                                                     (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
    Observations (Individuals)       14,640,000     14,640,000         14,640,000   14,640,000     14,640,000     14,640,000

    R2                                   0.000         0.001             0.010        0.131          0.230          0.231
    Individual Age Fixed Effects                                                       YES           YES            YES
    Founding Year Fixed Effects                         YES              YES          YES            YES             YES
    County Fixed Effects                                                 YES           YES           YES            YES
    NAICS-4 Fixed Effects                                                                            YES            YES
Notes: This table shows a series of OLS regressions using log annual wages as the dependent variable. Sample consists
of individuals employed by startups at five years after founding, distinguishing immigrant versus native-founded firms
based on Definition 1. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the firm level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                               xi 
 
Appendix References

Gibson, Campbell, and Emily Lennon. 1999. "Historical Census Statistics on the Foreign-Born Population
        of the United States: 1850 to 1990." Working Paper No. 29, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Population
        Division.
Passel, Jeffrey S., and D'Vera Cohn. 2018. "U.S. Unauthorized Immigrant Total Dips to Lowest Level in a
         Decade." Pew Research Center. Available at https://www.pewresearch.org/ hispanic/2018/
         11/27/u-s-unauthorized-immigrant-total-dips-to-lowest-level-in-a-decade/.
Van Hook, Jennifer, and James D. Bachmeier. 2013. "How Well Does the American Community Survey
      Count Naturalized Citizens?" Demographic Research 29(1): 1-32.




                                                  xii 
 
