                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              WINNERS AND LOSERS FROM SOVEREIGN DEBT INFLOWS

                                      Fernando Broner
                                       Alberto Martin
                                      Lorenzo Pandolfi
                                      Tomas Williams

                                     Working Paper 27772
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27772


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




We are grateful to Anusha Chari and Anna Pavlova for their constructive discussion at the 43rd
Annual NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics (ISoM). We also received very helpful
comments from Graciela Kaminsky, Tommaso Oliviero, Marco Pagano, Giovanni W. Puopolo,
Stefano Rossi, Tom Schmitz, Annalisa Scognamiglio, Saverio Simonelli, seminar participants at
the Bank of Italy, and participants at the III Interdisciplinary Sovereign Debt Research and
Management Conference (DebtCon3) conference, the XV CSEF-IGIER Symposium on
Economics and Institutions, the 43rd Annual NBER ISoM, the 2020 Annual Meeting of the
American Economic Association, and the XXI Workshop on Quantitative Finance. We thank
Colton Larson and Genna Tatu for excellent research assistance, and Mariano Cosentino for his
help in the preparation of the dataset. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the
Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance (2017 EIEF research grant) and the Columbian
College Facilitating Fund from George Washington University. All errors remain ours. The views
presented here are those of the authors and not of the European Central Bank or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Fernando Broner, Alberto Martin, Lorenzo Pandolfi, and Tomas Williams. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Winners and Losers from Sovereign Debt Inflows
Fernando Broner, Alberto Martin, Lorenzo Pandolfi, and Tomas Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 27772
September 2020
JEL No. F3,F31,F32,F34,G15,G23

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the transmission of sovereign debt inflow shocks on domestic firms. We exploit
episodes of large sovereign debt inflows in six emerging countries that are due to the
announcements of these countries' inclusion in two major local-currency sovereign debt indexes.
We show that these episodes significantly reduce government bond yields and appreciate the
domestic currency, and have heterogeneous stock market effects on domestic firms. Firms
operating in tradable industries experience lower abnormal returns than firms in non-tradable
industries. In addition, financial, government-related, and firms that rely more on external
financing experience relatively higher abnormal returns. The effect on financial and government-
related firms is stronger in countries that display larger reductions in government bond yields.
The effect on tradable firms is stronger in countries where the domestic currency appreciates
more. We provide a stylized model that rationalizes these results. Our findings shed novel light
on the channels through which sovereign debt inflows affect firms in emerging economies.

Fernando Broner                                Lorenzo Pandolfi
CREI - Universitat Pompeu Fabra                Center for Studies in Economics
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27                      and Finance (CSEF)
08005 Barcelona - Spain                        Naples, Italy
and Barcelona GSE                              lorepandolfi@gmail.com
fbroner@crei.cat
                                               Tomas Williams
Alberto Martin                                 George Washington University
European Central Bank                          Department of Economics
Sonnenmannstrasse 20                           2115 G Street, NW
60314 Frankfurt                                Room 340
Germany                                        Washington, DC 20052
and CREI-Universitat Pompeu Fabra              tomaswilliams@gwu.edu
amartin@crei.cat
1     Introduction

Financial globalization in emerging economies has increased remarkably over the last two decades.

Loosening of capital controls and investors' search for yield in times of low interest rates contributed

to an upsurge in the presence of foreign investors in emerging asset markets. Local currency

sovereign debt markets, in particular, experienced an unprecedented rise in international investors'

participation. Since the Global Financial Crisis, the share of emerging countries' local currency

sovereign debt held by foreign investors more than doubled, going from about 10% in 2009 to

approximately 25% in 2018 (BIS, 2019).

    The increased participation of foreigners in domestic debt markets is believed to have significant

effects on the recipient economies. Yet, the exact nature of these effects is still debated. For instance,

small-open economy models with full financial integration leave little or no role for shocks to the

foreign demand for domestic assets.1 But recent studies argue that shocks to global investors'

demand indeed play a role in determining sovereign bond yields and exchange rates.2 Most of these

studies depart from the standard assumption of perfect financial markets by introducing frictions

such as market segmentation and limited arbitrage. Under this view, as long as domestic financial

markets are not perfectly integrated in international markets, an increase in foreign demand for

domestic sovereign debt leads to net capital inflows. These inflows, in turn, affect domestic firms

through their effects on interest and exchange rates.3 These effects are likely to be heterogeneous

depending, for instance, on whether a firm operates in a tradable sector or is financially dependent.

    Assessing the channels through which sovereign debt inflows are transmitted to domestic firms

is challenging from an empirical point of view. The main reason is that sovereign debt flows

are clearly endogenous to macroeconomic conditions that affect, and are affected by, domestic
1
  For example, in models of exchange rates determination based on uncovered interest parity, such as Obstfeld and
  Rogoff (1995), portfolio flows do not affect the equilibrium exchange rates, as noted in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015).
2
  Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) show theoretically that capital inflows can appreciate the currency of recipient countries
  as long as international financial intermediaries have limited risk-absorbing capacity. Du and Schreger (2016) argue
  that local currency sovereign debt markets are typically not internationally integrated, so that clientele demand
  shocks are important determinants of local currency sovereign bond prices.
3
  Consistent with this, Pandolfi and Williams (2019) provide empirical evidence that sovereign debt inflows increase
  both the value of the domestic currency and the price of local-currency denominated sovereign bonds. Relatedly,
  Hofmann et al. (2019) find that currency appreciations in emerging economics are often contemporaneous to reduction
  in government bond yields.


                                                          2
economic conditions. Typically, sovereign debt flows, sovereign bond yields, exchange rates, and

firms' fundamentals are jointly determined. For instance, they can all be affected by positive

technological or political shocks which reduce sovereign risk, improve fundamentals and, at the

same time, attract foreign investors. As a result, any correlation between sovereign debt inflows

and the profitability of domestic firms cannot be interpreted as evidence of a causal relationship.

   The aim of this paper is to assess the impact of sovereign debt inflows on domestic firms,

shedding light on the main transmission channels. To do so, we exploit episodes of large sovereign

debt inflow shocks in six emerging countries (Colombia, Czech Republic, Mexico, Nigeria, Romania,

and South Africa). Specifically, we take advantage of sudden and unanticipated announcements of

country inclusions in two major sovereign debt indexes: the Citigroup World Government Bond

Index (WGBI) and the J.P. Morgan Government Bond Index Emerging Markets (GBI-EM). These

two indexes represent two of the most widely tracked benchmarks for international investors in local

currency sovereign debt markets. Because of this, country inclusion announcements induce large

rebalancings in the portfolios of international investors who, in order to replicate the composition

of the index they follow, suddenly increase their demand for the newly included country's local

currency government bonds and domestic currency.

   These announcements provide an ideal setting to address our research question. First, they

trigger large inflows which are specific to the sovereign debt markets of newly included countries:

as the two indexes are exclusively composed of sovereign bonds, their rebalancings only entail

inflows to sovereign bond markets and not to equity nor corporate debt markets. Second, the

dates in which index providers announce the inclusions are not anticipated by investors, nor do

they coincide with important news about the economy of included countries or with major policy

changes. Thus, these features allow us to adopt an event study methodology ­ which exploits the

unexpected timing of the announcements ­ to assess the impact of sovereign debt inflows on the

cost of government debt, the domestic currency, and the stock market returns of domestic firms.

   Our results are as follows. In the two days following the announcement episodes, 5-year local

currency sovereign bond yields in all countries drop significantly. The 2-day reduction in yields

is sizable, as it corresponds on average to 32.5 basis points. Exchange rates also move in the 2

                                                 3
days following the announcement: the domestic currency appreciates in all countries, the average

appreciation being 1.1 percentage points.

    Domestic firms' stock prices also respond significantly and heterogeneously to the announce-

ments. Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of these results. The price of financial and

government-related firms tend to increase sharply in the first trading day following the announce-

ment episodes. Instead, the market value of firms operating in tradable sectors remains relatively

stable when inclusions are announced. Importantly, while prices of all these firms are on the same

trend in the 7 trading days prior to the episodes, they clearly diverge in the dates of the announce-

ments. Further, this divergence persists even 20 trading days after the announcements.

    To assess the economic magnitude of these heterogeneous effects, we analyze how abnormal

returns of firms evolve after each announcement episode in a series of regressions in which we can

control for potential overlap between different firm categories and for firms' dependance on exter-

nal financing. These regressions show that financial and government-related firms experience larger

than average cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) in the two days following the announcements.

Instead, tradable firms experience relatively lower CARs in the aftermath of the events. Addi-

tionally, we find that CARs tend to be larger for firms operating in more financially constrained

industries.

    We conjecture that these effects of sovereign debt inflows are mostly driven by changes in

sovereign bond yields and exchange rates. Indeed, we find that countries which experience larger

reductions in the 5-year local currency sovereign bond yield are the ones in which the effect on

financial and government-related firms is more pronounced. Similarly, countries whose currency

appreciates more are the ones where tradable firms are more affected by the announcement. Quan-

titatively, sovereign debt inflows that lead to a 100 basis points reduction in the 5-year government

bond yield, increase the CARs of financial and government related firms by 1.7 percentage points.

In turn, inflows that lead to a 1% appreciation of the exchange rate are associated with 0.41 per-

centage points lower CARs for tradable firms. We also find that the cross-country heterogeneity

in the 2-day changes in sovereign bond yields and exchange rates following each announcement is

related to the magnitude of the inclusion-driven sovereign debt inflows in each country. We provide

                                                 4
additional results that support our empirical analysis and various robustness checks.4

    We present a stylized model of a small-open economy to formalize our empirical findings. The

economy contains tradable firms, non-tradable firms and banks. The tradable sector is capital

intensive. Banks hold government debt and intermediate between domestic savers and borrow-

ers. Crucially, there are no domestic financial frictions but there is limited borrowing from the

international financial market.

    We model sovereign inflows as an increase in foreign purchases of government bonds. These

inflows are shown to affect the economy through two channels. First, since the economy is con-

strained, they entail net capital inflows and thus reduce the domestic interest rate. This raises the

price of government debt, which benefits banks directly, and expands domestic credit and thus the

relative production of the tradable good. Among all firms, moreover, lower interest rates benefit

especially those that are financially constrained, and ­ by reducing the cost of financing for the

government ­ also those that are related to the public sector. Second, sovereign inflows raise the

relative supply of tradables in the domestic economy, thereby appreciating the real exchange rate

and benefitting the non-tradable sector. The model thus illustrates the basic forces at work behind

our empirical estimates.

    Our results are related to three broad strands of the literature. First, they contribute to the

growing literature that focuses on the effects of financial flows on government bond yields and

exchange rates in imperfectly integrated financial markets. Among those, for instance, Gabaix

and Maggiori (2015) develops a model of exchange rate determination in which global investors'

portfolio flows can lead to currency appreciations in recipient countries because of the limited

capacity of financiers to absorb currency demand shocks. Evidence of the imperfect integration

across local currency sovereign debt markets is provided in Du and Schreger (2016), which argues

that an increased presence of foreign investors in local currency sovereign debt markets can have

important implications for the pricing of local-currency denominated bonds.5 Relatedly, Pandolfi
4
  For instance, we show that the difference in the post-announcement CARs of financial and government-related
  firms vs. tradable firms is not driven by different pre-existing trends. Further, consistent with the fact that the
  announcements entail shocks which are specific to countries' sovereign debt markets, we show that sovereign debt
  inflows in these countries increase sharply in the announcement year, while private inflows do not.
5
  Other studies which focus on the interactions between international investors' participation and the pricing of local


                                                          5
and Williams (2019) presents evidence that sovereign debt inflows due to international investors'

portfolio rebalancings can increase the price of local currency sovereign bonds and appreciate the

domestic exchange rate. More broadly, our results are also related to the vast literature that

focuses on the effects of demand shocks on sovereign bond yields in both emerging and developed

economies.6 Very related to ours is the study by Kolasa and Wesolowski (2020), which develops a

two-country open economy model with segmented markets, and shows that quantitative easing in

developed countries can induce sovereign debt inflows in emerging countries which boost domestic

demand but dampen international competitiveness. Our results are indeed consistent with these

theoretical predictions.

    Our results speak also to a second important strand of literature that analyzes how changes

in government bond yields and exchange rates affect firms. Many of these studies focus on the

stock market effects of increased sovereign default risk on domestic firms, and the consequent

rise in sovereign bond yields on domestic firms.7 Our findings are in line with the evidence in

these studies even though we exploit events which reduce government financing costs, rather than

increase them. They are consistent also with the theoretical predictions in Gennaioli et al. (2014)

­ according to which changes in sovereign default risk and sovereign bond yields can transmit to

firms through the balance sheet of banks holding government bonds8 ­ and Arellano et al. (2017)

­ according to which firms with larger external financing needs are more sensitive to changes in

sovereign default risk. Additionally, our findings are related to numerous studies analyzing how

exchange rate movements affect the terms of trade of a country and, therefore, domestic firms.9
  currency sovereign bonds are those by Borri and Shakhnov (2018), Hofmann et al. (2019), and Morelli et al. (2019).
  Relatedly, Warnock and Warnock (2009) and Kohn (2015) analyze the effects of foreign purchases of U.S. government
  debt on U.S. sovereign bond yields.
6
  Among others, Vayanos and Vila (2009), and Greenwood and Vayanos (2010) discuss the role of demand shocks
  from preferred-habitat investors in the determination of government bond yields. Recent studies focusing on the
  quantitative easing measures taken after the Global Financial Crisis also highlight that demand shocks and market
  segmentation can be important determinants of government bond yields (Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen,
  2011; Krishnamurthy et al., 2017).
7
  For instance, Hébert and Schreger (2017) estimates the cost of sovereign default for listed Argentinian companies
  exploiting legal rulings against Argentina. Similarly, Andrade and Chhaochharia (2018) and Chari et al. (2018)
  analyze the costs of sovereign default (in Europe and Puerto Rico, respectively) and find that firms that are more
  closely related with the domestic government tend to be more sensitive to changes in the risk of default.
8
  Altavilla et al. (2017), and Bottero et al. (2020) also provide evidence which is consistent with this channel.
9
  Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) argue that a depreciation of the domestic currency improves a country's terms of trade,
  which in turn leads to an increase in employment in tradable industries. This view is questioned by other studies
  according to which exchange rate depreciations may not affect firms' competitiveness as export prices are sticky in


                                                         6
      Finally, this paper also relates to a vast international macroeconomics literature that focuses on

the channels through which capital flows affect firms in the economy.10 This literature mostly focus

on FDI, bank flows, and equity portfolio flows. A study which is closely related to ours is Blanchard

et al. (2017), which argues that, while equity inflows can be expansionary for emerging countries,

bond inflows should be in general contractionary. We show that, when taking into account the

effect on government bond yields, sovereign debt inflow shocks can have both expansionary and

contractionary effects, depending on the sectoral composition of the economy and the sensitivity of

domestic firms to changes in sovereign bond yields and the exchange rate. Finally, our results are in

line with the evidence in Benigno et al. (2015) of a systematic reallocation of labor and investment

from tradable to non-tradable sectors, after episodes of large capital inflows.

      The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the empirical setting, decribing

the testable implications that we bring to data, the announcement episodes, and the data used to

conduct the analysis. Section 3 presents the first set of results on sovereign bond yields and exchange

rates. Section 4 presents the main results on the stock market effects of sovereign debt inflow shocks

on domestic firms. Section 5 discusses the potential determinants of the heterogenous cross-country

reaction in response to the announcement episodes, the role of expected and actual inflows, and

the drivers of the stock market effects. Section 6 presents a model that rationalizes our empirical

findings. Finally, Section 7 concludes.



2      Empirical Setting

2.1     Conceptual Background

In the textbook small, open economy model without frictions, shocks to foreigners' demand for

local currency sovereign debt should have no impact on the domestic economy. In a nutshell, the

gross inflows entailed by foreigners' demand for domestic debt would be compensated one-for-one
 a dominant currency (i.e., the U.S. dollar) (Gopinath et al., 2020).
10
  See among others Schnabl (2012), Alfaro et al. (2014), Lane and McQuade (2014), Baskaya et al. (2017), Calomiris
  et al. (2020), Sander (2019). Related to this strand of literature are the studies on capital account liberalizations
  and their effects on firms' stock market value (see Chari and Henry (2004), Chari and Blair Henry (2008) and
  Larrain (2015) among others).


                                                          7
by a reduction of other gross inflows or by an increase of gross outflows. In the presence of financial

frictions, however, this is not true.

       First, financial frictions may hamper access to international financial markets. In this case,

sovereign inflows increase the availability of financial resources and lead to a reduction in gov-

ernment yields and other domestic interest rates. In other words, sovereign inflows reduce the

government's reliance on domestic financial markets and free up resources for the private sector

(Becker and Ivashina, 2018; Ongena et al., 2019; Williams, 2018).11 In this way, they foster pri-

vate investment and fuel the expansion of firms and sectors that rely heavily on external finance

(Arellano et al., 2017). Moreover, through their effect on the price of public debt, sovereign in-

flows provide an windfall for bondholders, in particular domestic financial institutions (Gennaioli

et al., 2014). We will test for these implications in the data by empirically analyzing the effects of

sovereign inflows on domestic financial firms, on firms that are more financially constrained, and

on firms that are connected to the government. (Chari et al., 2018).

       Second, by increasing the relative availability of tradable goods, sovereign debt inflows should

lead to an appreciation of the exchange rate. This appreciation should in principle hurt, in relative

terms, firms in the tradable sector (Gabaix and Maggiori, 2015).

       In Section 6, we formalize this conceptual discussion with the help of a stylized model. For

now, we use it to guide our empirical analysis. In particular, we analyze the effects of exogenous

shocks to the foreign demand for local currency sovereign debt on the stock returns of: (i) domestic

financial firms; (ii) firms that are connected to the government ; (iii) firms that are more financially

dependent; and (iv) tradable firms. To the extent that sovereign inflows relax domestic financial

conditions, we expect (i), (ii), and (iii) to be positive. To the extent that sovereign inflows lead to

an appreciation of the exchange rate, we expect (iv) to be negative.
11
     In other words, foreign purchases of public debt reduce its "crowding-out" effect thereby raising private investment
     (see Broner et al. (2014), Broner et al. (2019), and Priftis and Zimic (2020)).




                                                             8
2.2     Index Inclusions as Sovereign Debt Inflow Shocks

In order to analyze the consequences of sovereign debt inflows for domestic firms, we exploit episodes

of country inclusion in two major global, local-currency sovereign debt indexes that are widely used

as benchmarks by international investors: the Citigroup WGBI and the JP Morgan GBI-EM.12 ,13

Specifically, the episodes we exploit are the inclusions in the GBI-EM of local-currency denominated

sovereign bonds issued by the governments of Colombia, Czech Republic, Nigeria, and Romania,

and the inclusions in the WGBI of Mexican and Southern African local-currency denominated

sovereign bonds. These episodes were announced by index providers on specific dates which we

retrieved from their websites.14

      These inclusion events constitute an ideal laboratory to address our research question as they

trigger massive sovereign debt inflows by foreign investors. International investors who are bench-

marked against each index have indeed the incentive to rebalance their portfolios, purchasing

sovereign bonds of the newly included country to replicate the index composition.15 Even though

the inclusion is usually implemented gradually by index providers over the 3 to 12 months sub-

sequent to the announcement, more active investors have the incentive to start rebalancing their

portfolios already at the announcement date in order to minimize the cost of the rebalancing. Fig-
12
   For more details on how these indexes are created and their importance see Section A.1 in the Appendix.
13
   Since the focus of our analysis is to study the effects of inflows to local currency sovereign debt markets, we do
   not consider country inclusions into foreign currency sovereign debt indexes, such as the J.P. Morgan EMBI Global
   Diversified. Also, the inclusion criteria used to construct the J.P. Morgan EMBI Global Diversified differ from
   those used to construct the two indexes that we consider. The inclusion of an emerging country into the latter
   is typically the result of an increased accessibility and liquidity of the domestic sovereign debt market. Instead,
   the EMBI only contains dollar denominated bonds that are traded and settled internationally. Thus, all countries
   classified as emerging markets enter the index automatically when they issue bonds that comply with the index
   criteria (size, maturity, currency of denomination, and daily price availability). In fact, to our knowledge, there is
   only one episode of country inclusion into the EMBI which is similar to the ones studies in this paper. This is the
   recent inclusion, in 2019, of 5 Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, which is due to a change in the criteria
   used by J.P. Morgan to categorize emerging countries. Even though analyzing this episode is outside the scope
   of this paper, in Section 6, we discuss the potential differences between the effects of local currency and foreign
   currency sovereign debt inflows.
14
   In particular, the first trading days after the announcement episodes are the 19th of March 2014 (Colombia), the
   22nd of February 2017 (Czech Republic), 31st of March 2010 (Mexico) the 16th of August 2012 (Nigeria), the 16th
   of January 2013 (Romania), and the 17th of April 2012 (South Africa). More details about these two indexes are
   provided in Section A.2 in the Appendix.
15
   Evidence of international investors' tendency to replicate the composition of the indexes they track is abundant in
   the literature. See for instance Cremers et al. (2016) and Raddatz et al. (2017). Basak and Pavlova (2013) and
   Kashyap et al. (2018) show theoretically that asset managers whose performance are evaluated against a common
   benchmark have the incentive to increase their demand for securities included in the benchmark index. This can
   in turn affect the price of firms in the benchmark, which end up being subsidized by asset managers.


                                                           9
ure 2 depicts the evolution in the average share of sovereign debt held by private foreign investors

across 4 of the 6 countries in our sample around the corresponding announcement dates.16 The

figure clearly shows that, already in quarter of the announcement, the foreign investor base of these

countries' sovereign debt increases sharply and deviates from the pre-announcement trend.

     To grasp the magnitude of these inclusion-driven shocks, we follow Pandolfi and Williams (2019)

and adapt their Flows Implied by Rebalancings (FIR) measure to our setting. We compute the

estimated inflow shocks to the sovereign debt market of each country as the change in benchmark

weight ­ calculated over the entire implementation period ­ multiplied by the assets under man-

agement of funds tracking their returns against the corresponding benchmark index, normalized

by the market value of the securities that are going to be included in the index. The FIR measure

captures the total inflows that would enter the country if all institutional investors were to pre-

cisely replicate the index composition. For the episodes in our sample the estimated FIR is 18%

in Colombia, 25% in Czech Republic, 12% in Mexico, 31% in Nigeria, 30% in Romania, and 10%

in South Africa. Hence, the estimated sovereign debt inflows due to the inclusion events are very

large, especially if compared to the size of these countries' sovereign debt markets.

     Additionally, these events share some features which are key for our identification strategy.

First, the dates in which index providers announce the inclusions are unexpected. Of course,

the inclusions themselves do not come as a surprise, as markets in most cases were expecting

these countries to be included into an emerging sovereign debt index at some point in the future.

However, the exact timing of the inclusion in the index is not anticipated by investors.17 Second,

the announcements made by index providers are not contemporaneous to macroeconomic shocks

nor to relevant policy changes which might have a direct effect on stock prices.18 Because of this,

the announcements are unlikely to reveal information about changes in the countries' fundamentals.
16
   The data used to produce this figure is from Arslanalp and Tsuda (2014), and do not include information of foreign
   private holdings of Czech and Nigerian debt.
17
   Consistent with the unexpected nature of the shock, in Section 3, we show that 5-year government bond yields
   in all newly included countries drop significantly on the exact dates in which inclusions are announced, which
   makes implausible that investors were anticipating the events and trading accordingly in the days prior to the
   announcement dates.
18
   Precisely because of this, the inclusion of Argentina in the GBI-EM is not part of our sample. For this country,
   the inclusion event coincides with the removal of capital controls, which mostly likely had a direct impact on the
   Argentinian equity market.



                                                         10
If they did, they should be followed by large capital inflows into the private sector as well. As Figure

3 shows, however, this is not the case

       Figure 3 depicts the cross-country average public and private inflows in the three years before the

announcement episode, as well as the average private and public inflows in the year of the inclusion

event. In the figure, private inflows are made of portfolio debt, equity and foreign direct investment

inflows, while public inflows are inflows to the sovereign debt market. The figure shows that the

events trigger large inflows which are specific to the sovereign debt markets of newly included

countries: public inflows nearly triple in the year of the inclusion episode, compared to average

inflows in the three years before. Instead, private inflows remain almost unchanged. This evidence

provides important support to our empirical strategy, as it further corroborates the hypothesis that

the announcement episodes have a negligible information content and are not associated to other

events which trigger also private inflows to the countries.19


2.3       Data

To conduct the empirical analysis, we combine data from several sources. We collect from Datas-

tream the time-series of daily (end-of-day) stock prices of domestic public companies in Colombia,

Czech Republic, Mexico, Nigeria, Romania, and South Africa. We gather from Datastream also

additional information about companies in these countries, including the International Securities

Identification Number (ISIN), the industry classification, and a concise description of each firm's

business activity. We combine this information with end-of-year balance sheet data from World-

scope.

       We then collect the daily time series of local currency 5-year government bond yields and prices

from Bloomberg, and the daily time series of (end-of-day) exchange rates from Datastream. The

exchange rate is computed as the amount of local currency needed to buy one U.S. dollar. To

compute the abnormal returns of firms in our sample, we gather data about regional and global

factors: from Datastream we obtain the daily time series of returns on the MSCI Emerging Markets
19
     Figure A1 in the Appendix reports the evolution of private and public inflows around the announcement year for
     each of the countries in our sample, separately.



                                                         11
Index and the MSCI World Index.

       We supplement these data with additional firm-specific information. In particular, to identify

firms which are closely related to the domestic government, we proceed in two steps. First, from

Thomson Reuters Securities Data Company (SDC) Platinum we retrieve the list of firms whose

major shareholder is the state. Second, we perform a search in the business description of firms and

look for the words government or public. Hence, we construct the indicator variable 1(Govt), which

equals one if a company is partially owned by the domestic government or its business activity is

related to the domestic government. To identify financial firms, we follow the industry classification

in Datastream. Specifically, we construct the indicator variable 1(F inancial) which equals to 1 if

a firm is classified as a bank, a financial firm, an investment firm, or a life insurance company. We

use the industry classification in Datastream also to identify firms operating in tradable sectors. In

particular, we construct the indicator variable 1(T radable) which takes value 1 if a firm operates in

a tradable industry and 0 otherwise, following the classification scheme in Mian and Sufi (2014).20

Further, we use the balance sheet information from Worldscope to measure firms' dependance on

external financing. We follow Rajan and Zingales (1998) and compute, for each firm, the ratio

between capital expenditures net of cash flows from operations, and capital expenditures. We then

compute the median of this measure in each industry and use it as our proxy for firms' external

financial dependance (which we denote as EF D).

       To identify firms which have access to corporate debt markets, we retrieve from Thomson

Reuters SDC Platinum the list of companies that issue corporate bonds or have syndicated loans

in our sample of countries at any time before the announcement. We match firms in this list to

firms in our database using the SEDOL and generate the dummy variable 1(DebtIssuer), which

equals 1 in case of a successful merge. Finally, we merge the list of firms in our sample with the

list of companies that are included in the MSCI Emerging Markets index, which we get from the

MSCI website. Since stocks of these companies are more likely to be held by foreigners, we use this

information to create the indicator variable 1(F orOwnership), which is equal to 1 if a company is
20
     In particular, we take the list of tradable industries according to the first classification criterion in Mian and Sufi
     (2014). According to this classification scheme, tradable industries are those whose exports plus imports is greater
     or equal than 10,000 U.S. dollars per worker or greater or equal than 500 million U.S. dollars.



                                                              12
included in this equity index in the quarter preceding the shock and 0 otherwise.

       Table 1 reports summary statistics of firms in our sample. The table reports the share of

financial firms, government-related firms, and tradable firms (on the announcement date) in the

entire sample and in each country separately. About one third of firms in the sample operate in

tradable sectors, while 14% of firms are financial firms and 9% of them are classified as government-

related. The country where the financial sector is most prominent is Colombia, where 36% of firms

in our sample are financial firms. Czech Republic and Romania, instead, feature the largest share

of government-related firms and tradable firms, respectively (36% and 54%). In all countries there

are firms included in the MSCI Emerging Markets index, as well as firms issuing corporate bonds

or syndicated loans. Finally, the least represented country in our sample is Czech Republic, with

14 companies, while the most represented one is South Africa, with 361 companies. In total, our

sample is composed of 909 companies.21



3       Sovereign Debt Inflows, Exchange Rates, and Sovereign Bond

        Yields

According to our hypotheses, sovereign debt inflows can have a substantial impact on the economies

of recipient countries through their effect on sovereign bond yields and exchange rates. We thus

begin our empirical analysis by assessing the response of these two variables to the country-inclusion

announcement episodes in our sample.

       First, in Figure 4, we depict the daily time series of each country's local-currency, 5-year

government bond yield in the 2 years around the announcement episode. The figure clearly shows

that government yields drop sharply when index providers announce the inclusion of countries into

their benchmark indexes. Further, the figure shows that there are no common pre-announcement

trends in government bond yields across countries, thus supporting our identifying assumption that

announcement dates were unexpected.
21
     In our sample, we consider each observation as a distinct company. Actually, 28 companies appear twice in our
     dataset, as each of them issue two distinct securities. In the Appendix, we show that reducing each of these
     companies to a single observation does not change the results of our analysis.


                                                         13
   Figure 5 reports the daily time series of each country's exchange rate in the 2 years around

the announcement episodes. The exchange rate in each country is the amount of domestic cur-

rency needed to buy one US dollar and is normalized to its value in the last trading day before

the announcement. In all countries, the exchange rate drops on the announcement date, which

means that the domestic currency appreciates in response to the inclusion announcements. The

appreciation is not as sharp as the drop in the yields, which can be presumably explained by the

higher volatility of exchange rates relative to sovereign bond yields, even in calm periods. What is

important to note is that, as for the sovereign bond yields, there is not a pre-announcement trend

that is common to all countries.

   To assess the economic magnitude of these two effects, we compare, for each country, the 2-

day changes in the sovereign bond yield and the exchange rate after the announcement with the

average 2-day changes in the 2 years around the announcement. Figures 6 and 7 provide a graphical

representation of this comparison. In all countries, the 2-day change in both the government bond

yield and the exchange rate after the announcement is larger (in absolute value) than the average

2-day change. In most cases, the 2-day change after the announcement lies in the very left tail of

the distribution of 2-day changes, thus representing an outlier observation. In Table 2, we report

the size of these post-announcement changes. In the two days after the announcement episode,

the local currency 5-year government bond yield decreases, on average, by 32.5 basis points. The

country experiencing the largest drop in the yield is Romania, where the yield decreases by almost

90 basis points. Conversely, the country experiencing the lowest reduction in the yield is Mexico (4.8

basis points). In all countries, the 2-day changes after the announcement episodes are statistically

different from the average 2-day change in the yield, which is close to 0. Similarly, the average

appreciation across countries is 1.09 percentage points. The lowest appreciation is the one that

occurs in Nigeria (0.057 percentage points), while the largest ones are observed in Colombia and

Romania (2 percentage points). In all countries, the 2-day appreciation following the announcement

date is statistically different from the average 2-day change in the 2 years around the announcement.

   We analyze also how our estimates compare to the price effects of index inclusion episodes in




                                                 14
the existing literature.22 Most of these studies focus on U.S. equity indexes, and find an average

estimated price increase for newly included stocks of approximately 3.5%.23 In emerging asset

markets, index inclusions are instead found to have lower effects, of about 2% (Hacibedel and

van Bommel, 2007). Our estimated price effects on included sovereign bonds are in line with this

evidence. As shown in Figure 8, the estimated increase in the price of sovereign bonds is about

1.1% in the 2 days following the announcement and about 2.5% in the two weeks after the event.



4     The Effects of Sovereign Debt Inflows on Domestic Firms: an

      Event Study

To measure the effect of sovereign debt inflow shocks on domestic firms, we conduct a multiple event

study around the dates in which country inclusions are announced by index providers. Specifically,

we calculate the cumulative abnormal returns of domestic listed firms in the two trading days fol-

lowing the announcements ­ which should reflect changes in firms' profitability and future prospects

­ and use them to test the empirical predictions discussed in Section 2.1.

     We compute abnormal returns for listed domestic firms in four ways. First, we calculate, for

each firm, daily abnormal returns as the difference between the return in each trading day and the

average daily return in the year preceding the announcement.24 We then cumulate such abnormal

returns on the first two trading days after the announcements and define the resulting CAR as
   Demeaned . Second, we compute each firms' daily abnormal returns as the difference between
CARi

the actual returns and the returns predicted by a 1-factor model where the only risk factor is the
22
   We thank Anna Pavlova for suggesting this comparison.
23
   Among the first to examine the price effects of index inclusions into the S&P500, Shleifer (1986) and Harris and
   Gurel (1986) find an estimated price increase due to the inclusion of stocks in the index of approximately 2.8% and
   3.1%. there has been an extensive literature on measuring the effects of stock additions into the S&P500. More
   recently, Chen et al. (2004) deliver an estimated index inclusion premium ranging between 3.2% and 5.4% while
   Patel and Welch (2017) estimate this to be around 3.5%.
24
   In particular, the average pre-announcement daily return is calculated over a 252-trading-day window which ends
   10 days before each country's announcement date.




                                                         15
daily return of the MSCI EM Index.25 We label the 2-day CAR thus calculated as CARi
                                                                                  1-Factor .26


Third, we calculate daily abnormal returns as the difference between the actual returns and the

returns predicted by a 2-factor model which, on top of the regional factor, includes also a global

factor, i.e., the daily return of the MSCI World Index. Cumulating these abnormal returns on
                                                  2-Factor . Fourth, we calculate daily abnormal
the days following the announcement we get the CARi

returns as the difference between the actual returns and the returns predicted by a 5-factor model

which adds to the regional and global factors, a small minus big (SMB), high minus low (HML),
                                                                      5-Factor .27 In our
and momentum (WML) factor, which we use to obtain to calculate the CARi

baseline specification we use 2-day CARs calculated with these four alternative models as our main

dependent variables.28


4.1     Overall Effect of Sovereign Debt Inflow Shocks

We start our empirical analysis by looking at the overall effect of the announcements and the

associated sovereign debt inflow shocks on domestic firms. To this end, we calculate the average

CAR of all firms in our sample in the two days following the announcement dates as:

                                                              I      j
                                                     j        i   CARi
                                               CAR =                                                              (1)
                                                                  I

                                                j
where I the total number of observations and CARi is the 2-day CAR of firm i calculated using

model j .

      Table 3, Panel A, reports the average post-announcement CAR of domestic listed firms in our
25
   We do not use domestic stock market indexes to compute predicted returns since, in some of the countries in our
   sample, these indexes are made of few large firms (often financial firms), whose returns have a major impact on the
   performance of the index. Thus, the returns of the domestic index would absorb a large part of the variation that
   we want to exploit.
26
   Factor loadings of the 1-factor model ­ as well as those of the 2-factor and 5-factor models ­ are estimated by
   running a series of firm-specific regressions over a time window of 252 trading days which ends 10 trading days
   before the announcement date in each country.
27
   To compute the SMB, HML, and WML factors we follow Cakici et al. (2013). These three factors are computed
   using stock market data about all countries in our sample.
28
   In our baseline specification we use 2-day CARs, as most of the event studies which exploit stock market data (see
   for instance Alfaro et al. (2017)). However, in the Appendix (Figure A2), we show that results are robust to using
   3-day, 4-day, and 5-day CARs. Also, in our baseline specification, we exclude observation in the top and bottom
   percentiles of the country-specific distribution of 2-day CARs, to control for outlier observations.



                                                         16
sample. On average, the post-announcement 2-day CARs are positive as they range between 0.11

and 0.22 percentage points, depending on the way abnormal returns are calculated. However,

except for those computed with the first model (the demeaned returns), the average 2-day CAR

is not statistically distinguishable from 0. Panel B of Table 3 reports, instead, the average CAR

before the announcement date, calculated as the average CAR in the interval [t - 3, t - 2], where

t is the first trading day after the announcement. In this case, the average CAR is very close to

0, especially if computed using the 1-, 2-, and 5-factor models. In columns 2 to 4, the average

pre-announcement CAR is below 0.05 percentage points. The evidence in Panel B, lends important

support to our empirical strategy, as it corroborates the hypothesis that announcement dates are

not anticipated by investors and shows that, in the days prior to the events, the factor models used

to predict returns deliver a good approximation of the actual returns.

      The evidence in Table 3 thus illustrate two important results. First, prior to the announcements,

firms' abnormal returns are on average very close to 0. Second, in the two days following the

announcements, the average CAR turns positive, but is relatively small in magnitude and not

statistically distinguishable from 0. However, this result actually masks important heterogeneity

across firms, as we show in the next section.


4.2     Heterogeneous Effects of Sovereign Debt Inflow Shocks

As discussed in Section 2.1, sovereign debt inflows can have heterogenous effects on domestic

firms operating in different industries. In particular, financial and government-related firms can

be expected to benefit most from the inflows, while firms operating in tradable sectors can be

relatively hampered by them. Hence, the fact that the effect of announcemenet episodes appears

to be small and not statistically significant on average may conceal the presence of strong effects,

albeil in opposite directions, at a more granular level, i.e., for different types of firms.

      Figure 9 provides evidence that this is indeed the case for firms in our sample. In the figure,

we plot the abnormal returns of firms ­ cumulated on an interval that starts 3 trading days before

the announcement date in each country and ends 5 days after it ­ for all firms in our sample (left



                                                   17
panel), and for financial and government-related firms vs. tradable firms (right panel). While the

average aggregate CAR is close to 0 over the entire interval of time, the average CAR of financial

and government-related firms, and that of tradable firms are not. The average CARs of these two

groups of firms are both close to 0 in the days before the announcement, but then sharply diverge on

the announcement date. In particular, while the average CAR of financial and government-related

firms turns positive in the post-announcement period, that of tradable firms becomes negative.

    Table 4 reports the average post-announcement 2-day CAR of financial firms, government-

related firms, and tradable firms, separately. In the 2 days after the announcement, financial firms

experience positive CARs which are on average equal to 0.65 percentage points (and statistically

different from 0 in all specifications). Similarly, government-related firms exhibit positive CARs of

approximately 0.8-0.9 percentage points (statistically different from 0 under all models). Conversely,

the average CAR of tradable firms is negative but not distinguishable from zero.

    Estimates in Table 4, however, do not take into account the potential overlap between the

different groups of firms. For instance, some tradable firms might also be government-related.

Additionally, they do not take into account the heterogeneity of firms in terms of external financial

needs. To take this into account, we therefore estimate the following equation:


          CARi =  + 1 1(F inancial)i + 2 1(Govt)i + 3 1(T radable)i + 4 EF Di + i                  (2)


where: 1(F inancial) is an indicator variable which takes value 1 for financial firms, and 0 otherwise;

1(Govt) is an indicator variable which takes value 1 for firms which are connected to the domestic

government; 1(T radable) is an indicator variable which takes value 1 for firms operating in tradable

industries, and 0 otherwise; EF D is a measure of firms' external financial dependance (computed at

the industry level following Rajan and Zingales (1998)); and  is the error term. This specification

allows us to measure the differential impact of sovereign debt inflows on each of the above-defined

categories of firms, and to test whether the inflows tend to benefit more financially constrained

firms.

    Results are reported in Table 5. Financial and government-related firms experience larger than


                                                  18
average CARs in the two days following the announcement episode. The estimated coefficients of

1(F inancial) ranges between 0.53 and 0.61, and is statistically significant in all models. Similarly,

the coefficient of 1(Govt) ranges between 0.6 and 0.7, and is always statistically different from 0.29

Instead, tradable firms experience significantly lower than average CARs in the 2 days following the

announcement. The estimated coefficients of 1(T radable) ranges between -0.45 and -0.51, and is

statistically significant in all specifications. Table 5 also reports the difference between the estimated

coefficients on financial firms and tradable firms, as well as the difference between the coefficient on

government-related and tradable firms. In all models, these differences are statistically significant

at the 99% confidence level and quantitatively close to 1 percentage point.

     Consistent with the hypothesis that more financially constrained firms also benefit from the

shocks, we find that the coefficient of EF D is positive and significant under all specifications.

Firms operating in industries which depend more on external financing experience larger CARs

in the aftermath of the announcements. Quantitatively, a one-standard deviation increase in the

proxy for external financial dependence increases the 2-day CAR by approximately 0.22 percentage

points.30

     We then re-estimate the coefficients in Equation 2 controlling for other firm-specific observables.

In particular, we use as additional controls: i) the indicator variable 1(IssueDebt) which takes value

1 for companies that have access to the corporate debt market (either through corporate bonds or

syndicated loans); ii) the indicator variable 1(F orOwnership), which takes value 1 if a stock is
29
   In Table A1 in the Appendix, we also estimate our main specification separating between firms partially owned by
   the government and firms with close relationship with it. We find both coefficients to be positive (even though the
   latter is not significant, most likely because of the small number of firms partially owned by the government in our
   sample) and of a similar magnitude. This suggests that the positive effect on government-related firms is driven by
   both government ownership and reliance on government demand.
30
   In Table A2 in the Appendix, we show that our main results are robust to: i) excluding illiquid stocks, that is
   stocks whose price never change in the 20 trading days around the announcement date; ii) reducing the weight of
   firms with more than one stock, by considering for each of these companies only the average 2-day CAR of the
   company's traded securities; iii) excluding Czech Republic and Nigeria from our sample. Czech Republic is indeed
   the least represented country in our sample, while Nigeria is the only country in our sample whose announcement
   date is in part ambiguous, as it is unclear whether the news were released on the 14th or on the 15th of August
   2012 (as we explain in greater detail in Section A.2 in the Appendix). In all cases, our results are quantitatively
   and qualitatively very close to those in Table 5. Further, in Table A3 we show that our results are robust to
   controlling for country fixed effects. Finally, in Table A4, Panel A, we replicate our estimates in the days prior to
   the announcement, using as dependent variable the CARs in the interval [t - 3, t - 2], where t is the first trading
   day after the announcement. None of the 16 coefficients of interest is statistically significant at the 95% confidence
   level, and only one is statistically different from 0 at the 90% confidence level.



                                                           19
also included in the MSCI Emerging Markets Index, and is therefore more likely held by foreigners;

iii) size, measured by the logarithm of total assets. In principle, some of these controls might be

related to the effect of the announcement on CARs. For instance, firms issuing bonds could benefit

from reductions in government bond yields, as highlighted in Dittmar (2008). At the same time,

these firms are more likely to be the least financially constrained (within each industry), so that

the overall effect is a priori ambiguous.

      Table 6 reports the results from this analysis. None of the additional controls have coefficients

which are statistically significant. More importantly, including them does not alter our main results,

as our main coefficients of interest remain quantitatively close to those in Table 5. When controlling

for the log of assets, some coefficient fall below the conventional significance threshold, but this

is most likely because balance sheet data are not available for almost 200 firms and therefore

controlling for assets reduces sample size and power. Nevertheless, the difference between the

coefficients on financial and tradable firms, as well as the difference between the coefficients on

government-related and tradable firms, remain large and highly statistically significant under all

specifications.


4.3     Exploiting Cross-Country Variation

Our results so far show that financial and government-related firms tend to have larger than average

CARs after the announcement episodes, while firms operating in tradable industries exhibit lower

than average CARs. These findings do not exploit the cross-country variation in the changes

in sovereign bond yields and exchange rates after the announcement dates (described in Section

3). Such heterogeneity is potentially important, as it can shed further light on the hypotheses

developed in Section 2.1. According to our conceptual discussion, the size of the stock market

effects should be correlated, across countries, with the magnitude of the changes in sovereign bond

yields and exchange rates. In particular, we should find that: i) the effect of the shock on financial

and government-related firms is more pronounced in countries with larger reductions in sovereign

bond yields; and ii) the effect on tradable firms is stronger in countries where the domestic currency

appreciates more. We now present additional evidence that is consistent with these two hypotheses.

                                                   20
     We first estimate six separate regressions, one for each country, of the form



                   CARi =  + 1 1(Govt&F in)i + 2 1(T radable)i + 3 EF Di + i ,                                   (3)


where 1(Govt&F in) is an indicator variable which takes value 1 for financial and government-

related firms. Then, in Figure 10, we plot the estimated 1 coefficient as a function of the country-

specific 2-day change in the 5-year local currency sovereign bond yield (left panel) and the estimated

2 as a function of the country-specific 2-day currency appreciation. The figure shows that, as

expected, the magnitude of these coefficients are related with the post-announcement changes in

sovereign bond yields and exchange rates. In particular, the CARs of financial and government-

related firms are larger in countries that experience a larger 2-day reduction in the yield following

the announcement. Moreover, the CARs of tradable firms are smaller in countries that experience

a larger 2-day appreciation of the domestic currency following the announcement.31

     To quantitatively assess the relationship between changes in government bond yields and ex-

change rates, othe one hand, and the CARs of firms around the announcements, on the other, we

estimate the following equation:


 CARic = c + 1 1(Govt&F in)i × Y ieldc + 2 1(T radable)i × %ExchRatec + 3 EF Di + ic (4)


where: c are country fixed effects, and 1(Govt&F in) and 1(T radable) are interacted, respectively,

with the country-specific 2-day change in the 5-year local currency sovereign bond yield (Y ield)

and the 2-day currency appreciation (%ExchRate). Both shocks are in absolute values: larger

values correspond to larger reductions in sovereign bond yields and larger appreciations. Under this

specification, the 1 coefficient should capture the cross-country relationship between the reduction

in the sovereign bond yield and the CARs of financial and government-related firms. Similarly, the

2 coefficient captures the relationship between the appreciation of the domestic currency and the

CARs of tradable firms.32
31
   In Section 5, we discuss some potential determinants of the differential effects of the inclusion announcements on
   sovereign bond yields and exchange rates across countries.
32
   In this regression we do not include the dummies 1(Govt&F in)i and 1(T radable)i thus assuming that they have


                                                         21
      Table 7 reports the estimated coefficients from Equation (4). The coefficients of both interaction

terms are statistically significant and consistent with the above-stated hypotheses. This analysis

allows us also to provide a more quantitative interpretation to our results: according to the estimates

in Table 7, a sovereign debt inflow shock that reduces the 5-year government bond yield by 100

basis points increases the CARs of financial and government-related firms by 1.7 percentage points.

Conversely, a sovereign debt inflow shock that leads to a 1% appreciation of the domestic currency

reduces the CARs of tradable firms by 0.41 percentage points.33



5      Discussion

5.1     Estimated Inflows and Heterogeneity of Shocks

The evidence in Section 4.3 shows that the effects of the announcement episodes on the stock prices

of domestic firms are related to the size of the 2-day changes in sovereign bond yields and exchange

rates in the aftermath of the announcements. In this section, we test whether such heterogeneity is

in turn related to the magnitude of the inflows that are expected to enter each of the countries in

our sample as a result of the index inclusion. First, we compute the estimated flows, in U.S. dollars,

entering each country as the change in benchmark weight ­ over the entire implementation period ­

multiplied by the assets under management of funds benchmarked against the corresponding index.

We normalize the inflows first with respect to the total value of the local-currency sovereign bonds

that are going to be included in the index, and then with respect to GDP (both measured in U.S.

dollars). The first normalized inflows-measure proxies for the magnitude of the inclusion-driven

inflow shocks relative to the size of the sovereign debt market of each country. The hypothesis

is that the effect of a dollar of inflows on sovereign bond prices and yields should be larger in
   no effect other than through their interaction with the government bond yield and the exchange rate, respectively.
   In fact, when included in the regressions, both dummies are not statistically distinguishable from zero in all
   specifications. The coefficients of the interaction terms remain of comparable magnitude, even though in some
   cases the coefficient on 1(Govt&F in)i × Y ieldc fall below the conventional significance level.
33
   In Table A4, Panel B, we present the results of a placebo test where we re-estimate Equation (4) using as dependent
   variable the CARs in the interval [t - 3, t - 2], where t is the first trading day after the announcement. None of the
   coefficients is statistically distinguishable from 0, thus further corroborating that the cross-country relationships
   estimated in Table 7 emerge only after the announcement episodes.




                                                           22
countries with smaller sovereign debt markets. The second measure, that of estimated inflows

relative to GDP, captures the magnitude of the estimated inclusion-driven inflows relative to the

overall size of the country's economy. We use this second measure to test for the hypothesis that

the effect of inflows on the exchange rate should be larger in countries with smaller economies.

      Figure 11 presents the results from this analysis. Panel A shows the relationship, across coun-

tries, between the 2-day change in the 5-year local currency sovereign bond yield after the an-

nouncement and the estimated inflows relative to the size of the sovereign debt market. Panel B

depicts the relationship between the 2-day percentage appreciation of the domestic currency and

the estimated inflows relative to the GDP. In both cases, we see that sovereign bond yields and

exchange rates tend to respond more in countries experiencing larger relative inflow shocks. The

only country that appears to be in outlier in both figures is Czech Republic. However, this can

be explained by two things: first, Czech Republic is the only country where the inclusion to the

GBI-EM is accompanied by a simultaneous exclusion from another index, the GBI-DM (for devel-

oped markets). J.P. Morgan does not provide data on the amount of assets benchmarked against

the GBI-DM, so we cannot estimate the potential outflows due to this exclusion. As a result,

the true net inflows in Czech Republic are likely to be smaller than those we estimate; second,

the 5-year sovereign bond yield is Czech Republic is already close to the zero lower bound on the

announcement date, which plausibly reduces the scope for inflow shocks to reduce the yield.34


5.2     Expected versus Actual Inflows

In our analysis so far, we have analyzed the effects of sovereign debt inflows based on the announce-

ments of country inclusions. Of course, sovereign debt inflows do not enter the country only at

the time of the announcement. In particular, passive investors are likely to enter the country at

the time of implementation, which takes place between 2 and 6 months after the announcement.35

Although markets should in principle react to all inflows, actual and expected, at the time of the
34
   In fact one news article suggests that estimated inflows at the time of the announcement were between 3 and
   6 billions U.S. dollars. Our estimated inflows are 6.8 billion dollars, larger than the average estimated net in-
   flows. Source: Pio Online. https://www.pionline.com/article/20170428/ONLINE/170429837/j-p-morgan-drops-
   czech-republic-bonds-to-emerging-markets-indexes-inflows-expected (Retrieved on May 6, 2020).
35
   Indeed, Raddatz et al. (2017) have shown that there are portfolio movements at the time of implementation.


                                                        23
announcement, there could still be price effects at the time of implementation in the presence of

limited arbitrage. To see whether this is the case, we analyze the behavior of sovereign bond prices

on the implementation dates.

      In particular, we compute the average prices of 5-year local currency sovereign bonds around

the effective implementation dates. Figure 12 shows the average change in the log price of these

bonds in the 15 trading days around each implementation date. The figure clearly shows that the

price of sovereign bonds does not move significantly on these dates, differently from its behavior

in the aftermath of the announcment, when it increases by almost 2% in 5 days (Figure 8). In a

similar vein, we also find the stock market effects on the dates of implementation to be negligible.

In Table 8, we report our main coefficients of interest estimated in the two days following the

actual implementation dates. None of the estimated coefficients is significantly different from zero.

Overall, this suggests that the reaction of bond and stock prices in the few days following the

inclusion announcements reflects both, the actual and the future expected inflows.


5.3     The Drivers of the Stock Market Effects of Sovereign Debt Inflows

In this study, we assess the impact of sovereign debt inflow shocks on firms by looking at the

evolution of stock market prices in the days immediately following six major sovereign debt inflow

shocks in emerging countries. We have thus far documented that stock prices respond significantly

to sovereign debt inflows and that not all firms are equally affected.

      But what drives these findings? Stock prices are the present discounted value of future div-

idends, so that their variation may be driven either by changes in the expected future dividends

of firms or by changes in the "interest rate", i.e., in the expected return required by investors.

Empirically distinguishing which of the two channels is driving the change in stock market prices is

challenging, especially for the high-frequency identification we use in our main analysis. In general,

changes in dividends are likely to have a more heterogeneous effect across firms than changes in

the interest rate. When the 5-year local currency sovereign bond yields decline in response to the

inclusion episodes, so does the compensation required by investors to hold domestic stocks. As long



                                                 24
as the sensitivity of firms to domestic and global risk factors remains the same, all domestic stock

prices should be positively affected by the inclusion episodes.

   This suggests that changes in dividends (or cash flows) could play an important role to explain

our main results. Financial firms that hold sovereign bonds benefit from a positive balance sheet

shock as the price of bonds rises, which in turn raises their expected profits and thus the dividends

that investors expect to receive. Government-related firms also experience an increase in expected

profits, either because they are expected to face a higher demand for their goods by the domestic

government (for firms which are related to the government because of their business activity) or

because they are expected to have increased access to public funding (for firms which are partially

owned by the government). Finally, the expansion in the domestic credit supply means that firms

operating in more financially constrained industries can be expected to expand their productive

investments without having to retain earnings, which unambiguously increases the expected divi-

dends paid to shareholders. Instead, relative to the non-tradable sector, tradable firms are expected

to suffer due to the appreciated exchange rate.

   According to this interpretation of the results, the heterogeneous stock market effects that we

have documented should translate into a heterogenous evolution of firm outcomes in the middle-

and long-run. An empirical analysis of this issue would require substantially extending the sample

period beyond the country-inclusion announcement episodes, making estimates more vulnerable

to identification concerns. Nevertheless, as reported in Pandolfi and Williams (2020), it does ap-

pear that the long-term effects of country-inclusion events are consistent with the above-stated

hypotheses. Pandolfi and Williams (2020) document that ­ in the three years following the in-

clusion episodes exploited in this study ­ financial and government-related firms exhibit a larger

growth in income, employment, dividends, and total assets relative to firms operating in the trad-

able sector. In particular, financial and government-related firms tend to increase their dividends

during this period, whilst tradable firms become more likely to stop paying dividends. In addition,

more financially constrained firms also become relatively more likely to distribute dividends to

shareholders in the years following index inclusions. This evidence strongly supports the view that

the heterogeneous stock market responses to sovereign debt inflow shocks can be at least in part


                                                  25
explained by changes in the expected prospects of domestic firms.



6        A model of sovereign debt inflows

The empirical results presented in the previous sections show that positive shocks to governments'

access to international financial markets have heterogeneous effects on domestic firms. In particular,

the effects are more positive for government related firms, financial firms, non-tradable firms, and

financially-dependent firms. We have so far provided a somewhat informal discussion of why these

heterogeneous effects reflect realistic economic forces. In this section, we present a simple model to

formalize our arguments and illustrate the mechanisms at play.


6.1       Setup

We consider a small economy that lasts for two periods, t  {0, 1}. The economy is populated by

a continuum of measure one of residents. All residents have identical preferences:

                                                                                     
                                                           -1                  -1    -1
                                                                               
                                  U (CN , CT ) =  · CN           + (1 -  ) · CT           ,


where CT and CN respectively denote consumption of tradable and non-tradable goods at t = 1,

and  is the elasticity of substitution between both goods. We assume throughout that  < 1.36

       Production is organized in firms. There is a continuum of measure one of firms in each of the

tradable and non-tradable sectors. As we shall specify below, firms may need to borrow funds in

the credit market in order to produce. We assume that all credit is intermediated by a continuum

of measure one of competitive banks. Firms and banks are all owned by the economy's residents.

       There is also a government that collects taxes from firms at t = 1 in order to repay pre-existing

public debt and provide subsidies.
36
     See Akinci (2017) for a review of the empirical evidence.




                                                            26
6.1.1   Tradable and non-tradable firms


Firms are indexed by sector T (tradable) and N (non-tradable) and by an individual firm index

s  [0, 1]. Each tradable firm s is endowed at t = 0 with T s units of tradable good. The total

tradable endowment at t = 0 is thus given by

                                                          1
                                         T =                  T s · ds.
                                                      0



    At t = 1, the tradable good is produced competitively by final good producers that combine

capital and labor according to the production function


                                          YT = K  · L1- ,


where L denotes labor and
                                                                        
                                                  1       -1            -1
                                      K=              ks  
                                                                 · ds
                                              0

is an aggregator of differentiated varieties of capital. We assume throughout that the elasticity of

substitution  is high but finite.

    Each variety of capital s is produced by its corresponding tradable firm through investment. In

particular, if tradable firm s invests is units of the tradable good at t = 0 it produces


                                             ks = A · is


units of capital s at t = 1.

    Each resident is endowed with one unit of labor that is supplied inelastically in a competitive

labor market, so that

                                               L = 1.


    In the non-tradable sector, firm s is endowed with N s units of the non-tradable good at t = 1.




                                                      27
The total non-tradable endowment at t = 1 is thus given by

                                                    1
                                         N =            N s · ds.
                                                0



6.1.2   Banks and financial markets


Firms in the financial sector, referred to as banks, are indexed by sector B and by an individual

index s  [0, 1]. Banks start at t = 0 with a pre-existing stock of public debt b as assets and

deposits by residents d as liabilities. A fraction  of public debt is long-term and matures at t = 1;

the remaining fraction 1 -  is short-term and matures at t = 0. All deposits are short-term and

mature at t = 0. We assume that banks start with more short-term liabilities than short-term

assets; namely

                                           d > (1 - ) · b.


   At t = 0, banks repay maturing deposits, take new deposits from residents and (some) tradable

firms, extend loans to (other) tradable firms, receive the proceeds from maturing short-term public

debt, and either sell or buy long-term public debt.

   Banks can sell long-term public debt to the international financial market (IFM), although

they cannot borrow directly from the IFM. We assume that the IFM buys an exogenous amount

x of long-term public debt. The variable x is the key parameter of the model. We will interpret

increases in x as reflecting the exogenous inclusion of the country in sovereign debt indices. In the

model, x determines both sovereign debt inflows and total capital inflows since the private sector

cannot borrow directly from the IFM. We assume that x  T .


6.1.3   Public sector


The government does not spend or impose any taxes at t = 0. It just rolls over all maturing

short-term public debt at the market interest rate R.

   At t = 1, the government taxes the profits of tradable and non-tradable firms and banks. We



                                                 28
assume that all profits are taxed at an exogenous rate  . Tax revenues are used to repay public

debt and all remaining funds are transferred back as subsidies to a subset of "related" firms and

banks. Total subsidies are thus given by


                               · (N + T + B ) - b · [ + (1 - ) · R] ,


where N , T , and B respectively denote profits of non-tradable firms, tradable firms, and banks.

      We assume that the same fraction  of firms in each sector and banks are related to the

government. Also, whether a firm is related to the government is independent of its endowment.

Finally, the subsidy is proportional to profits and it can be interpreted as a reduction in the tax

rate. Letting s denote the subsidy rate of a related firm or bank, it follows that

                                       1     b · ( + (1 - ) · R)
                                 s =     · -                     .
                                                 N + T + B


6.2     Equilibrium

As usual with two-period models, we first analyze conditional equilibria at t = 1 and then solve for

the full equilibrium at t = 0. At t = 1, the prices of labor and capital are given by


                                w = (1 - ) · K  and q =  · K -1 .



      The price of each variety of capital s is proportional to the overall price of capital q and

decreasing in the relative supply ks /K of the variety:

                                                            1
                                                       K    
                                           ps = q ·             .
                                                       ks


      Pre-tax profits of tradable firms, non-tradable firms and banks are respectively given by


                                    T s = ps · ks + (T s - is ) · R,



                                                  29
                                           N s = pN · N s ,

                                 Bs =  · b + [(1 - ) · b - d] · R,

where T s - is are net deposits by tradable firms (1 - ) · b - d are net lending by banks at t = 0.

   At t = 0, tradable firms decide how much to invest taking K and R as given. Each tradable

firm s maximizes its market value

                        T s                     A · ps
               VT s =       · (1 -  + s ) =            - 1 · is + T s · (1 -  + s ) .
                        R                        R

The optimal investment is thus given by

                                                   -1   
                                      -1 ·A        
                               is =     ·                   · K 1+·(-1) .
                                          R


   It follows that is = i for all tradable firms s, where i also denotes total investment. Noting that

K = A · i, we can solve for investment demand i as a function of the interest rate R:

                                                               1
                                            - 1  · A          1-
                                      i=       ·                   .                              (5)
                                                 R


   Domestic residents roll over their deposits since they do not consume at t = 0. Market clearing

then requires that investment be equal to the endowment of tradable firms plus sovereign debt

inflows x :

                                              i = T + x .                                         (6)


   Equations (5) and (6) jointly determine the equilibrium interest rate

                                      -1
                                 R=      ·  · A · (T + x )-1 .
                                      

Note that the equilibrium interest rate is lower than the marginal return of investment  · A · i-1 .

The reason is that market power depresses investment and thus the demand for credit.



                                                  30
   Given investment and the interest rate, consumption of tradables and non-tradables are respec-

tively given by

                                                                                    -1
               CT = YT - R · x = A · (T + x )-1 · T + 1 -  ·                                · x ,                 (7)
                                                                                    

                                                     CN = N .                                                     (8)


   Together with the relative demand of non-tradable goods

                                                        1
                                                CN                    1
                                                            =       ·   ,
                                                CT              1 -  PN

Equations (7) and (8) allow us to derive the equilibrium price of non-tradables

                                                                                                    1
                          -1                               -1                                       
             PN =       · N  · A · (T + x )-1 · T + 1 -  ·                                  · x         .
                     1-                                    


   We can now compute the value of firms of different types. In the tradable sector, the value of

firm s is given by
                                           1
                                  VT s =      · (T + x ) + T s · (1 -  + s ) .
                                           -1

The value of the average tradable firm equals

                           1                          x                     b · ( + (1 - ) · R)
               VT =            VT s · ds =      · T +                · 1-                       .
                       0                     -1                                 N + T + B


   In the non-tradable sector, the value of firm s is given by

                  PN · N s
     VN s =                · (1 -  + s ) =
                     R
                                                   1-                                       1
                                              -1                           -1               
           = N s · A · (T + x )                         ·       T + 1 -  ·          ·x          · (1 -  + s ) ,
                                                                           




                                                            31
                             -1                          -1
where N s =     1-       ·         · N s · N  . The value of the average non-tradable firm equals

                                       1
               VN        =                 VN s · ds =
                                   0
                                                                         1-                                     1
                                                                   -1                         -1                
                         = N · A · (T + x )                                    ·   T + 1 -  ·           ·x          ·
                                                                                              
                                              b · ( + (1 - ) · R)
                                  · 1-                            ,
                                                  N + T + B

                                              1
                         -1                1- 
where N =      1-    ·             · N            .

      Finally, the equilibrium value of bank s is given by

                                                          b ·  - [d - b · (1 - )] · R
                                           VBs =                                      · (1 -  + s ) ,
                                                                      R

and the value of the average bank equals

                             1
          VB =                   VBs · ds =
                         0
                              b ·  · (T + x )1-                        b · ( + (1 - ) · R)
               =            ·            a
                                                - d + (1 - ) · b · 1 -                     .
                         -1           ·A                                   N + T + B


6.3     Winners and losers from inflows

How does an increase in sovereign debt inflows x affect relative firm valuations? Using the firm

valuations obtained above and after some straightforward algebra the following results follow:

Financial dependence: Financially-dependent firms are those that borrow more. In the model only

tradable firms participate in the financial market at t = 0 and their borrowing is given by i - T s .

Hence, tradable firms with lower endowment T s are considered more financially dependent. The

impact of sovereign debt inflows on the value of tradable firms

                                                           1 dVT s
                                                              ·    is decreasing in T s .
                                                          VT s dx

In other words, the value of more financially-dependent firms increases more with x than the value


                                                                          32
of less financially dependent ones. This result follows directly from the fact that reductions in the

interest rate benefit borrowers.

Non-tradable versus tradable firms: On average, the impact of sovereign debt inflows is higher for

non-tradable than for tradable firms

                                                1 dVN    1 dVT
                                                  ·  
                                                      >    ·   .
                                               VN dx    VT dx

This happens because sovereign debt inflows raise domestic consumption of tradables and, thus,

lead to an increase in the relative price of the non-tradable good.

Government-related firms: Within each sector, sovereign debt inflows increase the value of related

relative to unrelated firms; namely

                                            1 dVSs
                                              ·    is increasing in s
                                           VSs dx

for sectors S  {T, N, B }. This happens for two reasons. Sovereign debt inflows reduce the interest

rate and allow the government to roll-over its debt at a lower cost, which reduces government

outlays. Moreover, capital inflows are expansionary and this increases tax revenues. Ultimately,

both channels raise the government subsidy and hence the relative valuation of related to unrelated

firms.37

Financial firms: The impact of sovereign debt inflows on the value of banks

                                         1 dVB
                                           ·   is increasing in  and d.
                                        VB dx

Sovereign debt inflows reduce the interest rate and raise the price of long-term bonds. The associ-

ated capital gains to banks are larger in absolute terms if the share of long-term public debt  is

higher. In addition, the higher initial deposits d are the more leveraged banks are and, thus, the
37
     Of course, our assumption that the government simply distributes its surplus as a handout among related firms
     is an extreme simplification. We could think, at the cost of complicating the model, of other ways in which a
     relaxation of the government resource constraint would eventually benefit firms that are related to the government
     (e.g., through an expansion in the government's demand for the goods produced by these firms).




                                                           33
more these capital gains translate into higher stock returns. If these effects are strong enough the

value of banks increases more than the value of tradable and non-tradable firms.

    Overall, the analysis in this section supports our view that the private sector is to some extent

excluded from international financial markets and, thus, increases in foreign demand for domestic

public debt lead to net capital inflows. In particular, once we make this assumption the model

naturally delivers all our empirical results on the heterogeneous effects of inclusions in international

sovereign debt indices.



7    Conclusions

This paper studies the effects of large local currency sovereign debt inflows on domestic firms.

To this end, we exploit six announcements of country inclusion into two major local currency

sovereign debt market indexes. These announcements are not anticipated by investors and trigger

large inflows from international investors wishing to replicate the index compositions.

    Our results show that sovereign debt inflows significantly reduce the local currency sovereign

bond yields and lead to an appreciation of the domestic currency. Also, they have sizable hetero-

geneous effects on domestic firms: financial and government-related firms exhibit larger CARs in

the 2 days following country inclusion announcements; instead, firms operating in tradable indus-

tries experience lower CARs. The former effect is more pronounced in countries where the 5-year

government bond yields drops more after the event, whilst the latter effect is larger in countries

where the currency appreciates more.

    Our findings shed novel light on the channels through which capital inflows to sovereign debt

markets affect firms in the economy. They highlight that sovereign debt inflows can have important

effects on the domestic economy of recipient countries. In addition, they can contribute to reshape

emerging economies, favoring the growth of the non-tradable sector at the expense of the tradable

one, promoting the development of the financial sector, and relaxing the financial constraints faced

by domestic firms.




                                                  34
   We have focused here on the effects of domestic-currency debt inflows. One important question

going forward is how these effects compare to those of foreign-currency debt inflows. In principle,

since domestic banks in emerging economies tend to hold a significant amount of domestic govern-

ment debt in local currency, but a relatively lower share of foreign currency sovereign debt, the

positive effect of sovereign debt inflows on banks might be much lower when in foreign currency.

Also, if foreign currency inflows have smaller effects on exchange rates, their negative effects on

tradable firms relative to non-tradable firms might be smaller as well. These are exciting questions

which we leave for future research.




                                                35
References

Akinci, O., 2017. A Note on the Estimation of the Atemporal Elasticity of Substitution Between

  Tradable and Nontradable Goods. mimeo.

Alfaro, L., Chari, A., Kanczuk, F., 2017. The real effects of capital controls: Firm-level evidence

  from a policy experiment. Journal of International Economics 108, 191­210.

Alfaro, L., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Volosovych, V., 2014. Sovereigns, Upstream Capital Flows, And

  Global Imbalances. Journal of the European Economic Association 12, 1240­1284.

Altavilla, C., Pagano, M., Simonelli, S., 2017. Bank Exposures and Sovereign Stress Transmission.

  Review of Finance 21, 2103­2139.

Andrade, S. C., Chhaochharia, V., 2018. The costs of sovereign default: Evidence from the stock

  market. The Review of Financial Studies 31, 1707­1751.

Arellano, C., Bai, Y., Bocola, L., 2017. Sovereign Default Risk and Firm Heterogeneity. NBER

  Working Papers 23314, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Arslanalp, S., Tsuda, T., 2014. Tracking Global Demand for Emerging Market Sovereign Debt.

  IMF Working Papers 14/39, International Monetary Fund.

Bank for International Settlements (BIS), 2019. Monetary Policy Frameworks in EMES: Inflation

  Targeting, the Exchange Rate and Financial Stability. In: Annual Economic Report .

Basak, S., Pavlova, A., 2013. Asset Prices and Institutional Investors. American Economic Review

  103, 1728­1758.

Baskaya, Y. S., di Giovanni, J., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Peydro, J.-L., Ulu, M. F., 2017. Capital flows

  and the international credit channel. Journal of International Economics 108, 15­22.

Becker, B., Ivashina, V., 2018. Financial repression in the european sovereign debt crisis. Review

  of Finance 22, 83­115.



                                                36
Benigno, G., Converse, N., Fornaro, L., 2015. Large capital inflows, sectoral allocation, and eco-

  nomic performance. Journal of International Money and Finance 55, 60­87.

Blanchard, O., Ostry, J. D., Ghosh, A. R., Chamon, M., 2017. Are Capital Inflows Expansionary

  or Contractionary? Theory, Policy Implications, and Some Evidence. IMF Economic Review 65,

  563­585.

Borri, N., Shakhnov, K., 2018. Limited Participation and Local Currency Sovereign Debt. Unpub-

  lished, available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2978127.

Bottero, M., Lenzu, S., Mezzanotti, F., 2020. Sovereign debt exposure and the bank lending channel:

  impact on credit supply and the real economy. Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Broner, F., Clancy, D., Erce, A., Martin, A., 2019. Fiscal Multipliers and Foreign Holdings of Public

  Debt. Working Paper Series 2255, European Central Bank.

Broner, F., Erce, A., Martin, A., Ventura, J., 2014. Sovereign Debt Markets in Turbulent Times:

  Creditor Discrimination and Crowding-out Effects. Journal of Monetary Economics 61, 114­142.

Cakici, N., Fabozzi, F. J., Tan, S., 2013. Size, value, and momentum in emerging market stock

  returns. Emerging Markets Review 16, 46­65.

Calomiris, C. W., Larrain, M., Schmukler, S. L., 2020. Capital Inflows, Equity Issuance Activity,

  and Corporate Investment. Journal of Financial Intermediation, forthcoming.

Chari, A., Blair Henry, P., 2008. Firm-specific information and the efficiency of investment. Journal

  of Financial Economics 87, 636­655.

Chari, A., Henry, P. B., 2004. Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.

  Journal of Finance 59, 1295­1324.

Chari, A., Leary, R., Phan, T., 2018. The Costs of (sub)Sovereign Default Risk: Evidence from

  Puerto Rico. Working Paper 18-3, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.

Chen, H., Noronha, G., Singal, V., 2004. The Price Response to S&P 500 Index Additions and

  Deletions: Evidence of Asymmetry and a New Explanation. Journal of Finance 59, 1901­1930.

                                                 37
Cremers, M., Ferreira, M. A., Matos, P., Starks, L., 2016. Indexing and Active Fund Management:

  International Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 120, 539­560.

Dittmar, R. F., 2008. Do Sovereign Bonds Benefit Corporate Bonds in Emerging Markets? Review

  of Financial Studies 21, 1983­2014.

Du, W., Schreger, J., 2016. Local Currency Sovereign Risk. Journal of Finance 71, 1027­1070.

Gabaix, X., Maggiori, M., 2015. International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics. The Quar-

  terly Journal of Economics 130, 1369­1420.

Gennaioli, N., Martin, A., Rossi, S., 2014. Sovereign Default, Domestic Banks, and Financial

  Institutions. Journal of Finance 69, 819­866.

Gopinath, G., Boz, E., Casas, C., Díez, F. J., Gourinchas, P.-O., Plagborg-Moller, M., 2020.

  Dominant Currency Paradigm. American Economic Review 110, 677­719.

Greenwood, R., Vayanos, D., 2010. Price Pressure in the Government Bond Market. American

  Economic Review 100, 585­590.

Hacibedel, B., van Bommel, J., 2007. Do emerging markets benefit from index inclusion? Money

  Macro and Finance (MMF) Research Group Conference 2006 128, Money Macro and Finance

  Research Group.

Harris, L., Gurel, E., 1986. Price and Volume Effects Associated with Changes in the S&P 500

  List: New Evidence for the Existence of Price Pressures. Journal of Finance 41, 815­29.

Hébert, B., Schreger, J., 2017. The Costs of Sovereign Default: Evidence from Argentina. American

  Economic Review 107, 3119­3145.

Hofmann, B., Shim, I., Shin, H. S., 2019. Bond risk premia and the exchange rate. BIS Working

  Papers 775, Bank for International Settlements.

Kashyap, A. K., Kovrijnykh, N., Li, J., Pavlova, A., 2018. The Benchmark Inclusion Subsidy.

  NBER Working Papers 25337, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.


                                                  38
Kohn, D., 2015. Addicted to Debt: Foreign Purchases of U.S. Treasuries and the Term-Premium.

  Department of Economics Working Papers 2015-1, Universidad Torcuato Di Tella.

Kolasa, M., Wesolowski, G., 2020. International spillovers of quantitative easing. Journal of Inter-

  national Economics, forthcoming.

Krishnamurthy, A., Nagel, S., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2017. ECB Policies Involving Government

  Bond Purchases: Impact and Channels. NBER Working Papers 23985, National Bureau of Eco-

  nomic Research, Inc.

Krishnamurthy, A., Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2011. The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest

  Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 42, 215­

  287.

Lane, P. R., McQuade, P., 2014. Domestic credit growth and international capital flows. The

  Scandinavian Journal of Economics 116, 218­252.

Larrain, M., 2015. Capital Account Opening and Wage Inequality. Review of Financial Studies 28,

  1555­1587.

Mian, A., Sufi, A., 2014. What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment? Econometrica 82,

  2197­2223.

Morelli, J., Perez, D., Ottonello, P., 2019. Global Banks and Systemic Debt Crises. 2019 Meeting

  Papers 644, Society for Economic Dynamics.

Obstfeld, M., Rogoff, K., 1995. Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux. Journal of Political Economy 103,

  624­660.

Ongena, S., Popov, A., Horen, N. V., 2019. The Invisible Hand of the Government: Moral Suasion

  during the European Sovereign Debt Crisis. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11,

  346­379.

Pandolfi, L., Williams, T., 2019. Capital Flows and Sovereign Debt Markets: Evidence from Index

  Rebalancings. Journal of Financial Economics 132, 384­403.

                                                39
Pandolfi, L., Williams, T., 2020. Real Effects of Sovereign Debt Inflows. AEA Papers and Proceed-

  ings, forthcoming.

Patel, N., Welch, I., 2017. Extended Stock Returns in Response to S&P 500 Index Changes. Review

  of Asset Pricing Studies 7, 172­208.

Priftis, R., Zimic, S., 2020. Sources of Borrowing and Fiscal Multipliers. The Economic Journal

  Ueaa051.

Raddatz, C., Schmukler, S., Williams, T., 2017. International Asset Allocations and Capital Flows:

  The Benchmark Effect. Journal of International Economics 108, 413­430.

Rajan, R. G., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial Dependence and Growth. American Economic Review

  88, 559­586.

Sander, N., 2019. Causal Effects of Capital Inflows. mimeo.

Schnabl, P., 2012. The International Transmission of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence from an

  Emerging Market. The Journal of Finance 67, 897­932.

Shleifer, A., 1986. Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down? Journal of Finance 41, 579­90.

Vayanos, D., Vila, J.-L., 2009. A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates.

  CEPR Discussion Papers 7547, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Warnock, F., Warnock, V., 2009. International Capital Flows and U.S. Interest Rates. Journal of

  International Money and Finance 28, 903­919.

Williams, T., 2018. Capital inflows, sovereign debt and bank lending: Micro-evidence from an

  emerging market. Review of Financial Studies 31, 4958­4994.




                                               40
                                          Figure 1: Stock Prices around Events


                          103



                          102
     Price (normalized)




                          101



                          100



                          99
                                -7           0               7             14                                            21
                                              Days to/from Announcement Date

                                     Financial                  Government-related                           Tradable

Note: This figure depicts the evolution of the stock prices of financial firms, government-related firms, and firms operating in
tradable sectors, separately, over a time window which starts 7 days before the announcement of each country's inclusion in
the corresponding index, and ends 14 days after it. Stock prices are normalized to their values in the last trading day before
each announcement episode, indicated by a vertical dashed line. Observations in the top and the bottom percentile of the
country-by-date distribution of stock prices are excluded.




                                                              41
                                                         Figure 2: Foreign Share of Sovereign Debt around Events

         30%                                                                                30%




         25%                                                                                25%




         20%                                                                                20%
42




         15%                                                                                15%
               -6   -5    -4      -3   -2     -1   0     1    2    3     4    5     6             -6   -5    -4      -3   -2     -1   0     1    2    3     4    5    6
                                 Quarters to/from Announcement Quarter                                              Quarters to/from Announcement Quarter

                               Observed values           Pre-announcement trend                                   Observed values           Pre-announcement trend


                     Average Private Foreign Share of Government Debt                                   Median Private Foreign Share of Government Debt

     This figure depicts the quarterly time series of the average and the median (left panel and right panel, respectively) share of sovereign debt held by foreign private
     investors for Colombia, Mexico, Romania and South Africa over a time window which starts 6 quarters before the announcement of each country's inclusion in the
     corresponding index, and ends 6 quarters after it. In both panels, the dotted line is a linear trend estimated on the pre-announcement period. The vertical dashed line
     indicates the quarter prior to the announcement episodes. Data is from Arslanalp and Tsuda (2014).
                               Figure 3: Balance of Payments: Private vs. Public Inflows


                      4%




                      3%
   Inflows over GDP




                      2%




                      1%




                       0
                           Private Inflows                                                  Public Inflows

                                      Average in the 3 years                                   Year of the
                                      before the announcement                                  announcement

This figure depicts the average private and public net inflows to Colombia, Czech Republic, Mexico, Nigeria, Romania and
South Africa in the year of the announcement of each country's inclusion into the corresponding index vs. the average of public
and private inflows to these countries in the three years before the announcement episodes. Private inflows are the sum of foreign
direct investments, portfolio equity net inflows and private debt net inflows. Public inflows are net inflows to the countries'
sovereign debt markets. Both are in U.S. dollars and are normalized by the GDP of each country, before being averaged across
countries. Data is from the IMF Balance of Payments Statistics and IMF WEO.




                                                               43
                                                                                                        Figure 4: 5-Year Government Bond Yields around Events

                                         7                                                                                                   .2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7.2
         5Y Government Bond Yield (%)




                                                                                                              5Y Government Bond Yield (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                               5Y Government Bond Yield (%)
                                        6.5                                                                                                   0                                                                                                7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6.8

                                         6                                                                                                   -.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6.6




                                        5.5                                                                                                  -.4                                                                                              6.4
                                              27jan2014   21feb2014      18mar2014   12apr2014   07may2014                                         03jan2017   28jan2017   22feb2017   19mar2017   13apr2017                                        08feb2010   05mar2010     30mar2010    24apr2010   19may2010




                                                                  Colombia                                                                                       Czech Republic                                                                                             Mexico
44




                                        17                                                                                                     7                                                                                              7.6



                                        16
         5Y Government Bond Yield (%)




                                                                                                              5Y Government Bond Yield (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                               5Y Government Bond Yield (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7.4

                                                                                                                                             6.5
                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7.2


                                        14
                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7

                                        13

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6.8
                                                                                                                                             5.5
                                        12
                                              26jun2012   21jul2012      15aug2012   09sep2012    04oct2012                                        26nov2012   21dec2012   15jan2013   09feb2013   06mar2013                                        26feb2012   22mar2012     16apr2012   11may2012    05jun2012




                                                                      Nigeria                                                                                          Romania                                                                                       South Africa

     This figure depicts the time series of the 5-year local currency government bond yield in Colombia, Czech Republic, Mexico, Nigeria, Romania and South Africa over a
     time window which starts 2 months before the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index, and ends 2 months after it. The vertical dashed
     line indicates the last trading day before each announcement episode.
                                                                                                                                          Figure 5: Exchange Rates around Events

                                      102                                                                                                 102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         106


                                                                                                                                          101
                                      100
         Exchange Rate (normalized)




                                                                                                             Exchange Rate (normalized)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Exchange Rate (normalized)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         104

                                                                                                                                          100

                                      98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         102
                                                                                                                                           99


                                      96
                                                                                                                                           98                                                                                            100



                                      94                                                                                                   97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         98
                                            27jan2014   21feb2014      18mar2014    12apr2014   07may2014                                       03jan2017   28jan2017   22feb2017   19mar2017   13apr2017                                      08feb2010   05mar2010      30mar2010    24apr2010   19may2010




                                                                Colombia                                                                                      Czech Republic                                                                                           Mexico
45




                                      104                                                                                                                                                                                                110
                                                                                                                                          108


                                      103                                                                                                                                                                                                105
                                                                                                                                          106
         Exchange Rate (normalized)




                                                                                                             Exchange Rate (normalized)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Exchange Rate (normalized)
                                                                                                                                          104
                                      102
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         100

                                                                                                                                          102
                                      101
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         95
                                                                                                                                          100

                                      100
                                                                                                                                           98                                                                                            90
                                            26jun2012   21jul2012       15aug2012   09sep2012    04oct2012                                      26nov2012   21dec2012   15jan2013   09feb2013   06mar2013                                      26feb2012   22mar2012     16apr2012    11may2012    05jun2012




                                                                    Nigeria                                                                                         Romania                                                                                     South Africa

     This figure depicts the time series of the exchange rate in Colombia, Czech Republic, Mexico, Nigeria, Romania and South Africa over a time window which starts 2
     months before the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index, and ends 2 months after it. The exchange rate for each country is the amount
     of local currency needed to buy 1 U.S. dollar, and is normalized to its value in the last trading day before each announcement episode, indicated by a vertical dashed
     line.
                                                                                      Figure 6: Distribution of 2-day Changes in 5Y Government Bond Yields

                         100                                                                                             100                                                                                           80



                          80                                                                                             80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
         Frequency (%)




                                                                                                         Frequency (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frequency (%)
                          60                                                                                             60

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40

                          40                                                                                             40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                          20                                                                                             20



                              0                                                                                           0                                                                                             0
                                  -50    -40   -30    -20     -10   0     10     20    30     40   50                          -20                -10               0             10             20                          -30         -20          -10        0        10        20     30
                                           2-Day Change 5Y Government Bond Yield (basis points)                                        2-Day Change 5Y Government Bond Yield (basis points)                                        2-Day Change 5Y Government Bond Yield (basis points)



                                                            Colombia                                                                               Czech Republic                                                                                       Mexico
46




                                                                                                                         150                                                                                           80
                         80



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                         60
                                                                                                                         100
         Frequency (%)




                                                                                                         Frequency (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Frequency (%)
                         40                                                                                                                                                                                            40


                                                                                                                         50

                         20                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                          0                                                                                               0                                                                                             0
                                  -100   -80   -60    -40     -20   0     20     40    60     80   100                         -100   -80   -60         -40   -20   0   20   40        60   80   100                        -40    -30         -20     -10   0       10        20    30   40
                                          2-Day Change 5Y Government Bond Yield (basis points)                                         2-Day Change 5Y Government Bond Yield (basis points)                                        2-Day Change 5Y Government Bond Yield (basis points)



                                                            Nigeria                                                                                       Romania                                                                                    South Africa

     This figure depicts the distribution of 2-day changes in the 5-year local currency government bond yield in Colombia, Czech Republic, Mexico, Nigeria, Romania and
     South Africa in the 2 years around the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index. The vertical line in each panel indicates the change in the
     5-year government bond yield in the 2 days following the announcement episode in each country.
                                                                                              Figure 7: Distribution of 2-day Percentage Changes in Exchange Rates

                                                                                                                              80                                                                                           80
                         80




                         60                                                                                                   60                                                                                           60
         Frequency (%)




                                                                                                              Frequency (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Frequency (%)
                         40                                                                                                   40                                                                                           40




                         20                                                                                                   20                                                                                           20




                          0                                                                                                    0                                                                                            0
                                  -5      -4    -3        -2         -1   0   1       2       3       4   5                        -4      -3      -2       -1       0        1       2        3       4                        -5     -4     -3        -2         -1    0   1       2       3       4       5
                                       2-Day Percentage Change in Exchange Rate (percentage points)                                     2-Day Percentage Change in Exchange Rate (percentage points)                                  2-Day Percentage Change in Exchange Rate (percentage points)



                                                               Colombia                                                                              Czech Republic                                                                                               Mexico
47




                         200                                                                                                  80                                                                                           50



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
                         150                                                                                                  60
         Frequency (%)




                                                                                                              Frequency (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Frequency (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           30

                         100                                                                                                  40

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                          50                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10



                              0                                                                                                0                                                                                            0
                                  -4       -3        -2         -1        0       1       2       3       4                        -4      -3      -2       -1       0        1       2        3       4                         -6    -5    -4    -3        -2     -1   0   1   2       3       4       5   6
                                       2-Day Percentage Change in Exchange Rate (percentage points)                                     2-Day Percentage Change in Exchange Rate (percentage points)                                  2-Day Percentage Change in Exchange Rate (percentage points)



                                                               Nigeria                                                                                    Romania                                                                                       South Africa

     This figure depicts the distribution of 2-day changes in the log of the exchange rate in Colombia, Czech Republic, Mexico, Nigeria, Romania and South Africa in the 2
     years around the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index. The vertical line in each panel indicates the percentage change in the exchange
     rate in the 2 days following the announcement episode in each country.
                                                Figure 8: 5-Year Government Bond Prices around Events
                                    104
     5-year Government Bond Price
                                    102
                                    100
                                    98




                                          -20           -10                    0                    10                   20
                                                           Days to/from Announcement Date

This figure depicts the time series of the average 5-year local currency government bond prices across Colombia, Czech Republic,
Mexico, Nigeria, Romania and South Africa over a time window which starts 20 trading days before the announcement of each
country's inclusion in the corresponding index, and ends 20 trading days after it. The index (which is equal to 100 in the day
before the announcement for each country) is constructed by taking the average change in log prices across countries. The
vertical dashed line indicates the last trading day before each announcement episode.




                                                                         48
                                                                             Figure 9: Cumulative Abnormal Returns around Events

                                        1%                                                                                                1%
        Cumulative Abnormal Returns




                                                                                                           Cumulative Abnormal Returns
                                                                                                                                         0.5%
                                      0.5%



                                                                                                                                            0
                                         0



                                                                                                                                     -0.5%
49




                                      -0.5%
                                              -3   -2   -1      0       1      2       3           4   5                                        -3       -2         -1       0       1      2        3               4         5
                                                         Days to/from Announcement Date                                                                               Days to/from Announcement Date

                                                           1-Factor Model         2-Factor Model                                                     Gvt&Fin (1-Factor Model)   Gvt&Fin (2-Factor Model)   Gvt&Fin (5-Factor Model)
                                                           5-Factor Model                                                                            Trad (1-Factor Model)      Trad (2-Factor Model)      Trad (5-Factor Model)



                                                              All firms                                                                              Financial & Government-related vs. tradable firms


     This figure depicts the evolution of the cumulative abnormal returns of domestic firms over a time window which starts 3 days before the announcement of each country's
     inclusion in the corresponding index, and ends 5 days after it. The left panel depicts the cumulative abnormal returns of all firms, while the right panel depicts the
     cumulative abnormal returns of financial and government-related firms, and tradable firms, separately. Cumulative abnormal returns are computed using three models.
     The only risk factor in the 1-factor model is the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index; the two risk factors in the 2-factor model are the return of the MSCI
     Emerging Markets Index and the return of the MSCI World Index; the 5-factor models include these two risk factors plus small minus big (SMB), high minus low
     (HML), and momentum (WML) factors. The vertical dashed line indicates the last trading day before the announcement. Observations in the top and the bottom
     percentile of the country-by-date distribution of cumulative abnormal returns are excluded.
                                                                         Figure 10: Heterogeneous Effects of the Shocks

                              RO                                                                                  .5
                        1.2


                                                                                                                                                                                             NG
                         1                                                                                                                                                RO
                                                                 NG
                                                                                                                   0
         1 (Govt&Fin)




                                                                                                                                                     MX




                                                                                                   2 (Tradable)
                         .8                                                                                                                                                            CZ
                                                                               ZA            CZ


                         .6                                               CO
                                                                                                                  -.5
50




                         .4                                                                                              CO



                         .2                                                                                                  ZA
                                                                                            MX                    -1
                               -80              -60             -40            -20           0                          -2               -1.5              -1               -.5              0
                                     2-Day Change 5Y-Government Bond Yield (basis points)                                     2-Day Percentage Change in Exchange Rate (percentage points)


     This figure depicts the relationship between the size of the 2-day changes in sovereign bond yields and exchange rates (in the two days following the announcement
     of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index), and the stock market effects on government-related and financial firms (left panel), and tradable firms (right
     panel), separately. 1 and 2 are the OLS estimated coefficients of 6 country-specific regressions of the form: CAR = 1 1(Govt&F in) + 2 1(T radable) + 3 EF D + ,
     where CAR is the cumulative abnormal returns of each firm in the two days following the announcement episode (computed using a 1-factor model where the only
     risk factor is the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index), 1(Govt&F in) is a dummy variable which equals 1 for government-related and financial companies,
     1(T radable) is a dummy which equals 1 for firms operating in tradable sectors, and EF D is a measure of external financial dependance computed at the industry-level.
     Observations in the top and the bottom percentile of the country-specific distribution of 2-day cumulative abnormal returns are excluded.
                                                                                                           Figure 11: Estimated Inflows and Size of the Shocks
         2-Day Change 5Y-Government Bond Yield (bps)




                                                         0                                                                                                                                       NG
                                                                       MX




                                                                                                                                            2-Day Log Change FX (percentage points)
                                                                                                              CZ
                                                                                                                                                                                       -.2

                                                        -20   ZA                                                                                                                                                                                                CZ
                                                                                        CO                                                                                                              RO
                                                                                                                                                                                       -.6
                                                                                                                                       NG
                                                        -40
                                                                                                                                                                                       -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MX
                                                        -60
                                                                                                                                                                                      -1.4
51




                                                        -80                                                                       RO                                                  -1.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ZA     CO

                                                       -100                                                                                                                           -2.2
                                                              10%              15%             20%             25%             30%                                                           0        0.5%        1%         1.5%   2%      2.5%      3%       3.5%
                                                                    Estimated Inflows over Market Value of Local-currency Sov. Debt                                                                                 Estimated Inflows over GDP

                                                                              All countries            Excluding Czech Republic                                                                              All countries          Excluding Czech Republic


     This figure depicts the relationship between the size of the 2-day changes in sovereign bond yields and exchange rates (in the two days following the announcement of
     each country's inclusion in the corresponding index), and the estimated sovereign debt inflows relative to the size of each country's local-currency sovereign debt market
     (left panel) and each country's GDP (right panel), separately. The estimated inflows, the market value of sovereign debt markets, and countries' GDP are in US dollars.
     Estimated inflows are computed as the change in benchmark weight following the inclusion of each country in the index, calculated over the entire implementation
     period, multiplied by the assets under management of funds tracking their returns against the corresponding index. The dashed and the solid line are regression lines
     describing the relationship between estimated inflows and shocks, with and without Czech Republic, respectively.
                                               Figure 12: 5-Year Government Bond Prices around Implementation
                                    104
     5-year Government Bond Price
                                    102
                                    100
                                    98




                                          -7   -6   -5    -4    -3     -2   -1    0     1      2     3     4    5   6    7
                                                                     Days to/from Effective Date

This figure depicts the time series of the average 5-year local currency government bond prices across Colombia, Czech Republic,
Mexico, Nigeria, Romania and South Africa over a time window which starts 7 trading days before the implementation date,
and ends 7 trading days after it. The index (which is equal to 100 in the day before the announcement for each country) is
constructed by taking the average change in log prices first across implementations for each country, and then across countries.
The vertical dashed line indicates the last trading day before each implementation episode.




                                                                             52
                                         Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                         Mean      St. Dev.       CO       CZ       MX       NG        RO       ZA
Financial                                 0.14        0.35       0.36      0.21     0.14     0.17     0.10      0.10
Government-Related                        0.09        0.29       0.19      0.36     0.07     0.11     0.05      0.08
Tradable                                  0.35        0.48       0.19      0.21     0.23     0.42     0.54      0.32
External Financial Dependance             -2.04       2.91       -2.53    -1.88    -2.04     -2.19    -1.65    -2.05
Foreign Ownership                         0.11        0.31       0.18      0.21     0.16     0.09     0.02      0.12
Issue Debt                                0.16        0.36       0.38      0.36     0.47     0.04     0.05      0.09
Log(Assets)                               15.44       3.25       21.68    16.57    16.43    17.41     12.18    14.33
Observations                               909                    72        14      137       170      155      361
 This table reports summary statistics about domestic firms in our sample. The first two columns report the
mean and the standard deviation of our main explanatory variables computed over the entire sample of firms.
Columns 3 to 8 report the average of these variables in each of the countries in our sample (Colombia, Czech
Republic, Mexico, Nigeria, Romania, and South Africa). Financial is an indicator variable that is equal to 1
for financial firms. Government-Related is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for government-related firms.
Tradable is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for firms in tradable industries (according to the classification
in Mian and Sufi (2014)). External Financial Dependance is a measure of firms' dependance on external financing
sources, computed following Rajan and Zingales (1998). Foreign Ownership is an indicator variable that is equal
to 1 for firms which are included in the MSCI Emerging Markets Index in the year prior to the announcement
date. Issue Debt is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for firms that issued corporate debt or obtained a
syndicated loan in the years before the announcement date.




                                                         53
                                                     Table 2: Shocks


                                      Colombia      Czech Rep.       Mexico        Nigeria       Romania       South Africa
Yield (bps)                          -30.190        -7.300          -4.800       -42.000        -86.900        -23.600
Yield - Yield                        -30.649***     -7.641***       -4.569***    -42.870***     -85.819***     -22.674***
%ExchRate (pp)                       -2.026         -0.532          -1.266       -0.057         -0.633         -2.006
%ExchRate - %ExchRate                -2.179***      -0.484***       -1.200***    -0.077***      -0.635***      -2.120***
 This table reports the changes in government bond yields and exchange rates in the 2 days following the announcement of each
country's inclusion in the corresponding index. Y ield(bps) is the 2-day change in the 5-year local currency government bond
yield in basis points. %ExchRate(pp) is the 2-day percentage change in the exchange rate (computed as the difference in the log
of the exchange rate) in percentage points. Y ield - Y ield and %ExchRate - %ExchRate are the differences between the
changes in government bond yields and exchange rates in the 2 days following the announcement episodes, and the average 2-day
changes of these two variables in the 2 years around the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index. *,
**, ***, denote that these differences are statistically different from 0 at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence level, respectively.




                                                             54
                          Table 3: Aggregate Cumulative Abnormal Returns


 Panel A: Cumulative Abnormal Returns after Announcement Dates
                           Demeaned Returns         1-Factor Model       2-Factor Model       5-Factor Model
Average 2-day CAR                 0.219**                   0.133              0.111                 0.117
                                  (0.099)                (0.102)              (0.102)               (0.108)
Number of Countries                   6                      6                    6                    6
Observations                        861                     861                 861                   861

 Panel B : Cumulative Abnormal Returns before Announcement Dates
                           Demeaned Returns         1-Factor Model       2-Factor Model       5-Factor Model
Average 2-day CAR                  0.117                    0.014              0.041                -0.006
                                  (0.096)                (0.096)              (0.096)               (0.097)
Number of Countries                   6                      6                    6                    6
Observations                        861                     861                 861                   861
 This table reports the average cumulative abnormal return of firms in our sample after and before the announce-
ment of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index (Panel A and Panel B, respectively). The average
CAR in Panel A is computed as the average CAR in the 2 days following the announcement. The average CAR
in Panel B is computed as the average CAR over the interval [t - 3, t - 2], where t is the first trading day after
the announcement. CARs in the first column (the demeaned returns) are computed as the cumulated differences
between the daily returns and the average daily return in the year preceding the announcement. CARs in columns
2 to 4 are computed using three different factor models. The only risk factor in the 1-factor model is the return
of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index; the two risk factors in the 2-factor model are the return of the MSCI
Emerging Markets Index and the return of the MSCI World Index; the 5-factor model include these two risk
factors plus small minus big (SMB), high minus low (HML), and momentum (WML) factors. Observations in
the top and the bottom percentile of the country-specific distribution of 2-day cumulative abnormal returns are
excluded. Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country-by-industry level. *, **, ***, denote that
the the average CAR is statistically different from 0 at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence level, respectively.




                                                       55
                        Table 4: Cumulative Abnormal Returns, by Firm Type


 Panel A: Financial firms
                           Demeaned Returns          1-Factor Model       2-Factor Model       5-Factor Model
Average 2-day CAR                 0.688***               0.666***             0.643***              0.607***
                                   (0.181)                (0.173)              (0.166)               (0.183)
Number of Countries                   6                       6                   6                     6
Observations                         118                     118                 118                   118

 Panel B : Government-related firms
                           Demeaned Returns          1-Factor Model       2-Factor Model       5-Factor Model
Average 2-day CAR                 0.909***               0.802***             0.831***              0.866***
                                   (0.237)                (0.245)              (0.247)               (0.250)
Number of Countries                   6                       6                   6                     6
Observations                         78                      78                   78                   78

 Panel C : Tradable firms
                           Demeaned Returns          1-Factor Model       2-Factor Model       5-Factor Model
Average 2-day CAR                  -0.132                 -0.205               -0.239                -0.202
                                   (0.173)                (0.166)              (0.165)               (0.177)
Number of Countries                   6                       6                   6                     6
Observations                         306                     305                 305                   304
 This table reports the average cumulative abnormal return of financial firms (Panel A), government-related firms
(Panel B), and firms operating in tradable sectors (Panel C) in the 2 days following the announcement of each
country's inclusion in the corresponding index. CARs in the first column (the demeaned returns) are computed
as the cumulated differences between the daily returns and the average daily return in the year preceding the
announcement. CARs in columns 2 to 4 are computed using three different factor models. The only risk factor
in the 1-factor model is the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index; the two risk factors in the 2-factor
model are the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index and the return of the MSCI World Index; the 5-factor
model include these two risk factors plus small minus big (SMB), high minus low (HML), and momentum (WML)
factors. Observations in the top and the bottom percentile of the country-specific distribution of 2-day cumulative
abnormal returns are excluded. Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country-by-industry level. *,
**, ***, denote that the the average CAR is statistically different from 0 at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence level,
respectively.




                                                        56
                                                   Table 5: Main Results


 2-Day Cumulative Abnormal Returns after Announcement Dates
                                        Demeaned Returns           1-Factor Model      2-Factor Model        5-Factor Model
Financial                                       0.525*                 0.613**              0.614**                0.573*
                                                (0.290)                (0.285)              (0.280)               (0.302)

Government-Related                             0.632***                0.598**             0.656***              0.700***
                                                (0.241)                (0.249)              (0.247)               (0.252)

Tradable                                       -0.514**               -0.472**              -0.495**              -0.450*
                                                (0.218)                (0.220)              (0.220)               (0.235)

External Financial Dependance                   0.072*                  0.070*               0.075*                0.073*
                                                (0.041)                (0.041)              (0.040)               (0.043)
Financial ­ Tradable                           1.04***                 1.09***              1.11***               1.02***
                                                (0.31)                  (0.30)               (0.29)                (0.31)
Govt-Related ­ Tradable                        1.15***                 1.07***              1.15***               1.15***
                                                (0.32)                  (0.33)               (0.32)                (0.33)
Number of Countries                                6                       6                    6                     6
Observations                                      857                    857                   857                  857
R2                                               0.02                    0.02                 0.02                  0.02
 This table reports the OLS coefficients of a regression where the dependent variable is the CAR of each firm in the 2 days
following the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index. The explanatory variables are: Financial,
which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for financial firms; Government-Related, which is an indicator variable that
is equal to 1 for government-related firms; Tradable, which is an indicator variable equal to for firms in tradable industries
(according to the classification in Mian and Sufi (2014)); and External Financial Dependance, which is a measure of firms'
dependance on external financing sources, computed following Rajan and Zingales (1998). The table reports also the difference
between the estimated coefficient on Financial and that on Tradable, as well as the difference between the estimated coefficients
on Government-Related and that on Tradable. CARs in the first column (the demeaned returns) are computed as the the
cumulated differences between the daily returns and the average daily return in the year preceding the announcement. CARs
in columns 2 to 4 are computed using three different factor models. The only risk factor in the 1-factor model is the return of
the MSCI Emerging Markets Index; the two risk factors in the 2-factor model are the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets
Index and the return of the MSCI World Index; the 5-factor model include these two risk factors plus small minus big (SMB),
high minus low (HML), and momentum (WML) factors. Observations in the top and the bottom percentile of the country-
specific distribution of 2-day cumulative abnormal returns are excluded. Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the
country-by-industry level. *, **, ***, denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence level, respectively.




                                                              57
                                             Table 6: Additional Controls

2-Day Cumulative Abnormal Returns after Announcement Dates
                            Demeaned Returns 1-Factor Model 2-Factor Model 5-Factor Model
Financial                   0.497*     0.494  0.584** 0.618* 0.569** 0.557* 0.578* 0.539
                            (0.276) (0.339) (0.275) (0.336) (0.271) (0.329) (0.297) (0.364)

Government-Related                     0.505**      0.451*      0.500** 0.441 0.569** 0.498* 0.641*** 0.557**
                                       (0.237)      (0.264)     (0.244) (0.270) (0.243) (0.271) (0.245) (0.271)

Tradable                               -0.431*     -0.539**     -0.398* -0.499* -0.421* -0.533* -0.364 -0.431
                                       (0.226)      (0.273)     (0.226) (0.279) (0.227) (0.279) (0.246) (0.307)

External Financial Dependance 0.074*                0.083*      0.072* 0.083* 0.076* 0.087* 0.076* 0.085*
                              (0.041)               (0.048)     (0.042) (0.050) (0.041) (0.049) (0.043) (0.051)

Foreign Ownership                       0.222        0.112       0.073 0.002 0.049 -0.092 0.056 -0.089
                                       (0.243)      (0.262)     (0.255) (0.278) (0.249) (0.277) (0.249) (0.283)

Issue Debt                              0.133        0.087       0.040 0.010 0.008 -0.049 -0.042 -0.113
                                       (0.246)      (0.266)     (0.253) (0.274) (0.268) (0.295) (0.279) (0.314)

Log(Assets)                                          0.026                 0.013                0.039                 0.046
                                                    (0.046)               (0.046)              (0.049)               (0.060)

Country FE                               Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes    Yes
Financial ­ Tradable                   0.93***     1.03***      0.98***   1.12***   0.99***   1.09*** 0.94*** 0.97**
                                        (0.29)      (0.37)       (0.29)    (0.36)    (0.28)    (0.35) (0.31) (0.39)
Govt-Related ­ Tradable                0.94***     0.99***      0.90***   0.94**    0.99***   1.03*** 1.01*** 0.99**
                                        (0.32)      (0.37)       (0.33)    (0.39)    (0.33)    (0.39) (0.34) (0.40)
Number of Countries                        6           6            6         6         6         6       6      6
Observations                             857         663          857       663       857       663     857     664
R2                                       0.04        0.04         0.04      0.04      0.04      0.04    0.03   0.03
 This table reports the OLS coefficients of a regression where the dependent variable is the CAR of each firm in the 2
days following the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index. The explanatory variables are:
Financial, which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for financial firms; Government-Related, which is an indicator
variable that is equal to 1 for government-related firms; Tradable, which is an indicator variable equal to for firms in
tradable industries (according to the classification in Mian and Sufi (2014)); External Financial Dependance, which is
a measure of firms' dependance on external financing sources, computed following Rajan and Zingales (1998); Foreign
Ownership, which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for firms which are included in the MSCI Emerging Markets
Index in the year prior to the announcement date; IssueDebt, which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for firms
that issued corporate debt or obtained a syndicated loan in the years before the announcement date; and Log(Assets),
which is the logarithm of the total value of a firm's assets. All regressions include country fixed effects. The table reports
also the difference between the estimated coefficient on Financial and that on Tradable, as well as the difference between
the estimated coefficients on Government-Related and that on Tradable. CARs in the first column (the demeaned returns)
are computed as the cumulated differences between the daily returns and the average daily return in the year preceding
the announcement. CARs in columns 2 to 4 are computed using three different factor models. The only risk factor in
the 1-factor model is the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index; the two risk factors in the 2-factor model are the
return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index and the return of the MSCI World Index; the 5-factor model include these
two risk factors plus small minus big (SMB), high minus low (HML), and momentum (WML) factors. Observations in
the top and the bottom percentile of the country-specific distribution of 2-day cumulative abnormal returns are excluded.
Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country-by-industry level. *, **, ***, denote significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% confidence level, respectively.



                                                              58
                                      Table 7: Interaction with Size of the Shocks


2-Day Cumulative Abnormal Returns after Announcement Dates
                                       Demeaned Returns          1-Factor Model          2-Factor Model         5-Factor Model
Yield × Govt&Fin                       0.015*** 0.017*** 0.015*** 0.017*** 0.015*** 0.017*** 0.015*** 0.017***
                                        (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.006)

%ExchRate × Tradable                   -0.354** -0.411*** -0.341** -0.393*** -0.358** -0.414*** -0.295* -0.349**
                                        (0.147)     (0.144)     (0.145)     (0.144)     (0.146)     (0.144)     (0.166)    (0.162)

External Financial Dependance                       0.070*                   0.066                  0.070*                 0.068*
                                                    (0.038)                 (0.040)                 (0.039)                (0.041)

Country FE                                Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Number of Countries                        6           6             6         6           6           6           6           6
Observations                              861         857           861       857         861         857         861        857
  2
R                                        0.04        0.04        0.04        0.04        0.04        0.04        0.03        0.04
 This table reports the OLS coefficients of a regression where the dependent variable is the CAR of each firm in the 2 days following
the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index. The explanatory variables are: Y ield × Govt&F in,
which is the product of indicator variable that is equal to 1 for financial and government-related firms, and the 2-day change in
the 5-year local currency government bond yield, in basis points; %ExchRate × T radable, which is the product of indicator
variable that is equal to 1 for firms in tradable industries (according to the classification in Mian and Sufi (2014)), and the 2-day
percentage change in the exchange rate (computed as the difference in the log of the exchange rate) in percentage points; and
External Financial Dependance, which is a measure of firms' dependance on external financing sources, computed following Rajan
and Zingales (1998). All regressions include country fixed effects. CARs in the first column (the demeaned returns) are computed
as the cumulated differences between the daily returns and the average daily return in the year preceding the announcement. CARs
in columns 2 to 4 are computed using three different factor models. The only risk factor in the 1-factor model is the return of the
MSCI Emerging Markets Index; the two risk factors in the 2-factor model are the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index and
the return of the MSCI World Index; the 5-factor models include these two risk factors plus small minus big (SMB), high minus
low (HML), and momentum (WML) factors. Observations in the top and the bottom percentile of the country-specific distribution
of 2-day cumulative abnormal returns are excluded. Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country-by-industry level.
*, **, ***, denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence level, respectively.




                                                               59
                                   Table 8: Main Results on Implementation Dates


 2-Day Cumulative Abnormal Returns after Announcement Dates
                                        Demeaned Returns           1-Factor Model      2-Factor Model        5-Factor Model
Financial                                        0.014                  -0.065               -0.139                -0.188
                                                (0.184)                (0.245)              (0.241)               (0.264)

Government-Related                              -0.039                  -0.062               -0.031                -0.012
                                                (0.172)                (0.181)              (0.179)               (0.178)

Tradable                                         0.009                  0.028                0.052                 0.043
                                                (0.159)                (0.153)              (0.156)               (0.157)

External Financial Dependance                   -0.034                  -0.041               -0.039                -0.061
                                                (0.027)                (0.028)              (0.028)               (0.038)
Number of Countries                                6                       6                    6                     6
Observations                                     1781                    1781                 1781                  1781
  2
R                                                0.00                    0.00                 0.00                  0.00
 This table reports the OLS coefficients of a regression where the dependent variable is the CAR of each firm in the 2 days
following the implementation of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index. The explanatory variables are: Financial,
which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for financial firms; Government-Related, which is an indicator variable that
is equal to 1 for government-related firms; Tradable, which is an indicator variable equal to for firms in tradable industries
(according to the classification in Mian and Sufi (2014)); and External Financial Dependance, which is a measure of firms'
dependance on external financing sources, computed following Rajan and Zingales (1998). The table reports also the difference
between the estimated coefficient on Financial and that on Tradable, as well as the difference between the estimated coefficients
on Government-Related and that on Tradable. CARs in the first column (the demeaned returns) are computed as the the
cumulated differences between the daily returns and the average daily return in the year preceding the announcement. CARs
in columns 2 to 4 are computed using three different factor models. The only risk factor in the 1-factor model is the return of
the MSCI Emerging Markets Index; the two risk factors in the 2-factor model are the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets
Index and the return of the MSCI World Index; the 5-factor model include these two risk factors plus small minus big (SMB),
high minus low (HML), and momentum (WML) factors. Observations in the top and the bottom percentile of the country-
specific distribution of 2-day cumulative abnormal returns are excluded. Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the
country-by-industry level. *, **, ***, denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence level, respectively.




                                                              60
A        Appendix

A.1        International Benchmark Indexes for Local Currency Sovereign Bond Mar-
           kets

International indexes are indexes which combine and track assets of different classes from different

countries. Depending on the criteria used to select the countries to be included in the index,

international indexes can be categorized in regional and global indexes. The former track securities

whose issuers are located in a given region ­ either geographically or based on the classification of

countries in frontier, emerging, and developed markets ­, while the latter track securities whose

issuers are located in multiple regions. With the rise of financial globalization, international indexes

have gained considerable importance, as they constitute the main benchmark for an increasingly

large number of international investors.

       Two of the main and most widely tracked international indexes for local currency­denominated

government debt securities are the World Government Bond Index (WGBI) and J.P. Morgan Gov-

ernment Bond Index Emerging Markets (GBI-EM), which are constructed by Citigroup and J.P.

Morgan, respectively. Both indexes represent key benchmarks for international investors in local

currency sovereign debt markets. However, while the former is a global index which tracks the

returns on sovereign bonds denominated in local currency issued by the governments of both de-

veloped and emerging countries, the latter is a regional index which solely focuses on emerging

countries.38

       As of 2016, the assets under management benchmarked against the WGBI were approximately

1.5 trillions U.S. dollars, and those benchmarked against the GBI-EM were approximately 200

billion U.S. dollars. Hence, when index providers change the composition of these two indexes,

many international investors wishing to replicate the index composition rebalance their portfolios

accordingly. Index rebalancings therefore trigger capital flows which, as shown in Pandolfi and
38
     As a result, the sovereign debt bonds of some emerging countries are included in both indexes. However, given
     that the average market capitalization of the securities in the WGBI is much larger than that in the GBI-EM, the
     weight of emerging countries in the former is typically much lower than the weight they have in the latter. For
     instance, Mexican local currency sovereign bonds account for about 10% of the GBI-EM, while they account for
     less than 1% of the WGBI.


                                                          61
Williams (2019), can have important price effects on the value of the local currency sovereign

bonds involved in the rebalancing.

       In this paper, in particular, we focus on some large rebalancings in these two indexes which

are due to the inclusion of the following emerging countries: Colombia, Czech Republic, Mexico,

Nigeria, Romania, and South Africa. During our sample period ­ which spans from 2010 to 2018 ­

Argentina was also included in the GBI-EM (in 2017). However, this event is not included in our

sample as the inclusion was driven by the decision of the Argentinian government of removing the

mandatory 120-days holding period for foreign capital, which was taken the day before the country

inclusion announcement.


A.2        Details on Country Inclusion Events

A.2.1       Colombia


On the 19th of March 2014, J.P. released a communication to investors which announced the

inclusion of five Colombian treasury bonds (named TES) into the GBI-EM family of indexes.

The index inclusion was planned to be implemented gradually between May and September 2014,

bringing Colombian weight in the GBI-EM Global Diversified from 3.2% to an estimated 8% (as

three TES were already included in the index before the inclusion episode). The document released

by J.P. Morgan does not contain a time stamp, so we searched the web for news related to this

event. The first news article we found was published by Reuters at 1:52PM (Eastern Standard

Time), which corresponds to 12:52PM in Colombian time, when Colombian markets were still

open.39 Hence, the first trading day for Colombia coincides with the announcement date and is

set on the 19th of March 2014. As regards the drivers of the inclusion, J.P. Morgan states that

this the "[...] result of improved transparency and accessibility for international investors in the

local TES market [...]". Nevertheless, we could not find any relevant news about policy changes

or changes in the functioning of Colombian sovereign debt market which might overlap with the

inclusion announcement made by J.P. Morgan. The most significant regulatory change affecting
39
     Source: Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/colombia-jpmorgan-debt/j-p-morgan-to-boost-colombia-bond-
     weighting-peso-up-most-in-6-months-idUSL2N0MG12I20140319 (Retrieved on May 6, 2020).


                                                       62
Colombian sovereign debt market before the inclusion episode was a tax cut on foreigners investing

in TES which occurred in January 2013, more than one year before the inclusion announcement.


A.2.2       Czech Republic


On the 22nd of February 2017, J.P. Morgan released a communication to investors which announced

the inclusion of nine local-currency denominated Czech sovereign bonds into the GBI-EM family

of indexes. The index inclusion was planned to be implemented gradually between April and June

2017, bringing Czech weight in the GBI-EM Global Diversified from 0% to an estimated 3.3%. The

document was disseminated at 9:44AM (Eastern Standard Time), which corresponds to 3:44PM

in Czech Republic time, when Czech markets were still open. Hence, the first trading day for

Colombia coincides with the announcement date and is set on the 22nd of February 2017. The

inclusion of Czech Republic in the J.P. Morgan GBI-EM was due to reclassification of the country

from a developed to an emerging market, since: "Czech Republic's GNI per-capita levels falling

below the Index Income Ceiling for three consecutive years". As a result, Czech sovereign bonds

were excluded from developed markets indexes and included in the Emerging Markets ones. As the

weight of Czech Republic in the index for developed countries was much smaller than that in the

GBI-EM, the outflows due to the exclusion from the former were going to be much smaller than the

inflows due to the inclusion in the latter. According to experts, the transition should have brought

between 3 and 6 billion U.S. dollar inflows to the country.40


A.2.3       Mexico


On the 31st of March 2010, Citigroup announced that Mexican sovereign bonds were eligible for

inclusion in the WGBI, with an estimated weight equal to 0.65%. We searched the web for news

related to this event. The first news article we found was published by Reuters at 12:41PM (Eastern

Standard Time), which corresponds to 11:41AM in Mexican time, when Mexican markets were still
40
     Source: Pensions&Investments Online. https://www.pionline.com/article/20170428/ONLINE/170429837/j-p-
     morgan-drops-czech-republic-bonds-to-emerging-markets-indexes-inflows-expected (Retrieved on May 6, 2020).




                                                       63
open.41 Hence, the first trading day for Mexico coincides with the announcement date and is set

on the 31st of March 2010. The eligibility announcement stated that: "If Mexico continues to meet

all WGBI criteria for three consecutive months starting with the April 2010 index profile, it will

become the first Latin American and the 24th government bond market to enter the WGBI. Entry

would be effective October 2010". The criteria refer to the size and ratings of the Mexican sovereign

bonds, and their accessibility to foreign investors. Several news articles highlighted that Mexico

already fulfilled the size and ratings requirements and that during the past year the government

of Mexico improved the liquidity of the government bond market by issuing 30-year bonds, selling

syndicated debt to foreigners and creating a primary dealers program. As a result, Mexico was

eventually included in the WGBI in October 2010.


A.2.4     Nigeria


On the 14th of August 2012, J.P. Morgan released a communication to investors which announced

the inclusion of local-currency denominated Nigerian sovereign bonds (FGN) maturing in 2014, 2019

and 2022, into the GBI-EM family of indexes. The index inclusion was planned to be implemented

gradually between October and December 2012, bringing Nigerian weight in the GBI-EM Global

Diversified from 0% to an estimated 0.59% (the estimate was later revised to 0.72%). The document

released by J.P. Morgan does not contain a time stamp, so we searched the web for news related

to this event. The first news article we found was published by Reuters on the 15th of August at

12:46PM (Eastern Standard Time), which corresponds to 5:46PM in Nigerian time, when Nigerian

markets had already closed.42 Due to the one-day delay between the communication by J.P. Morgan

and the diffusion of the news, we assume that the latest date is the one in which the information

was effectively received by international investors. In fact, we do observe an increase in transaction

of local currency sovereign bonds on the day following the dissemination of the Reuters' article.

Hence, we set the first trading day after the announcement on the 16th of August 2012. As regards
41
   Source: Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/mexico-index/update-1-citi-says-mexico-eligible-for-wgbi-bond-
   index-idUSN3121335820100331 (Retrieved on May 6, 2020).
42
   Source: Reuters. https://in.reuters.com/article/us-nigeria-debt-idINBRE87E0TF20120815 (Retrieved on May 6,
   2020).




                                                       64
the drivers of the inclusion, J.P. Morgan stated that this is the result of the improved liquidity of

the Nigerian sovereign debt market, in large part due to the removal of the mandatory one-year

holding period for foreign capital occurred in June 2011, more than one year before the inclusion

announcement.


A.2.5    Romania


On the 16th of January 2013, J.P. Morgan released a communication to investors which announced

the inclusion of local-currency denominated Romanian sovereign bonds (RON) maturing in 2015,

2016 and 2017, into the GBI-EM family of indexes. The index inclusion was planned to be im-

plemented gradually between March and May 2013, bringing Romanian weight in the GBI-EM

Global Diversified from 0% to an estimated 0.54% (the estimate was later revised to 0.87%). The

document released by J.P. Morgan does not contain a time stamp, so we searched the web for news

related to this event. The first news article we found was published by Reuters on the 16th of

January, according to which J.P. Morgan had announced the inclusion overnight.43 We therefore

set the first trading day after the announcement on the 16th of January 2013. As regards the

drivers of the inclusion, J.P. Morgan stated that this was the result of the improved liquidity of the

Romanian sovereign debt market occurred in the 18 months preceding the announcement.


A.2.6    South Africa


On the 16th of April 2012, Citigroup announced that 11 Southern African sovereign bonds were

eligible for inclusion in the WGBI. The document released by Citigroup does not contain a time

stamp, so we searched the web for news related to this event. The first news article we found was

published on the 17th of April by Reuters at 07:05AM (Eastern Standard Time), which corresponds

to 1:05PM in the time of South Africa, when markets were still open.44 Hence, we set the first

trading day after the announcement on the 17th of April 2012. The eligibility announcement
43
   Source: Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/romania-debt/jp-morgan-gives-fresh-impetus-to-romania-debt-
   idUSL6N0AL7IY20130116 (Retrieved on May 6, 2020).
44
   Source: Reuters. https://af.reuters.com/article/southAfricaNews/idAFL6E8FH3YH20120417 (Retrieved on May
   6, 2020).



                                                      65
stated that: "If South Africa continues to meet all WGBI criteria with the May and June 2012

profiles, it will become the first African government bond market to be included in the WGBI".

The criteria refer to the size and ratings of the domestic sovereign bonds, and their accessibility

to foreign investors. South Africa already fulfilled the size and ratings requirements at the time of

the announcement. As for the accessibility to foreign investors, it most likely improved in the year

preceding the inclusion, but we could not find more detailed information.




                                                 66
     A.3                        Additional Figures & Tables

                                                                   Figure A1: Balance of Payments: Private vs. Public Inflows in Each Country

                                                                                                       5%                                                                        4%


                           4%
                                                                                                       4%
                                                                                                                                                                                 3%
        Inflows over GDP




                                                                                    Inflows over GDP




                                                                                                                                                              Inflows over GDP
                           3%
                                                                                                       3%

                                                                                                                                                                                 2%
                           2%
                                                                                                       2%


                                                                                                                                                                                 1%
                           1%                                                                          1%



                            0                                                                           0                                                                         0
                                  Private Inflows                  Public Inflows                           Private Inflows                  Public Inflows                           Private Inflows                  Public Inflows

                                         Average in the 3 years     Year of the                                    Average in the 3 years     Year of the                                    Average in the 3 years     Year of the
                                         before the announcement    Announcement                                   before the announcement    Announcement                                   before the announcement    Announcement



                                                    Colombia                                                            Czech Republic                                                                  Mexico
67




                           4%                                                                          4%                                                                        4%




                           3%                                                                          3%                                                                        3%
        Inflows over GDP




                                                                                    Inflows over GDP




                                                                                                                                                              Inflows over GDP
                           2%                                                                          2%                                                                        2%




                           1%                                                                          1%                                                                        1%




                            0                                                                           0                                                                         0
                                  Private Inflows                  Public Inflows                           Private Inflows                  Public Inflows                           Private Inflows                  Public Inflows

                                         Average in the 3 years     Year of the                                    Average in the 3 years     Year of the                                    Average in the 3 years     Year of the
                                         before the announcement    Announcement                                   before the announcement    Announcement                                   before the announcement    Announcement



                                                    Nigeria                                                                   Romania                                                               South Africa

     This figure depicts the private and the public net inflows to Colombia, Czech Republic, Mexico, Nigeria, Romania and South Africa in the year of the announcement
     of each country's inclusion into the corresponding index vs. the average of public and private inflows to these countries in the three years before the announcement
     episodes. Private inflows are the sum of foreign direct investments, portfolio equity net inflows and private debt net inflows. Public inflows are net inflows to the
     countries' sovereign debt markets. Both are in U.S. dollars and are normalized by the GDP of each country. Inflows are reported separately for each of the countries in
     our sample. Data is from the IMF Balance of Payments Statistics and IMF WEO.
                                                                                 Figure A2: Alternative Time Windows

                                        2                                                                                       .3



                                        1                                                                                       .2
                Estimated coefficient




                                                                                                        Estimated coefficient
                                        0                                                                                       .1



                                        -1                                                                                       0
68




                                        -2                                                                                      -.1
                                             2     3                4                5              6                                 2       3                4                5   6
                                                       Days from Announcement Date                                                                Days from Announcement Date

                                                 Gvt&Fin            Tradable             90% C.I.                                                       EFD            90% C.I.


                                                       Gvt&Fin-Tradable                                                                   External Financial Dependance

     This figure depicts the estimated coefficients of 1(Govt&F in), 1(T radable), and EF D in 5 regressions of the form: CARi      t =  1(Govt&F in) +  1(T radable) +
                                                                                                                                          1              i    2            i
     3 EF Di + i , where CARi is the cumulative abnormal return of firm i in the t days following the announcement episode, with t  [2, 6]. CARs are computed using a
     1-factor model where the only risk factor is the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index. 1(Govt&F in) is a dummy variable which equals 1 for government-related
     and financial companies, 1(T radable) is a dummy which equals 1 for firms operating in tradable sectors, and EF D is a measure of external financial dependance
     computed at the industry-level. In each regression, observations in the top and the bottom percentile of the country-specific distribution of cumulative abnormal returns
     are excluded.
                Table A1: Government ownership and government demand

 2-Day Cumulative Abnormal Returns after Announcement Dates
                                 Demeaned Returns      1-Factor Model   2-Factor Model   5-Factor Model
Financial                              0.545*             0.628**          0.632**           0.588*
                                      (0.289)             (0.284)          (0.279)           (0.301)

Gvt Owned                              0.661               0.550            0.608             0.591
                                      (0.440)             (0.478)          (0.468)           (0.451)

Gvt Demand                            0.512**             0.516**          0.549**           0.626**
                                      (0.245)             (0.249)          (0.254)           (0.267)

Tradable                              -0.508**            -0.465**         -0.488**          -0.441*
                                      (0.218)             (0.221)          (0.220)           (0.236)

External Financial Dependance          0.071*              0.069*           0.074*           0.073*
                                      (0.041)             (0.041)          (0.041)           (0.043)
Number of Countries                      6                   6                6                 6
Observations                            857                 857              857               857
R2                                      0.02                0.02             0.02              0.02

 This table reports the OLS coefficients of a regression where the dependent variable is the CAR of each
firm in the 2 days following the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index.
The explanatory variables are: Financial, which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for financial
firms; Gvt Owned, which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for firms which are partially owned
by the domestic government; Gvt Demand, which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for firms
which are related to the domestic government because of their business activity; Tradable, which is an
indicator variable equal to for firms in tradable industries (according to the classification in Mian and
Sufi (2014)); and External Financial Dependance, which is a measure of firms' dependance on external
financing sources, computed following Rajan and Zingales (1998). The table reports also the difference
between the estimated coefficient on Financial and that on Tradable, as well as the difference between
the estimated coefficients on Government-Related and that on Tradable. CARs in the first column (the
demeaned returns) are computed as the the cumulated differences between the daily returns and the
average daily return in the year preceding the announcement. CARs in columns 2 to 4 are computed
using three different factor models. The only risk factor in the 1-factor model is the return of the MSCI
Emerging Markets Index; the two risk factors in the 2-factor model are the return of the MSCI Emerging
Markets Index and the return of the MSCI World Index; the 5-factor model include these two risk factors
plus small minus big (SMB), high minus low (HML), and momentum (WML) factors. Observations
in the top and the bottom percentile of the country-specific distribution of 2-day cumulative abnormal
returns are excluded. Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country-by-industry level. *,
**, ***, denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence level, respectively.




                                                  69
                                        Table A2: Robustness Tests

  Panel A: No companies with zero returns in (-10,10)
                                 Demeaned Returns          1-Factor Model      2-Factor Model      5-Factor Model
Financial                               0.537                    0.703               0.682               0.678
                                       (0.451)                 (0.448)             (0.430)              (0.474)
Government-Related                     0.692**                  0.628*              0.672*              0.694*
                                       (0.350)                 (0.362)             (0.353)              (0.357)
Tradable                              -0.878***               -0.802**            -0.844***            -0.816**
                                       (0.313)                 (0.316)             (0.315)              (0.332)
External Financial Dependance           0.083                   0.084               0.089                0.093
                                       (0.063)                 (0.063)             (0.061)              (0.064)
Financial ­ Tradable                   1.42***                 1.50***             1.53***              1.49***
                                        (0.48)                  (0.47)              (0.44)               (0.49)
Govt-Related ­ Tradable                1.57***                 1.43***             1.52***              1.51***
                                        (0.48)                  (0.49)              (0.48)               (0.49)
Observations                             565                      565                 565                 565
R2                                       0.03                    0.03                 0.03                0.03
  Panel B : No multi-stock companies
                                  Detrended Returns        1-Factor Model      2-Factor Model      5-Factor Model
Financial                               0.444                    0.543              0.526                0.545
                                       (0.388)                 (0.387)             (0.370)              (0.408)
Government-Related                     0.703**                  0.622*             0.656**              0.676**
                                       (0.307)                 (0.322)             (0.313)              (0.310)
Tradable                              -0.715***               -0.668**            -0.688***            -0.664**
                                       (0.262)                 (0.265)             (0.264)              (0.279)
External Financial Dependance           0.067                   0.064               0.068                0.073
                                       (0.051)                 (0.051)             (0.050)              (0.052)
Financial ­ Tradable                   1.16***                 1.21***             1.21***              1.21***
                                        (0.41)                  (0.40)              (0.38)               (0.41)
Govt-Related ­ Tradable                1.42***                 1.29***             1.34***              1.34***
                                        (0.40)                  (0.42)              (0.41)               (0.41)
Observations                             652                      652                652                  652
R2                                       0.03                    0.02                0.03                 0.02
  Panel C : Without Nigeria and Czech Republic
                                 Demeaned Returns          1-Factor Model      2-Factor Model      5-Factor Model
Financial                               0.413                    0.534               0.519               0.507
                                       (0.364)                 (0.363)             (0.348)              (0.383)
Government-Related                     0.633**                  0.566*              0.598*              0.625**
                                       (0.305)                 (0.316)             (0.308)              (0.310)
Tradable                              -0.716***               -0.661**            -0.686***            -0.661**
                                       (0.258)                 (0.261)             (0.260)              (0.274)
External Financial Dependance           0.066                   0.064               0.069                0.072
                                       (0.050)                 (0.050)             (0.049)              (0.051)
Financial ­ Tradable                   1.13***                 1.20***             1.20***              1.17***
                                        (0.39)                  (0.38)              (0.36)               (0.39)
Govt-Related ­ Tradable                1.35***                 1.23***             1.28***              1.29***
                                        (0.40)                  (0.41)              (0.40)               (0.41)
Observations                             680                      680                 680                 680
 2
R                                        0.03                    0.02                 0.02                0.02
 This table reports the OLS coefficients of a regression where the dependent variable is the CAR of each firm
in the 2 days following the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index. In Panel A,
we exclude firms whose price never changes in the 20 trading days around the announcement date. In Panel B,
we reduce the weight of firms issuing more than one stock, by considering for each of these companies only the
average 2-day CAR of the company's traded securities. In Panel C, we exclude Nigeria and Czech Republic. In
all panels, the explanatory variables are: Financial, which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for financial
firms; Government-Related, which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for government-related firms; Tradable,
which is an indicator variable equal to for firms in tradable industries (according to the classification in Mian and
Sufi (2014)); and External Financial Dependance, which is a measure of firms' dependance on external financing
sources, computed following Rajan and Zingales (1998). The table reports also the difference between the estimated
coefficient on Financial and that on Tradable, as well as the difference between the estimated coefficients on
Government-Related and that on Tradable. CARs in the first column (the demeaned returns) are computed as
the the cumulated differences between the daily returns and the average daily return in the year preceding the
announcement. CARs in columns 2 to 4 are computed using three different factor models. The only risk factor
in the 1-factor model is the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index; the two risk factors in the 2-factor
model are the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index and the return of the MSCI World Index; the 5-factor
model include these two risk factors plus small minus big (SMB), high minus low (HML), and momentum (WML)
factors. Observations in the top and the bottom percentile of the country-specific distribution of 2-day cumulative
abnormal returns are excluded. Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country-by-industry level. *,
**, ***, denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence level, respectively.



                                                        70
                                      Table A3: Main Results with Country FE


 2-Day Cumulative Abnormal Returns after Announcement Dates
                                       Demeaned Returns           1-Factor Model     2-Factor Model       5-Factor Model
Financial                                      0.533*                0.595**              0.574**               0.579*
                                               (0.284)                (0.279)             (0.274)               (0.300)

Government-Related                            0.576**                0.523**              0.579**              0.641**
                                               (0.241)                (0.245)             (0.244)               (0.248)

Tradable                                      -0.419*                -0.394*              -0.420*               -0.365
                                               (0.226)                (0.226)             (0.227)               (0.248)

External Financial Dependance                  0.075*                 0.072*               0.076*               0.075*
                                               (0.041)                (0.042)             (0.041)               (0.043)

Country FE                                       Yes                    Yes                 Yes                   Yes
Financial ­ Tradable                          0.95***                0.99***              0.99***              0.94***
                                               (0.30)                 (0.29)               (0.28)               (0.31)
Govt-Related ­ Tradable                       0.99***                0.92***              1.00***              1.01***
                                               (0.32)                 (0.33)               (0.33)               (0.34)
Number of Countries                               6                      6                    6                    6
Observations                                     857                    857                 857                   857
R2                                              0.04                   0.04                 0.04                 0.03
 This table reports the OLS coefficients of a regression where the dependent variable is the CAR of each firm in the 2 days
following the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index. The explanatory variables are: Financial,
which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for financial firms; Government-Related, which is an indicator variable that
is equal to 1 for government-related firms; Tradable, which is an indicator variable equal to for firms in tradable industries
(according to the classification in Mian and Sufi (2014)); and External Financial Dependance, which is a measure of firms'
dependance on external financing sources, computed following Rajan and Zingales (1998). All regressions include country fixed
effects. The table reports also the difference between the estimated coefficient on Financial and that on Tradable, as well as
the difference between the estimated coefficients on Government-Related and that on Tradable. CARs in the first column (the
demeaned returns) are computed as the the cumulated differences between the daily returns and the average daily return in
the year preceding the announcement. CARs in columns 2 to 4 are computed using three different factor models. The only
risk factor in the 1-factor model is the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index; the two risk factors in the 2-factor model
are the return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index and the return of the MSCI World Index; the 5-factor model include these
two risk factors plus small minus big (SMB), high minus low (HML), and momentum (WML) factors. Observations in the top
and the bottom percentile of the country-specific distribution of 2-day cumulative abnormal returns are excluded. Standard
errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country-by-industry level. *, **, ***, denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
confidence level, respectively.




                                                             71
                                                  Table A4: Placebo Tests

 Panel A: 2-Day Cumulative Abnormal Returns (2 Days before announcement)
                              Demeaned Returns 1-Factor Model 2-Factor Model 5-Factor Model
Financial                           0.264             0.254          0.248        0.219
                                   (0.250)           (0.263)        (0.264)      (0.258)

Government-Related                               -0.160                 -0.227             -0.237               -0.227
                                                (0.232)                (0.245)            (0.249)              (0.242)

Tradable                                        0.402*                  0.343              0.337                0.349
                                                (0.225)                (0.224)            (0.223)              (0.226)

External Financial Dependance                    -0.041                 -0.044             -0.046               -0.047
                                                (0.038)                (0.039)            (0.039)              (0.039)
Number of Countries                                 6                      6                  6                    6
Observations                                      857                    857                857                  857
R2                                                0.01                   0.01               0.01                 0.01
Panel B : 2-Day Cumulative Abnormal Returns (2 Days before announcement)
                              Demeaned Returns 1-Factor Model 2-Factor Model 5-Factor Model
Yield × Govt&Fin               0.003    0.001     0.002 -0.000 0.002 -0.000 0.002 -0.001
                              (0.005)  (0.005)   (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005)

%ExchRate × Tradable                     0.118        0.158          0.068   0.110   0.067   0.112   0.068   0.112
                                        (0.149)      (0.155)        (0.150) (0.156) (0.151) (0.156) (0.152) (0.157)

External Financial Dependance                         -0.048                 -0.052              -0.054                -0.053
                                                     (0.036)                (0.037)             (0.038)               (0.037)

Country FE                               Yes          Yes            Yes     Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
Number of Countries                        6            6              6       6         6          6          6          6
Observations                             861          857            861     857        861       857        861        857
R2                                       0.01         0.01           0.01    0.01       0.00      0.01       0.01       0.01
 This table reports the OLS coefficients of a regression where the dependent variable is the CAR of each firm over the interval
[t - 3, t - 2], where t is the first trading day after the announcement of each country's inclusion in the corresponding index.
In Panel A, the explanatory variables are: Financial, which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for financial firms;
Government-Related, which is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 for government-related firms; Tradable, which is an
indicator variable equal to for firms in tradable industries (according to the classification in Mian and Sufi (2014)); and
External Financial Dependance, which is a measure of firms' dependance on external financing sources, computed following
Rajan and Zingales (1998). In Panel B, the explanatory variables are: Y ield × Govt&F in, which is the product of indicator
variable that is equal to 1 for financial and government-related firms, and the 2-day change in the 5-year local currency
government bond yield, in basis points; %ExchRate × T radable, which is the product of Tradable and the 2-day percentage
change in the exchange rate (computed as the difference in the log of the exchange rate) in percentage points; External
Financial Dependance ; and country fixed effects. CARs in the first column (the demeaned returns) are computed as the
the cumulated differences between the daily returns and the average daily return in the year preceding the announcement.
CARs in columns 2 to 4 are computed using three different factor models. The only risk factor in the 1-factor model is the
return of the MSCI Emerging Markets Index; the two risk factors in the 2-factor model are the return of the MSCI Emerging
Markets Index and the return of the MSCI World Index; the 5-factor model include these two risk factors plus small minus
big (SMB), high minus low (HML), and momentum (WML) factors. Observations in the top and the bottom percentile of the
country-specific distribution of 2-day cumulative abnormal returns are excluded. Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered
at the country-by-industry level. *, **, ***, denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence level, respectively.


                                                               72
