                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




TRACING THE LINKAGES BETWEEN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND ENERGY INNOVATIONS:
              A COMPARISON OF CLEAN AND DIRTY TECHNOLOGIES

                                        Robert K. Perrons
                                         Adam B. Jaffe
                                           Trinh Le

                                       Working Paper 27777
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27777


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2020




  No external funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
  reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2020 by Robert K. Perrons, Adam B. Jaffe, and Trinh Le. All rights reserved. Short sections of
  text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
  credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tracing the Linkages Between Scientific Research and Energy Innovations: A Comparison
of Clean and Dirty Technologies
Robert K. Perrons, Adam B. Jaffe, and Trinh Le
NBER Working Paper No. 27777
September 2020
JEL No. O13,O31

                                         ABSTRACT

The challenge of mitigating climate change has focused recent attention on basic scientific
research feeding into the development of new energy technologies (Popp, 2017). Energy
innovation tends to consist of a series of partially overlapping processes involving: (1) the
production of scientific and technological knowledge, (2) the translation of that knowledge into
working technologies or artifacts, and (3) the introduction of the artifacts into the marketplace,
where they are matched with users' requirements. However, relatively little data are available
showing how long each of these processes takes for energy technologies. Here we combine
information from patent applications with bibliographic data to shine light on the second process
--that is, the translation of scientific knowledge into working prototypes. Our results show that
"clean" energy technologies are more dependent on underlying science than "dirty" technologies,
and that the average lag between publication of scientific findings and the incorporation of those
findings in clean energy patents has risen from about five to about eight years since the 1980s.
These findings will help policymakers to devise more effective mechanisms and strategies for
accelerating the overall rate of technological change in this domain.

Robert K. Perrons                               Trinh Le
QUT School of Management                        Motu Economic and Public Policy Research
GPO Box 2434                                    PO Box 24390
Brisbane, QLD 4001                              Wellington 6142
Australia                                       New Zealand
robert.perrons@qut.edu.au                       trinh.le@motu.org.nz

Adam B. Jaffe
188 Brookline Avenue
Apartment 26A
Boston, MA 02215
and Brandeis University and Queensland University of Technology
and also NBER
adam.jaffe@motu.org.nz
1. Introduction


Transitioning the world's energy system away from carbon-intensive sources such as fossil fuels towards
non-carbon alternatives represents an immense technological challenge (Deutch, 2011; Henderson &
Newell, 2011b; Newell, 2011; Patt, 2015). Despite the urgent case for bringing new energy-related
innovations to the marketplace, developing and deploying them on a large scale has been frustratingly
slow (Bunn, Anadon, & Narayanamurti, 2014; Grubler, 2012), often taking several decades to develop
even the most promising ideas into novel technologies that achieve a significant amount of market
penetration (Lester & Hart, 2012). But even with the broad consensus about the protracted timeframes
required for these activities (Smil, 2010, 2017), there is little evidence on the source or nature of the
delays. Significant attention has been paid to where and how financial investments in clean energy
technologies occur (Lerner, 2011; Nanda, Younge, & Fleming, 2015; Rotman, 2019; Yeo, 2019) but, aside
from a handful of case studies focused on individual technologies (e.g., Grubler & Wilson, 2014), far less
is understood about the investments of time that are required to develop and deploy these innovations.
In this paper, we build upon Popp's (2017) examination of the flows of knowledge between universities,
the private sector, and government agencies on the way to the development of new energy technologies.


However, whereas Popp (2017) mostly relied on a manual analysis of the data, this paper uses the Lens,
a new online tool that links information from patent applications with bibliographic data, to usefully
extend Popp's earlier findings. Specifically, we present evidence showing how much time passes in the
energy domain between the production of scientific knowledge and the delivery of working technologies
or artifacts. We start by reviewing prior investigations in this area, explaining the role of patents in
technological innovation, and putting forward the research questions at the center of this investigation.
We then present evidence quantifying the amount of time required to translate new science into energy-
related innovations, and conclude with a brief discussion about the importance and policy-related
implications of these findings.




                                                                                              1|Page
2. Background and Research Questions


The long time horizons required for energy innovation are frequently discussed in the literature in a vague
and aggregated way, but innovation tends to consist of a series of partially overlapping processes (Pavitt,
2005; Wilson & Grubler, 2014). As Figure 1 shows, technological innovation typically begins with the
production of scientific and technological knowledge, which is then translated into working technologies
or artifacts. The artifacts typically require further development to be viable in the marketplace, including
adaptation to users' needs and scale-up from laboratory prototypes to viable volume. There is, of course,
tremendous attrition across these processes, as much new knowledge never leads to any working
artifacts, and many inventions that are manifest in working artifacts are never transitioned to a market
innovation. But from the perspective of a successful market innovation, we can typically look backward
and see the prototype invention from which it developed, and the underlying scientific and technological
knowledge that contributed to that invention.




                                                                                           Making
                                                       Transition of
                Production of                                                              artifacts
                                                       knowledge
                scientific and                                                             into
                                                       into working
                technological                                                              market-
                                                       artifacts
                knowledge                                                                  viable
                                                                                           products
                                                                                           or
                                                                                           processes




                  Figure 1: Processes of Innovation (based on Pavitt (2005) pp. 88-89)




Each of these processes involves a different combination of stakeholders who respond to different
incentives and face different constraints. As a result, different policy instruments and strategies have been
recommended for each in an attempt to accelerate the overall clean energy technology innovation

                                                                                                 2|Page
journey (Deutch & Lester, 2004; Grubler & Wilson, 2014; Henderson & Newell, 2011a). It is therefore
useful to pry apart the overall timeframe required for energy innovation into its constituent parts so that
the length of each process can be examined separately. In this Research Note, we zoom in on the middle
process in Figure 1, leading to:


        Research Question 1: How important is basic scientific research as a foundation for new
        clean energy technology?

        Research Question 2: What is the magnitude of the lags between the production of
        scientific knowledge and the delivery of clean energy working technologies or artifacts?


3. Methodology

3.1 The Role of Non-Patent Literature in Patent Applications
The patent system provides a useful window into the second stage of Figure 1, and the connections
between the first stage and the second stage. A patent represents a legal acknowledgement that an
invention has occurred. The patent document captures key aspects of this invention, and places that
invention in the context of relevant knowledge at the time a patent is filed (Jefferson et al., 2018).
Applicants find and disclose evidence of science and technology that preceded the work and upon which
the innovation is based, and the patent examination process uncovers additional "prior art." Much of this
disclosure is in the form of previous patents, but it also includes non-patent literature (NPL) such as
publications in scholarly journals. NPL is an indicator of the feedstock science that underpins the
technological concept underlying the patent application (Jefferson et al., 2018). Therefore, patent
citations to NPL provide traces of pathways connecting the first and second processes described above.


Following earlier categorizations of energy technology patents (Bosetti & Verdolini, 2013; Lanzi, Verdolini,
& Hascic, 2011), we divided all the international patent classifications (IPCs) related to energy production
into two groups: "dirty" and "clean." For each NPL item identified in the prior art search for each of these
patents, we then measured the amount of time that had passed between when the scientific literature
referenced in an energy-related patent application was published, and when the resulting patent
application had been filed.2

2
 Citations here only include scholarly works for which a DOI, PMID, Microsoft Academic ID, or PMCID can be
found. The analysis therefore excludes other kinds of publications such as working papers, brochures, works
published by outlets which are not covered by the above sources, or works that cannot be found in the above sources
due to insufficient or incorrect information provided in the patent.

                                                                                                       3|Page
We recognize that this approach affords only an incomplete and imperfect representation of the
contributions of scientific and technological knowledge to the generation of "working artifacts." First, the
prior art search that yields the NPL references serves a specific legal function, and does not necessarily
identify the broad scope of knowledge inputs of the invention. Second, while patent law requires that an
invention be "reduced to practice" in order for a patent to be granted, patents in fact vary greatly in the
extent to which a working artifact has truly been achieved. Third, there is frequently only a tenuous
connection between the advent of novel technologies and any patents that are ostensibly underlying
them (Jaffe & Lerner, 2004). Finally, many inventions are never patented at all, so there will be no traces
of their development in the patent data. Despite these limitations, we believe that that the NPL citations
in energy patents provide a useful window into the scale and timing of linkages between scientific
research and new technologies in the energy domain. A large fraction of the participants and contributors
connected to these processes do use patents as a way to defend their intellectual property rights
(Henderson & Newell, 2011a), so the picture presented by these data is an important indicator of these
processes despite being incomplete.


Patent references to NPL have been used previously to study how knowledge flows between and among
universities, the private sector, and government research institutions contribute to energy innovation
(Popp, 2017). We build upon this earlier contribution by examining both the extent of citation to NPL and
the lag between NPL references and patent applications reflected in "clean" as compared to "dirty" energy
patents. The data were extracted from the Lens (www.lens.org), an online tool that connects patent
databases around the world with scholarly and technical literature. Through it, we were able to access a
broad range of information about worldwide patent applications and the scientific literature that
underpins them.


3.2 Categorizing Patents
The patents used in this study were classified according to the IPC system of the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO).3 Prior investigations in the area of energy innovations (e.g., Ardito,
Petruzzelli, & Albino, 2016; Bosetti & Verdolini, 2013; Johnstone, Hascic, & Popp, 2010; Lanzi et al., 2011)
have not entirely agreed on what IPC codes in the energy domain are "clean" and which ones are "dirty."



3
    https://www.wipo.int/classifications/ipc/en - accessed on 6 February 2020.

                                                                                                4|Page
In this investigation, we adopted Bosetti et al.'s (2013) list of IPC codes for clean technologies, and
included in our dirty technologies category IPC codes that appeared in either Bosetti et al.'s (2013) or
Lanzi et al.'s (2011) lists of dirty technologies. We framed our classifications in this way because the above
categorizations offer an established classification system of IPC codes that focus on energy production
technologies. Several of the other classification systems were inclusive of patent groups like energy
conservation or nuclear power generation for which there were no corresponding "dirty" innovations. By
confining our analysis only to IPC codes related to energy production technologies, we were able to make
reasonable like-for-like comparisons between the clean and dirty categories.


3.3 Linking IPCs to NPL
The IPCs were then submitted to the Lens4, an online tool that connects patent databases around the
world with scholarly and technical literature, to identify all of the individual patents applications filed
during the period 1970-2015.5 The data revealed that about 2.8% of the patents within the study have
any form of NPL connected to them that can be found on the Lens scholarly database. Over 99% of these
cited works had at least one digital object identifier (DOI), while the remaining 1% had a PubMed
identification (PMID), Pubmed Central identifier (PMCID), or Microsoft Academic ID.


3.4 Reference Data
Within the Lens, we limited the query to "citing patents," and then chose the "cited works" option to show
the metadata of the cited scholarly works connected to each of the patent applications within the targeted
IPC codes. The following data fields were provided for each cited work:


      a) Article title
      b) Publication year
      c) Type of document
      d) Name of journal
      e) Volume and issue number of journal


4
    www.lens.org
5
  By using the Lens' Boolean search function, we were able to query multiple IPC codes at a time. One limitation of
the Lens at the time of this investigation, however, was that users were only able to export results that had no more
than 50,000 records per query. The 207 IPC codes for the "clean" and "dirty" categories resulted in more than
50,000 records, so we needed to break apart the data gathering into seven separate queries, and then consolidate
them into a joined-up data set for further analysis.

                                                                                                         5|Page
    f)   Publisher
    g) Names of authors
    h) Country of publisher


The resulting database included bibliographic information for over 18,000 different NPLs. We conducted
two-sided t-tests to determine whether there was a difference between clean and dirty energy
technologies with regards to (1) the average number of NPL citations per patent application, and (2) the
time lags between patent applications and the NPL citations within them. The results for these t-tests are
shown in the Appendix, and are also depicted graphically in Figures 2 and 3.




4. Results and Discussion
In Figures 2-4, the bar height represents the mean (fraction of patents, number of papers or time lag) and
the error bars represent the 95% confidence intervals. Figure 2 shows the fraction of patents (clean and
dirty) that contain any reference to NPL, by decade. Figure 3 shows, for those patents that do have NPL
references, the mean number of such NPL items referenced in each awarded patent. Taking the number
of NPL per patent as an indicator of the importance of science as an input to invention, Figures 2 and 3
show two important things. First, the frequency of NPL citations in energy patents has been increasing on
both the extensive and intensive margins, i.e. a larger share of patents cite NPL and those that do cite NPL
have a greater number of NPL citations per patent. It is likely that this trend is, to some extent, an artifact
of technological and organizational changes that make it easier for patent examiners to find non-patent
prior art. But it also likely that increases in the extent of NPL citation indicate an increasing dependence
of invention on underlying scientific research over time (Jaffe and De Rassenfosse, 2019). That is, energy
invention (both clean and dirty) has become increasingly dependent on science in the last two decades
relative to the end of the 20th century.


The other clear pattern in Figures 2 and 3 is that the dependence of clean energy technologies on science
is greater than that of dirty technologies, and again this is true on both the extensive and intensive
margins. The fraction of patents with any science connection--as indicated by a NPL reference--is
consistently approximately twice as high for clean patents as for dirty patents. And, for those patents in
either group that do cite NPL, the NPL references per patent is greater for clean technologies in all periods.
The period-by-period difference is statistically significant only for the 2000s but, if the data for all periods

                                                                                                    6|Page
is combined, the difference is statistically significant. (See Appendix for t-tests on these differences.) The
relatively high and rising importance of science for clean energy invention reinforces the urgency of
investment in the underlying basic science as a crucial component of global strategy to manage climate
change (Jaffe, 2012; National Research Council, 2010).




                            Figure 2: Fraction of Patents Citing NPL by Period




                                                                                                  7|Page
                    Figure 3: Average Number of Papers Cited per Patent by Period




Figure 4 shows the average time lag between a published paper and a patent containing a NPL reference
to that paper. The "time lag" variable is the number of years between when the cited scholarly article was
published and when the patent was applied for. However, a patent might cite several articles, and
similarly an article might be cited by several patents. Two weighting methods were applied to consolidate
multiple linkages between patent applications and NPLs into a single calculation. In the "plutocratic"
weighting method, each patent-paper combination is weighted equally. That is, if a patent cites N papers,
then it will be used N times in the calculations (i.e., once for each cited paper). In the "democratic"
weighting method, if a patent cites N papers, then each patent-paper combination for that patent only
carries a weight of 1/N, thereby ensuring that the total weight for each patent is always 1. The plutocratic
method gives more weight to newer patents than does the democratic method, as newer patents tend to
cite more than older ones. The results presented in Figure 4 are based on the plutocratic weighting
method.

                                                                                                8|Page
Figure 4 shows that, during the past decade, it took on average approximately 8 years for scientific
discoveries to appear in patent applications related to clean energy technologies. Interestingly, the
average for dirty energy technologies in the most recent decade was about 11 years. This may reflect a
tendency for clean technologies to rely somewhat more on the most recent science, while dirty
technologies have more of a reliance on older science. But whatever the factors underlying the difference,
these relatively long lags suggest that the time needed for the middle stage of Figure 1 represents a
significant fraction of the overall time lags necessary to bring new cleaner technologies into actual use.




                   Figure 4: Years between Academic Paper and Patent Application




                                                                                                9|Page
5. Conclusions and Policy Implications
This finding carries with it important consequences for policymakers: barring any unexpected departures
from this pattern, discoveries arising from investments in science that are made today to help the
transition towards clean energy will quite likely take many years to find their way into new energy
technologies. Conventional wisdom has traditionally held that the capital-intensive nature of the energy
sector is a significant contributing factor to how slowly it is able to develop and deploy technological
innovations(Lester & Hart, 2012), but our evidence shows that a significant part of the problem lies further
upstream before the capital-intensive nature of the industry is materially relevant. This finding also
highlights the time-critical nature of investments in clean energy technologies. If significantly new
technologies will be required to mitigate climate change in a useful timeframe (Jaffe, 2012), then the
scientific research laying the foundations for these new technologies needs to be undertaken very soon.


Figure 4 also reveals that the process of turning scientific and technological knowledge into working
artifacts is not getting shorter, despite the chorus of voices that has been calling over many years for the
acceleration of energy-related innovation (Henderson & Newell, 2011a). It should be emphasized, too,
that this figure only considers the middle process of the three shown in Figure 1, and includes neither the
amount of time it will take for these investments in science to actually generate published results (i.e.,
the first process), nor how long it will take for the new technology to be matched with user requirements
in the marketplace (i.e. the third process).


As energy technologies become more science-intensive, it follows that the success of processes for
creating new energy technologies will become even more dependent on how scientific knowledge is
created and integrated into these innovations. By improving the granularity of our understanding of these
processes, the evidence presented here will help policymakers and to make more effective mechanisms
and strategies for accelerating the overall rate of technological change in this domain.




6. Acknowledgments
For help with preliminary data used in a previous draft, we thank Mr. Sander Fels-Leung for writing the
Java program used to acquire the data from the Lens.org and compile the resulting data into Excel




                                                                                               10 | P a g e
spreadsheets, and Professor Gaétan de Rassenfosse and Dr. Orion Penner for their expert advice in writing
the Java code in a way that successfully connected with the digital architecture of the Lens.org.




7. Author Contributions
RKP and ABJ put together the conceptual approach for the paper and managed the preliminary stages of
the data collection process from the Lens. TL updated the data, analyzed it, summarized the findings, and
assessed the robustness of the results. RKP led the writing of the text, and ABJ and TL made significant
additions and edits.




8. Data and Code Availability
All data analyzed during this study are available from authors on request.




9. References

Ardito, L., Petruzzelli, A. M., & Albino, V. (2016). Investigating the Antecedents of General Purpose Technologies: A
          Patent Perspective in the Green Energy Field. Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, 39,
          81-100.
Bosetti, V., & Verdolini, E. (2013). Clean and Dirty International Technology Diffusion. Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei
         working paper no. 43.2013. Milan, Italy.
Bunn, M., Anadon, L. D., & Narayanamurti, V. (2014). The Need to Transform U.S. Energy Innovation. In L. D.
        Anadon, M. Bunn, & V. Narayanamurti (Eds.), Transforming U.S. Energy Innovation (pp. 1-35). New York:
        Cambridge University Press.
Deutch, J. M. (2011). The Crisis in Energy Policy. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Deutch, J. M., & Lester, R. K. (2004). Making Technology Work: Applications in Energy and the Environment. New
         York: Cambridge University Press.
Grubler, A. (2012). Energy Transitions Research: Insights and Cautionary Tales. Energy Policy, 50, 8-16.
Grubler, A., & Wilson, C. (2014). Energy Technology Innovation. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Henderson, R. M., & Newell, R. G. (2011a). Accelerating Energy Innovation: Insights from Multiple Sectors. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press.
Henderson, R. M., & Newell, R. G. (2011b). Introduction and Summary. In R. M. Henderson & R. G. Newell (Eds.),
       Accelerating Energy Innovation: Insights from Multiple Sectors (pp. 1-23). Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press.
Jaffe, A. B. (2012). Technology Policy and Climate Change. Climate Change Economics, 3(4), 1250025.


                                                                                                         11 | P a g e
Jaffe, A. B., & De Rassenfosse, G. (2019). "Patent citation data in social science research: Overview and best
          practices." Research Handbook on the Economics of Intellectual Property Law. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Jaffe, A. B., & Lerner, J. (2004). Innovation and Its Discontents. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Jefferson, O. A., Jaffe, A., Ashton, D., Warren, B., Koellhofer, D., Dulleck, U., . . . Jefferson, R. A. (2018). Mapping the
         Global Influence of Published Research on Industry and Innovation. Nature Biotechnology, 36(1), 31-39.
Johnstone, N., Hascic, I., & Popp, D. (2010). Renewable Energy Policies and Technological Innovation: Evidence
        Based on Patent Counts. Environmental and Resource Economics, 45(1), 133-155.
Lanzi, E., Verdolini, E., & Hascic, I. (2011). Efficiency-Improving Fossil Fuel Technologies for Electricity Generation:
          Data Selection and Trends. Energy Policy, 39(11), 7000-7014.
Lerner, J. (2011). Venture Capital and Innovation in Energy. In R. M. Henderson & R. G. Newell (Eds.), Accelerating
          Energy Innovation: Insights from Multiple Sectors (pp. 225-260). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lester, R. K., & Hart, D. M. (2012). Unlocking Energy Innovation: How America Can Build a Low-Cost, Low-Carbon
         Energy System. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Nanda, R., Younge, K., & Fleming, L. (2015). Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Renewable Energy. In A. B. Jaffe &
        B. F. Jones (Eds.), The Changing Frontier: Rethinking Science and Innovation Policy (pp. 199-232). Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press.
National Research Council. (2010). Limiting the Magnitude of Future Climate Change. Retrieved from Washington,
         DC:
Newell, R. G. (2011). The Energy Innovation System: A Historical Perspective. In R. M. Henderson & R. G. Newell
         (Eds.), Accelerating Energy Innovation: Insights from Multiple Sectors (pp. 25-47). Chicago: University of
         Chicago Press.
Patt, A. (2015). Transforming Energy: Solving Climate Change with Technology Policy. New York: Cambridge
          University Press.
Pavitt, K. (2005). Chapter 4: Innovation Processes. In J. Fagerberg, D. C. Mowery, & R. R. Nelson (Eds.), Oxford
          Handbook of Innovation (pp. 86-114). New York: Oxford University Press.
Popp, D. (2017). From Science to Technology: The Value of Knowledge from Different Energy Research Institutions.
         Research Policy, 46(9), 1580-1594.
Rotman, D. (2019). What Would You Pay to Save the World? MIT Technology Review, 122(3), 8-11.
Smil, V. (2010). Energy Myths and Realities: Bringing Science to the Energy Policy Debate. Washington, DC:
          American Enterprise Institute.
Smil, V. (2017). Energy Transitions: Global and National Perspectives (2nd ed.). Santa Barbara, California: Praeger.
Wilson, C., & Grubler, A. (2014). Energy Technology Innovation. In A. Grubler & C. Wilson (Eds.), Energy Technology
         Innovation (pp. 3-10). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Yeo, S. (2019). Climate Finance: The Money Trail. Nature, 573, 328-331.




                                                                                                             12 | P a g e
10. Appendix ­ Statistical Significance of Results



                   Number of                      Number of
                  Applications                   Applications                   t-statistic
                   for "Dirty"                    for "Clean"                     on the
       Period
                     Patents      Fraction of       Patents      Fraction of    difference
                    (whether        "Dirty"        (whether        "Clean"       between
                  citing papers     Patents      citing papers     Patents      clean and
                      or not)     Citing NPL         or not)     Citing NPL        dirty
       1970-                                                                       -17.602
       1989             30117            0.01            6521           0.04
                                                                                   -13.281
       1990s            25999            0.02            9599           0.04
                                                                                   -20.385
       2000s            29593            0.02           26140           0.06
                                                                                   -20.569
       2010s            33273            0.03           30315           0.06
                                                                                   -20.569
       Total           118982            0.02           72575           0.05
           Table A1: Results and Statistical Significance of Data Behind Figure 2




                                    Average                        Average
                                   Number of                      Number of     t-statistic
                   Number of      Papers Cited    Number of      Papers Cited     on the
       Period
                  Applications     by "Dirty"    Applications     by "Clean"    difference
                   for "Dirty"       Patents     for "Clean"        Patents      between
                  Patents that    (conditional   Patents that    (conditional   clean and
                    cite NPL        on citing)     cite NPL        on citing)      dirty
       1970-
       1989                277            2.30            245            3.08       -1.768
       1990s               473            3.30            411            5.02       -3.083
       2000s               659            5.14           1440            9.74       -3.082
       2010s               912            6.09           1834            7.50       -2.170
       Total              2321            4.76           3930            7.80       -5.289
           Table A2: Results and Statistical Significance of Data Behind Figure 3




                                                                                        13 | P a g e
                          Average                      Average
                         Number of                    Number of
                            Years                        Years      t-statistic
Period     Number of      between       Number of      between        on the
          Applications   Paper and     Applications   Paper and     difference
           for "Dirty"     "Dirty"     for "Clean"      "Clean"      between
          Patents that     Patent      Patents that     Patent      clean and
            cite NPL     Application     cite NPL     Application      dirty
1970-
1989               277          5.35           245           4.74       1.583
1990s              473          6.81           411           5.64       4.116
2000s              659          9.10          1440           6.77      14.443
2010s              912         11.36          1834           8.36      17.662
Total             2321          9.62          3930           7.31      21.876
   Table A3: Results and Statistical Significance of Data Behind Figure 4




                                                                            14 | P a g e
