                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DECLINING BUSINESS DYNAMISM AMONG OUR BEST OPPORTUNITIES:
                 THE ROLE OF THE BURDEN OF KNOWLEDGE

                                      Thomas Astebro
                                     Serguey Braguinsky
                                        Yuheng Ding

                                     Working Paper 27787
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27787


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




Åstebro is the corresponding author. The use of NSF data does not imply NSF endorsement of the
research methods or conclusions in the paper, nor do the author views necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Thomas Astebro, Serguey Braguinsky, and Yuheng Ding. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Declining Business Dynamism among Our Best Opportunities: The Role of the Burden of
Knowledge
Thomas Astebro, Serguey Braguinsky, and Yuheng Ding
NBER Working Paper No. 27787
September 2020
JEL No. J24,J3,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

We document that since 1997, the rate of startup formation has precipitously declined for firms
operated by U.S. PhD recipients in science and engineering. These are supposedly the source of
some of our best new technological and business opportunities. We link this to an increasing
burden of knowledge by documenting a long-term earnings decline by founders, especially less
experienced founders, greater work complexity in R&D, and more administrative work. The
results suggest that established firms are better positioned to cope with the increasing burden of
knowledge, in particular through the design of knowledge hierarchies, explaining why new firm
entry has declined for high-tech, high-opportunity startups.


Thomas Astebro                                   Yuheng Ding
HEC Paris                                        University of Maryland
astebro@hec.fr                                   College Park
                                                 yuheng@umd.edu
Serguey Braguinsky
University of Maryland
Robert H. Smith School of Business and
Department of Economics
4558 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
sbraguinsky@rhsmith.umd.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27787
    1. Introduction

In the U.S. and across many countries, business dynamism is receding, as seen in declining

firm entry rates and a falling employment share in new firms (e.g., Decker et al. 2014;

Akcigit and Ates, 2019a). Is this something to worry about? Some emphatically say "yes":

"A country cannot be great over a sustained period without a steady flow of great new firms"

(Klepper, 2016, p. 62). However, the decline in the rate of startups and employment might

not be anything to be very concerned about as long as it applies mainly to mom-and-pop

stores and is explained by the increasing diffusion of efficient franchises, replacing

individually run enterprises with expert managers of franchises of multiunit firms, as

suggested by Lucas (1978) as the normal evolution of industries.

         Alternatively, it might be of grave concern if the rate of entry and the share of

employment by young firms are declining among high-opportunity firms from which most

new technologies and business opportunities typically originate (Schumpeter, 1942).

Although suggested that, for example, the supply of innovations is drying up (Gordon, 2016)

or at least has become more difficult to achieve (Jones, 2009; Bloom et al., 2020), we still

know little about the trend in business dynamics among high-tech, high-opportunity startups. 1

         We employ the nationally representative Survey of Doctorate Recipients to show a

decline over the past 20 years in both the rate of startups founded and the share of

employment at startups by the highest-educated science and engineering portion of the U.S.

workforce. The declines are wide-ranging and not driven by any particular founder

demographic category or geographic region or scientific discipline.

         A potential source of this decline is the exponential increase in the amount of

scientific knowledge. 2 Medicine is a poignant example: "It is estimated that the doubling time


1
  For evidence of the importance of high-growth young firms, see Decker et al. (2016a, 2016b).
2
  We leave aside various other reasons for the general decline in business dynamics suggested in the literature
(see e.g. Akcigit and Ates, 2019a; 2019b; Decker et al., 2016b) but we examine some potential alternative
explanations for the decline specific to high-tech, high-opportunity startups in the robustness/extensions section.
of medical knowledge in 1950 was 50 years; in 1980, 7 years; and in 2010, 3.5 years... What

was learned in the first 3 years of medical school will be just 6% of what is known at the end

of the decade from 2010 to 2020" (Densen, 2011). The impact of the so-called increasing

burden of knowledge has previously been analyzed with respect to the organization of

science (Jones, 2009). It has been argued to be a driving factor in the increase in teamwork

for research and patenting (Wuchty et al., 2007), the increasing age at which PhDs are

obtained, and an increased specialization of PhD work (Jones, 2009). The latter can be seen

for example by the decrease in the number of physicians entering practice as general

internists from 35% during 1991-2000 to 12% during 2011-2015 (Dalen et al., 2017).

        We argue and find that an increasing burden of knowledge also leads to fewer high-

tech high-opportunity startups. We argue and find that it also leads PhDs to amass greater

work experience before becoming a founder, to shoulder more R&D tasks as founders, and

not being rewarded for that extra work. Working for existing firms has, therefore, become

considerably more attractive. Our argumentation links insights from three strands of

literature: the increasing burden of knowledge, the organization of knowledge, and on the

declining business dynamism, specifically at high-tech, high-opportunity firms.

        The decline in startups is illustrated with the medical sector where 48.5 percent of

physicians worked as independent practice owners in 2012, but where only 31.4 percent were

independent owners in 2019 (Merritt Hawkins, 2019). Speaking of the shrinking gap in

earnings, John A. Bergfeld of Cleveland Clinic added, "it used to be my colleagues in private

practice made double to three times what I make. I do not think it is that way anymore." 3

        Exploring the impacts of the increasing burden of knowledge, we compare

individuals with a PhD in science and engineering either as founders of incorporated startups



3
  Press, Robert, 2011. "Private practice vs. salaried employment: A complicated decision." Healio, January 01.
https://www.healio.com/news/orthopedics/20120325/private-practice-vs-salaried-employment-a-complicated-
decision.


                                                      3
or as workers employed by established companies. We examine unique microdata on the

evolution of work experience, earnings and wages, the change in the returns to experience,

the change in the number of R&D and other tasks performed, and the trends in the span of

control (direct reports) and the depth of the hierarchy (indirect reports) for these two groups.

       We find that the number of different R&D tasks has increased more for founders than

for workers. And the returns to experience have increased over time for founders but not for

workers, highlighting the increasing need for a single person­­the founder­­to cope with the

burden of knowledge in startups. Workers at established firms have, instead, comfortably

narrowed their span of control, employed more people indirectly under their control to

support their work, and kept administrative duties low. They are also better rewarded for

taking on more diverse work and managerial responsibilities than founders. All evidence

suggests that established firms have coped more effectively with the increasing burden of

knowledge in science by better utilizing the division of labor in innovative work through re-

organizing tasks and hierarchies.

       The literature on efficient knowledge hierarchies (Caliendo and Rossi-Hansberg,

2012; Garicano, 2000; Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg, 2004) can be used to explain how large

organizations cope with the increasing burden of knowledge. As more innovation work

exceptions are reported by lower-level workers, the firm responds by increasing the number

of layers to handle the increasing volume of reports, and by narrowing the variance in reports

to allow greater job specialization. Increasing the number of layers of management adds a

fixed cost of operations, and narrowing task diversity may lower wages. Caliendo and Rossi-

Hansberg (2012) show that larger firms are more likely to become hierarchically taller by

adding more layers of management when the number of managerially actionable exceptions

passed up the hierarchy increases, as they can more easily absorb the added fixed cost.

Founders at startups appear not to have recourse to this mitigation strategy.



                                                4
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we briefly describe the data,

with more exhaustive information provided in the Online Appendix. In Section 3 we

document a declining startup rate and a declining employment share at startups for U.S. PhD

recipients in science and engineering. In Section 4 we examine the impact of the increasing

burden of knowledge as a possible explanation for the decline in startup rates and show that

startup founders have been hit much harder by this burden than workers at established firms.

Section 5 contains robustness checks and some extensions. Section 6 concludes.


   2.   Brief data description

The Survey of Doctorate Recipients (SDR) is a nationally representative survey of PhD

recipients in science and engineering from U.S. PhD-granting institutions. We employ

restricted-use data from all available surveys conducted (for most part) biannually between

1995 and 2017. We limit the sample to those who reside in the U.S. and report being

employed full time with non-zero salaries, whose principal employer is either a private-sector

for-profit company or organization, or who are self-employed or business owners at their own

business at the time of the survey. Information about startups comes from answers to the

question asking whether one's principal employer "c[a]me into being as a new business

within the past five years." This question was not asked in the 1995, 2006, and 2008 surveys.

Most of our analyses therefore start with the year 1997. We call businesses that did not come

into being within the prior five years "established businesses."

        Incorporated businesses have been found to be considerably more entrepreneurial and

pursue better business opportunities than nonincorporated ones (Shane, 2009; Hurst and

Pugsley, 2011; Åstebro and Tåg, 2017; Levine and Rubinstein, 2017). In this paper, we

therefore focus on owners of incorporated startups, whom we call "founders." This term

refers to owners at the time observed in the data, whose startups were their full-time primary




                                                5
employer and who drew non-zero salaries. We also sometimes use the term "startup rate" as a

shortcut when referring to the share of founders among all incorporated business owners.

       We further examine individuals' engagement in R&D tasks. The SDR data contain

responses to the question "Which of the following work activities occupied at least 10 percent

of your time during a typical week on the job?" The list of possible alternatives includes 14

different activities. See Table A2 (all figures and tables starting with the letter A are in the

appendix). We call these "tasks" and follow the classification suggested by the SDR to

identify four of those activities as "R&D" tasks: "basic research," "applied research,"

"development," and "design." We add up tasks in the R&D category to obtain the number of

R&D tasks performed by founders and workers. We also follow the SDR-suggested

classification to identify management and administration work activities (abbreviated as

"management" tasks), which consist of five categories: "accounting, finance, contracts,"

"human resources," "managing or supervising people or projects," "sales, purchasing,

marketing, customer service, public relations," and "quality or productivity management."

       As in recent empirical work on knowledge-based hierarchies (e.g. Caliendo et al.,

2015; Guadalupe and Wulf, 2010; Tåg, 2013; Tåg et al., 2016), we infer firms' hierarchical

structure based on microdata from workers' and founders' work tasks at their firms.

Specifically, SDR provides data on the number of people supervised directly and indirectly

by each respondent. Following Guadalupe and Wulf (2010), we call the former "span of

control" and the latter "depth of the hierarchy."



   3. The startup founding rate and the dynamics of the employment share at startups

Figure 1 displays the large decline over the past two decades in the share of founders among

PhDs in science and engineering. In 1997, 34 percent reported being a founder of a startup,

but by 2017 this rate had declined to 21 percent, a decline of 38 percent. This observation



                                                 6
alone would not be sufficient to conclude that high-tech high-opportunity startups are on the

decline because there could be fewer founding teams, but each could be getting larger.

However, as also shown in Figure 1, the employment share of science and engineering PhDs

at startups is also falling over time. 4 The downward trend is not driven by any particular

category of PhDs. For example, figures similar to Figure 1 for males versus females, whites

versus non-whites, California versus the rest of the U.S., and for U.S. versus non-U.S. born

PhDs differ in levels but their dynamics are almost exactly the same as those in Figure 1. See

Figures A1-A6. The dramatically falling share of founders and employment at startups raises

the prospect of a drying up of high-tech, high-opportunity startups.

                                      --- Figure 1 around here ---


    4. Evidence of an increasing burden of knowledge

        What factors can explain the decline in high-tech, high-opportunity startups? We

focus on the impact of an increasing burden of knowledge in science and engineering. If the

increasing burden of knowledge is especially hard to handle at startups, we would expect to

see a decline in the rate of startups. And if having more work experience is akin to prolonging

the training in preparation for shouldering the burden of knowledge as a founder (cf. Jones,

2009), we would expect to see greater work experience among founders. We would also

expect experienced founders to develop an earnings advantage over less experienced

founders.

        Consistent with the burden of knowledge increasing for founders, the years of work

experience among founders shows a steady increase. The regression results imply that the

average founder had about 14 percent longer post-PhD work experience in 2017 than in 1997.

See Table A11. Further, Figure 2 illustrates a pronounced decline over time in the earnings of



4
 Uniquely, the employment share of PhDs at startups increased from about 11 percent in 1997-99 to more than
15 percent in 2001, possibly reflecting the dot-com boom (see Hombert and Matray, 2019).


                                                     7
less experienced founders relative to their more experienced peers. Here, we separate less and

more experienced founders by the median number of years after PhD (13 years), although

other reasonable cut-offs lead to similar results. Between 1997 and 2001, founders with post-

PhD experience at or below the median earned more than the rest of the sample (consistent

with Ouimet and Zarutskie, 2014), but by the 2010s, the situation is reversed, with less

experienced founders earning on average 30-40 percent less than other founders. Prior work

experience apparently is becoming much more valuable for founders over time. The earnings

of less experienced founders declined not just in relative but also in absolute terms. The

average inflation-adjusted earnings of founders with below the median post-PhD experience

were $72,616 in 1997, whereas 20 years later their earnings were $57,517, a decline of more

than 20 percent (Table A3 presents full survey data).

                                   --- Figure 2 around here ---


       Running a startup might constrain founders' ability to organize its hierarchy

efficiently, at least until it has succeeded in growing well beyond its initial size. As science

accumulates more knowledge, we would therefore expect PhD founders to have to take on

more R&D tasks. The SDR sample offers a unique opportunity for pursuing this line of

inquiry using detailed, individual-level data on founder and worker tasks. We also explore

how startups and established firms differ in their organization of work, guided by the theory

of knowledge hierarchies (e.g., Garicano, 2000).



4.1. The number of R&D tasks is rising, but established firms take advantage of a

division of labor and knowledge hierarchies

Figure 3, Panel A, illustrates the dynamics of the total number of tasks reported by founders

and, separately, the number of R&D and management tasks. The total number of tasks (with a

theoretical maximum of 14) is measured on the left-hand scale whereas the number of


                                                 8
management and R&D tasks, whose maximum is five and four, respectively, are measured on

the right-hand scale. The average number of all tasks for founders increased by about 15

percent from the beginning to the end of our sample, a statistically significant difference

using a double-sided t-test. Furthermore, although the number of both R&D and management

tasks increased, the increase is more pronounced in R&D, for which it rose by more than 50

percent from 1997 to 2017. Importantly, the increase in R&D tasks was equally pronounced

at all experience levels (column (1) in Table 1 below). As a result, R&D tasks that comprised

about 25 percent of all tasks conducted by founders in 1997 increased to 34 percent of all

tasks in 2017. As can be seen in Figure 3, this was not accompanied by any decline in

management tasks, so the founders had to shoulder the burden of doing more R&D tasks

while also running the same or more administrative tasks.

                                        --- Figure 3 around here ---

         Panel B of Figure 3 presents the trends for workers at established firms. Workers were

also affected by the need to perform more R&D tasks, as the increase in the number of R&D

tasks from 1997 to 2017 is about 12 percent. Notably, however, as the figure reveals, workers

did not need to handle more management tasks, which remained relatively flat for them.

Also, founders had to deal with significantly more management tasks than workers in terms

of levels: about 30-40 percent more at the beginning of the study period, increasing to 50

percent more at the end. The explanation for this difference likely lies in how the two types of

firms differ in their organization of work, which we analyze below. 5

         Based on these initial observations, we conjecture that established firms were able to

take better advantage of a division of labor in innovation and organize knowledge hierarchies

more efficiently. To examine this further while accounting for various other differences



5
 Another potential explanation is that the breadth of tasks is better rewarded for founders than workers, as in
Lazear (2005). However, note that whereas founders take on more tasks, they are not rewarded for doing so.


                                                        9
between founders and workers, we turn to regression analysis. The estimation equation,

estimated separately on the samples of founders and workers at established firms, is

          =  + 1  + 2  +    +  ,                                                                   (1)
where  denotes outcome variables for individual i at time t, which are (a) the number of

R&D tasks, (b) the span of control, and (c) the depth of the hierarchy; t is the time trend;

 denotes experience (years after PhD is received) of individual i at time t; Xit is a vector

of controls, consisting of demographic, occupational, and geographic location dummies; and

 is the error term. Estimation results are presented in Table 1. 6

                                        --- Table 1 around here ---

         First, coefficients on the time trend variable in columns (1) and (2) in Panel A confirm

a positive time trend in the number of R&D tasks for both founders and workers at

established firms, with a somewhat stronger trend for founders. Second, coefficients on work

experience show that workers at established firms, but not founders, tend to perform fewer

R&D tasks as their experience grows. This suggests that established firms employ a greater

division of labor in innovation by assigning less experienced workers to R&D tasks and more

experienced workers to team leadership roles. In Panel B we dig deeper into this by looking

at the span of control and the depth of the hierarchy. Neither the span of control nor the depth

of hierarchy changes over time for founders. Although more experience is associated with

somewhat deeper hierarchies for founders, the coefficient is relatively small and statistically

only marginally significant. Needless to say, most startups are small, so opportunities to

restructure startups to counter the increasing burden of knowledge must be inherently limited.

         In contrast, both the span of control and the depth of the hierarchy (especially the

latter) strongly increase with experience for workers at established firms, in line with such



6
  To ease interpretation and to conform with the specification of earnings regressions in the next section, we
report the results of estimations for log-transformed dependent variables using the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS)
transformation. The results are qualitatively similar to those with non-log-transformed values.


                                                       10
workers performing fewer R&D tasks as they age, as shown in column (2) in Panel A.

Strikingly, the coefficient on the time trend for the span of control in column (4) is negative,

indicating that the span of control decreases for workers at established firms on average by

about 0.46 percent per year (statistically highly significant). However, the coefficient on the

time trend for the depth of the hierarchy in column (6) is positive, also statistically highly

significant, indicating that hierarchies deepen over time for workers at established firms on

average by about 0.32 percent per year. Together, the results suggest that established firms

cope with the increasing burden of knowledge on their workers by introducing additional

layers of hierarchy, while simultaneously reducing the number of employees who report

directly to managers, as suggested in the literature on efficient knowledge hierarchies. 7

        We probed the data further by looking at the sample limited to workers at firms with

5,000 or more employees. These firms account for about half the workers at established firms

in our sample. If, as we conjecture, the increasing burden of knowledge can be mitigated by

introducing costly additional layers of management, large firms should have greater

opportunities to implement these organizational changes. This should lead to a higher number

of indirectly supervised individuals. Hence, we re-estimated equation (1) for workers at large

firms. The results, reported in Table A4, show that hierarchies deepen over time at twice the

rate for workers at large firms as for workers at all firms. In addition, for workers at large

firms, the number of R&D tasks increases by about half the increase for founders and also

significantly more slowly than for all workers. Thus, other things equal, large firms mitigate

the impact of the increase in the burden of knowledge better than small firms, and this

appears to be related to hierarchies that grow taller more quickly at large than at small firms.


7
  Suppose that a firm initially consisting of two R&D teams with 10 members each added a second layer made
up of a single manager, promoted from a supervisory position on one of the teams. The newly promoted
manager had nine direct reports before the change but now has zero direct and 19 indirect reports. Her
replacement within her former team will now have eight, not nine, direct reports. More generally, reorganizing a
firm by adding layers of hierarchy while holding the firm size constant can be seen as accompanied by a
decrease in the number of direct reports and an increase in the number of indirect reports.


                                                      11
4.2. Earnings dynamics of founders versus workers at established firms

As mentioned in Section 3, founders did not appear to receive higher earnings over time,

despite having to cope with an increasing number of R&D and management tasks. In Table 2

we examine this with an earnings regression. The estimation equation is similar to Equation

(1) except that the outcome variable is now the (logged) salary of individual i at time t, while

the explanatory variables of interest include the (IHS-transformed) number of R&D tasks, the

span of control, and the depth of the hierarchy, and there is an interaction term between the

time trend and experience. We present results in Table 2 separately for founders and workers

at established firms. This avoids well-known specification problems associated with how

wages and entrepreneurial earnings are reported. Several things stand out.

       Founders' earnings decline on average by about 1.6 percent per year (column 1).

However, this is offset by an opposite time trend in returns to experience. The mean number

of years after founders receive a PhD is 15.9 years; hence, the coefficient on the interaction

term between experience and time implies that, at the mean work experience, the negative

baseline time trend is completely offset.

       In stark contrast to founders, workers' real earnings grow over time, although the

increase is relatively small, 0.4 percent per year (column 2). Earnings for workers at

established firms are concave in experience. The trend toward increasing returns to

experience is much weaker among workers than among founders; at the mean number of

years after receiving a PhD (12.5 years), earnings grow extra by just 0.125 percent per year.

                                   --- Table 2 around here ---


       Performing more R&D tasks is associated with significantly higher earnings for

workers at established firms. Doubling the number of R&D tasks increases their earnings by

4.4 percent. The point estimate for founders is similar in magnitude, but the standard errors

are high so the most we can say in this case is that, controlling for all other factors (including


                                                12
the time trend, experience, the interaction of the two, etc.), more R&D tasks are tentatively

associated with higher earnings, but there is large variance in outcomes.

       Finally, both a larger span of control and hierarchical depth seem to be associated

with higher earnings for both founders and workers. Recall that Table 1 showed no increase

in the span of control or hierarchical depth for founders over time. Nevertheless, a larger span

of control or hierarchical depth provides economic compensation. Hence, the lack of change

in these features for founders is likely explained by their inability to offset the increasing

burden of knowledge by more efficiently organizing tasks at their startups.



5. Robustness and alternative explanations

We wanted to gain insights about the dynamics of Schumpeterian startups, which are the

most likely to contribute to innovation and growth in the economy. For that purpose, we

studied founders with a PhD in science and engineering and their incorporated startups. In

this section, we briefly examine what happens if we perturb that measure and also consider

some potential alternative interpretations of our findings.



5.1. Type of entrepreneurial opportunity

       Following a series of articles showing that incorporated businesses pursue the highest

opportunities, we analyze only founders of incorporated startups. However, also including

founders of unincorporated startups in the analysis yields similar findings, provided the

sample is limited to founders whose job and education are closely related (see Braguinsky et

al., 2012; Ohyama, 2015). The details are in Appendix E.



5.2. R&D-focused individuals




                                                13
       In addition to the list of the work activities on which individuals spent at least 10

percent of their time on the job, SDR asks the question "On which work activity did you

spend most of your time during a typical week on the job?" We call founders who listed

R&D as their primary work activity "R&D-focused" founders. We examine these founders

(and workers) to see whether the results are, potentially, even more extreme for these

founders.

       Note that an R&D-focused founder and a startup engaged in R&D might not be the

same thing. A startup might be primarily engaged in R&D whereas the founder primarily

manages a team of researchers. An increasing burden of scientific and technological

knowledge, leading to an increasing number of exceptions brought to the attention of the

founder, might change this, however, shifting the primary work activity of the founder from

management to R&D. In fact, that interpretation appears to be most consistent with the data.

       The first thing to note is that R&D-focused founders as a share of all founders

increases over time­­from 26.1 percent in 1997 to 31.6 percent in 2017, an increase of 21

percent (see Table A7). However, the share of R&D-focused business owners among all

business owners irrespective of firm age rises even faster, from about 12 percent in 1997 to

over 30 percent in 2017, suggesting that the burden of knowledge is widespread. As a result,

the rate of R&D-focused startups steeply declines, and this decline, from 54 percent in 1997

to 20 percent in 2017, is larger in magnitude than the decline in the overall startup rate shown

in Figure 1. Notably, the share of R&D-focused workers at established firms remains

basically flat over time, fluctuating at around 50 percent.

       The increasing burden of knowledge is also reflected in a steeper earnings decline for

R&D-focused founders. In Table A8, we present the estimation results from the same

regression for which results were in Table 2, but with the sample limited to R&D-focused

founders. The negative earnings time trend is much more pronounced for R&D-focused



                                               14
founders than for all founders­­the decline at the baseline is more than 4.4 percent per year

and statistically highly significant. Table A9 present changes in levels.

       In summary, we find that R&D-focused owners are becoming more plentiful among

both startup founders and other business owners, the startup rate is declining more rapidly for

R&D-focused founders than for all founders, and earnings are declining more rapidly for

R&D-focused founders than for all founders.



5.3 Limited scope for the burden of knowledge?

       Could it be that the burden of knowledge is limited to certain fields of science? For

example, since the bioengineering revolution created by the invention of rDNA in 1973 by

Herber W. Boyer and Stanley N. Cohen, the life sciences have raced forward, but mechanical

engineering has not. However, we have already provided evidence that the decline in

business dynamics is not driven by any particular category of PhDs. Further, our regression

specifications (Tables 1 and 2) include detailed occupational dummies, controlling for

differences between bioengineers and mechanical engineers in their work.

       In Appendix H, we use information about PhD specializations and redo our main

analyses. Specifically, we sort PhDs into two groups: those where science has built up rapidly

over the past forty years, and those that have not experienced such a rapid increase. Then, the

levels do indeed appear different. PhD founders who are more science based perform more

R&D tasks. However, the general time trends already reported are found to apply universally,

albeit with one major difference. The drop in the share of founders is more pronounced for

PhDs that are more science based. This result provides further support for the conclusion that

the increasing burden of knowledge is driving the decline in business dynamics among high-

tech, high-opportunity startups.




                                               15
5.4 Declining human capital?

         A decline in the human capital of founders might explain the decline in high-tech,

high-opportunity startups and their founders' earnings. For example, using data in the U.S.

manufacturing sector, Ayyagari and Maksimovic (2017) find a declining trend in skill levels,

especially in cognitive skills among new entrants. We employ a standard approach (see Choi

et al., 2019; Azoulay et al., 2020) with prior salaries as a measure of the human capital of

future founders. The results, presented in Figure A8, show that although the predicted prior

salaries of future founders tended to be lower than of those who stay in paid work in the

1990s, the ordering was reversed in the 2008 and 2010 surveys while the two were at about

the same level in the 2015 survey. Furthermore, we examined the share of founders who

graduated from top-ranked PhD programs. Consistent with the findings about pre-transition

salaries, around 5 percent more founders graduated from top-ranked programs in the 2010s

than in the late 1990s and early 2000s (Figure A10). Hence, both prior salaries and the quality

of education received by founders have increased over time. In short, we find no evidence

that the declining trend in the startup rate and in earnings of founders could be due to a fall in

the ability or education quality of founders over time. 8



5.5 Declining supply of PhDs?

         Could the decline in the creation of high-tech, high-opportunity startups somehow be

driven by a decline in the number of PhDs? It appears not. The overall supply of recent

science and engineering PhD recipients has demonstrated a strong upward trend since 1997

(see Figure A13). The number of PhDs awarded in science and engineering fields increased

from 28,486 in 1997 to 41,294 in 2017 (National Science Foundation, 2019).


8
  Increasing human capital of founders is consistent with a "selection effect" due to higher barriers to entry that,
according to our story, stem from the increasing burden of knowledge. Note that this does not have to lead to an
increase in average earnings of the remaining founders, because the increasing burden of knowledge reduces
earnings at all levels of human capital.


                                                         16
5.6. Increasing Age of Founders?

        Over the past few decades, the U.S. population has been aging. Since young people

tend to disproportionately found or join new businesses (Ouimet and Zarutskie, 2014), the

aging of those receiving PhDs could explain the decline in Figure 1 (Hopenhayn et al., 2018;

Karahan et al., 2019). However, if we define "young" as those below the median age of 45

(or any other reasonable cutoff, for that matter), the share of such young founders in the total

number of all founders was stable, about 35-40 percent throughout the period studied. In

Figure A7, we also show that the age at which individuals receive their PhDs in science and

engineering had increased steadily until about 1993­­the average recipient was 28.7 years

old in 1971 and 31.3 years old in 1995. Then, the average age of PhD recipients stopped

increasing and even declined after 2003­­the average recipient in 2015 was 30.3 years old.

Apparently, the age of founders is not strongly associated with the decline in high-tech, high-

opportunity startups.9



5.7 Dot Com Bubble Effects?

        Since the starting period of our data coincides with the advent of the dot com boom,

the decline could just be an anomaly. We therefore reconstructed Figure 1 excluding

computer-related occupations (Figure A14) and excluding individuals who performed

computer-related tasks (Figure A15). The trends without computer-related occupations are

the same as in Figure 1, suggesting a widespread decline that is not specific to computing.

Also, Table A12 shows that the overall share of PhDs in computer-related occupations is

stable among incorporated business owners while it slightly increases over time among those




9
  In contrast, as mentioned above, accumulated work experience (years after PhD) prior to founding a startup did
tend to increase over time. Startup founders appear to have been receiving their doctorate degrees at a younger
age over time. See Appendix H, Table A11 and the discussion there.


                                                      17
employed in industry. None of these two latter trends shows a clear relationship to the

declining trend in startups, suggesting that the dot com boom and bust is not the culprit.



5.8. Declining Venture Capital?

       A simple explanation for the decline in high-tech, high-opportunity startups is that the

aggregate amount of venture capital for startups has declined. However, the supply of venture

funding has substantially increased since the dot com crash. For example, the amount of

global venture capital investments increased tenfold, from $25 billion in 2004 to $254 billion

in 2018 (National Venture Capital Association, 2019). More than 8,380 venture-backed

companies received $131 billion in funding in 2018, surpassing the $100 billion mark set at

the height of the dot-com boom in 2000. For more detail on how venture capital has shifted

over the years, see Lerner and Nanda (2020).


   6. Discussion

We have established a couple of new facts regarding business dynamism among high-tech,

high-opportunity startups run by PhDs in science and engineering. Since 1997, the share of

founders in these startups has declined by around 38 percent, not limited to any particular

founder demographic or ethnic group or occupation, and this decline is widespread across

regions of the United States. The share of workers at startups has followed the same path of

decline.

       There is a significant trend toward an increasing amount of work experience among

founders (although not their age), pointing to the burden of knowledge as an explanation for

the decline in startup rates. Probing this idea in the data, we show evidence that founders are

rewarded for building experience, as they have had to perform an increasing number of R&D

tasks over time while also increasing the number of other tasks that they have to perform.




                                               18
Nevertheless, founders' earnings generally do not reflect that added workload, as average

earnings have been declining, especially for less experienced founders.

       The data further suggest that established firms have an advantage over startups in

creating a division of labor in R&D, in particular by introducing more hierarchical layers,

reducing knowledge workers' span of control, and allocating more experienced workers to

positions with greater managerial responsibility. Further, established firms compensate

workers for performing more R&D tasks and supervising more individuals. These

developments are not seen among founders. The differences follow from the natural limits

imposed by running a small firm with less division of labor and a high amount of

multitasking by the founder. The largest firms are even more active in reorganizing job tasks,

increasing the depth of hierarchy at twice the rate of all established firms.

       Why don't founders hire more specialized workers and start with bigger teams and

build a richer hierarchy, as established firms do? Although we do not address this follow-on

question, we can at least speculate. Some of the answers might be that startups face high

uncertainty about the viability of their businesses and thus start small, and either grow or exit

as uncertainty diminishes; and/or most startups are financially constrained and cannot afford

to hire larger teams. We leave it to future research to explore these ideas.

       As noted in the introduction, a steady flow of great new high-tech firms is generally

agreed to be necessary for an economy to remain vibrant in the long run. In this sense, our

findings present cause for concern. It is not immediately clear what the remedy is. Typical

regulatory actions, such as changing taxation rates or restricting or enlarging businesses'

operating conditions would likely have no effect. And restricting established firms' ability to

make organizational design changes seems highly unlikely to pass any legislature. Our

findings suggest that if the goal is to restore business dynamism in the high-tech sector,

alleviating the burden of knowledge should be front and center in the strategy to attain it.



                                                19
7. References

Akcigit, Ufuk, and Sina T. Ates. 2019a. "Ten Facts on Declining Business Dynamism and
       Lessons from Endogenous Growth Theory." NBER Working Paper 25755.
Akcigit, Ufuk, and Sina T. Ates. 2019b. "What Happened to U.S. Business Dynamism?"
       NBER Working Paper 25756.
Åstebro, Thomas, and Joacim Tåg. 2017. "Gross, Net, and New Job Creation by
       Entrepreneurs." Journal of Business Venturing Insights 8 (November): 64­70.
Ayyagari, Meghana, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2017. "Fewer and Less Skilled? Human
       Capital, Competition, and Entrepreneurial Success in Manufacturing."
       https://ssrn.com/abstract=3093443. Accessed June 16, 2020.
Azoulay, Pierre, Benjamin F. Jones, J. Daniel Kim, and Javier Miranda. 2020. "Age and
       High-Growth Entrepreneurship." American Economic Review: Insights 2 (1): 65­82.
Bloom, Nicholas, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb. 2020. "Are
       Ideas Getting Harder to Find?" American Economic Review 110 (4): 1104­1144.
Braguinsky, Serguey, Steven Klepper, and Atsushi Ohyama. 2012. "High-Tech
       Entrepreneurship." Journal of Law and Economics 55 (4): 869­900.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, Giordano Mion, Luca David Opromolla, and Esteban Rossi-
       Hansberg. 2015. "Productivity and Organization in Portuguese Firms." NBER
       Working Paper 21811.
Caliendo, Lorenzo, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2012. "The Impact of Trade on
       Organization and Productivity." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3): 1393­1467.
Choi, Joonkyu, Nathan Goldschlag, John Haltiwanger, and J. Daniel Kim. 2019.
       "Founding Teams and Startup Performance." https://ssrn.com/abstract=3481850.
       Accessed June 16, 2020.
Dalen, James E., Kenneth J. Ryan, Joseph S. Alpert. 2017. "Where Have the Generalists
       Gone? They Became Specialists, Then Subspecialists." The American Journal of
       Medicine 130 (7): 766-768.
Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2016a.
       "Declining Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward." American
       Economic Review 106 (5): 203­207.
Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2016b.
       "Where Has All the Skewness Gone? The Decline in High-Growth (Young) Firms in
       the U.S." European Economic Review 86 (July): 4­23.
Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2014. "The Role of
       Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism." Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 28 (3): 3­24.
Densen, Peter. 2011. "Challenges and Opportunities Facing Medical Education."
       Transactions of the American Clinical and Climatological Association 122: 45-58.
Garicano, Luis. 2000. "Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production."
       Journal of Political Economy 108 (5): 874­904.
Garicano, Luis, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2004. "Inequality and the Organization of
       Knowledge." American Economic Review 94 (2): 197­202.
Gordon, Robert J. 2016. The Rise and Fall of American Growth. Princeton: Princeton
       University Press.


                                           20
Guadalupe, Maria, and Julie Wulf. 2010. "The Flattening Firm and Product Market
       Competition: The Effect of Trade Liberalization on Corporate Hierarchies." American
       Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (4): 105­127.
Hombert, Johan, and Adrien Matray. 2019. "Technology Boom, Labor Reallocation, and
       Human Capital Depreciation." https://ssrn.com/abstract=3496625. Accessed June 16,
       2020.
Hopenhayn, Hugo, Julian Neira, and Rish Singhania. 2018. "From Population Growth to
       Firm Demographics: Implications for Concentration, Entrepreneurship and the Labor
       Share." NBER Working Paper 25382.
Hurst, Erik, and Benjamin Wild Pugsley. 2011. "What Do Small Businesses Do."
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 73­118.
Jones, Benjamin F. 2009. "The Burden of Knowledge and the `Death of the Renaissance
       Man': Is Innovation Getting Harder?" Review of Economic Studies 76 (1): 283­317.
Karahan, Fatih, Benjamin Pugsley, and Ayegül ahin. 2019. "Demographic Origins of
       the Startup Deficit." NBER Working Paper 25874.
Klepper, Steven. 2016. Experimental Capitalism: The Nanoeconomics of American High-
       Tech Industries. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Lazear, Edward. 2005. Entrepreneurship. Journal of Labor Economics 23(4): 649-680.
Lerner, Josh, and Ramana Nanda. 2020. "Venture Capital's Role in Financing Innovation:
       What We Know and How Much We Still Need to Learn." NBER Working Paper
       27492.
Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein. 2017. "Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an
       Entrepreneur and Do They Earn More?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2):
       963­1018.
Lucas, Robert E. 1978. "On the Size Distribution of Business Firms." Bell Journal of
       Economics 9 (2): 508­523.
Merritt Hawkins. 2019. 2019 Physician Inpatient/Outpatient Revenue Survey. Dallas,
       Texas: Merritt Hawkins.
National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics.
       2019. Doctorate Recipients from U.S. Universities: 2018. Special Report NSF 20-301.
       Alexandria, VA. Available at https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf20301/.
National Venture Capital Association. 2019. 2019 Yearbook. Washington, DC: National
       Venture Capital Association.
Ohyama, Atsushi. 2015. "Entrepreneurship and Job-Relatedness of Human Capital."
       Economica 82 (328): 740­768.
Ouimet, Paige, and Rebecca Zarutskie. 2014. "Who Works for Startups? The Relation
       between Firm Age, Employee Age, and Growth." Journal of Financial Economics
       112 (3): 386­407.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York: Harper &
       Brothers.
Shane, Scott. 2009. "Why Encouraging More People to Become Entrepreneurs Is Bad Public
       Policy." Small Business Economics 33 (2): 141­149.
Tåg, Joacim. 2013. "Production Hierarchies in Sweden." Economics Letters 121 (2): 210­
       13.


                                           21
Tåg, Joacim, Thomas Åstebro, and Peter Thompson. 2016. "Hierarchies and
       Entrepreneurship." European Economic Review 89 (October): 129­147.
Wuchty, Stefan, Benjamin F. Jones, and Brian Uzzi. 2007. "The Increasing Dominance of
       Teams in Production of Knowledge." Science 316 (5827): 1036­1039.




                                         22
                                             Figures and Tables

         Figure 1. Dynamics of the share of PhDs who are employed at or founders of startups




          Notes: The figure reports the share of PhDs in science and engineering who are employed full-time
with non-zero salaries in new (five years old or less) private for-profit companies (startups) compared with
PhDs in science and engineering who are employed full-time with non-zero salaries in all private for-profit
businesses. "Employed full-time" means working at least 48 weeks per year and at least 30 hours per week. The
figure also reports the share of PhDs in science and engineering who are founders of startups in the total number
of PhDs in science and engineering who are self-employed or owners of established businesses full-time with
non-zero salaries. "Founders" are owners of/self-employed at an incorporated startup at the time observed in the
data. The question of whether the business was a startup was not asked in the 1995, 2006, and 2008 surveys, so
the data for those surveys are missing.

      Figure 2. Dynamics of relative earnings of founders with below the median years after PhD




          Notes: The figure reports the ratio of earnings of full-time incorporated startup founders with non-zero
salaries and years after PhD at or below the median of 13 years, to earnings of full-time incorporated startup
founders with non-zero salaries and 14 or more years after PhD among PhDs in science and engineering. The
question of whether the business was a startup was not asked in the 1995, 2006, and 2008 surveys, so the data
for those surveys are missing.


                                                        23
                                             Figure 3
          Panel A. The number of all, R&D, and management work activities among founders




                                          Panel B.
    The number of all, R&D, and management work activities among workers at established firms




Notes: The sample consists of full-time founders of incorporated startups with non-zero salaries among PhDs in
science and engineering. A startup is a firm that is five years old or less. Work activities that occupied at least 10
percent of their time during a typical workweek on their jobs. R&D tasks consist of "basic research," "applied
research," "development," and "design." Management (management and administration) tasks consist of
"accounting, finance, contracts," "human resources," "managing or supervising people or projects," "sales,
purchasing, marketing, customer service, public relations," and "quality or productivity management." The total
number of work activities includes, in addition to the above, computer programming, employee relations,
production, operations and maintenance, teaching as well as other work activities. See also Online Appendix
Table A2.




                                                         24
                                                   Table 1.
                            Panel A. Factors that affect the number of R&D tasks.

                                                            DV: IHS-transformed number of R&D tasks
                                                          Founders (1)               Workers at established firms (2)
                                                           0.0109***                           0.0075***
 Time
                                                             (0.002)                             (0.000)
                                                             -0.0021                          -0.0052***
 Experience (years after PhD)
                                                             (0.002)                             (0.000)
                                                            0.905***                            0.953***
 Constant
                                                             (0.196)                             (0.048)
 Other controls: gender, ethnicity,
                                                            Included                              Included
 occupation, U.S. state of employment
 Observations                                                   2,101                              65,485
 R-squared                                                      0.345                              0.274

                 Panel B. Factors that affect the span of control and depth of the hierarchy

                                                DV: span of control (IHS-             DV: depth of hierarchy (IHS-
                                              transformed # of individuals             transformed # of individuals
                                                   directly supervised)                    indirectly supervised)
                                                                 Workers at                               Workers at
                                            Founders (3)      established firms      Founders (5)      established firms
                                                                      (4)                                      (6)
                                               0.0001            -0.0046***            -0.0027            0.0032***
Time
                                               (0.004)              (0.001)             (0.004)             (0.001)
                                              -0.0010             0.0064***            0.0051*            0.0101***
Experience (years after PhD)
                                               (0.002)              (0.001)             (0.003)             (0.001)
                                             1.058***             0.686***              0.717*              -0.054
Constant
                                               (0.405)              (0.081)             (0.413)             (0.099)
Other controls: gender, ethnicity,
                                              Included             Included            Included              Included
occupation, U.S. state of employment
Observations                                   2,101                65,485               2,101               65,485
R-squared                                      0.208                0.218                0.264               0.470
Estimation method: OLS. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels,
respectively. Because there are observations with a zero number of R&D-related work activities as well as a zero span of
control and depth of hierarchy, we use inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformations, defined as  =  +  2 + 1.




                                                           25
                         Table 2. Earnings of founders and workers at established firms

 DV: Log(real earnings)
                                                                                                             Workers at
                                                                                  Founders
                                                                                                          established firms
                                                                                    (1)
                                                                                                                  (2)
                                                                                 -0.0163***                   0.0039***
 Time
                                                                                    (0.006)                     (0.001)
                                                                                    0.0121                    0.0277***
 Experience (years after PhD)
                                                                                    (0.009)                     (0.001)
                                                                                  -0.0005**                  -0.0005***
 Experience squared
                                                                                    (0.000)                     (0.000)
                                                                                  0.0011***                   0.0001***
 Experience x time
                                                                                    (0.000)                     (0.000)
                                                                                    0.0488                    0.0437***
 IHS-transformed number of R&D tasks
                                                                                    (0.046)                     (0.005)
 Span of control (IHS-transformed # of individuals directly                        0.0498*                    0.0466***
 supervised)                                                                        (0.029)                     (0.002)
 Depth of hierarchy (IHS-transformed # of individuals                             0.0820***                   0.0461***
 indirectly supervised)                                                             (0.024)                     (0.003)
                                                                                 10.0238***                  10.5638***
 Constant
                                                                                    (0.455)                     (0.042)
 Other controls: gender, ethnicity, occupation, U.S. state of
                                                                                   Included                    Included
 employment
 Observations                                                                       2,101                       65,485
 R-squared                                                                          0.138                       0.221
Estimation method: OLS. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent,
5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively. Because there are observations with zero numbers of R&D-related work
activities as well as a zero span of control and depth of hierarchy, we use inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformations, defined
as  =  +  2 + 1.




                                                               26
