                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DOES INCREASING ACCESS TO FORMAL CREDIT REDUCE PAYDAY BORROWING?

                                          Sarah Miller
                                          Cindy K. Soo

                                       Working Paper 27783
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27783


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




The authors thank seminar participants at the University of Michigan and the NBER Summer
Institute Corporate Finance meeting and Christopher Palmer for their helpful feedback. We also
thank Cathleen Kelmar for assistance with the provision of the Experian credit report data, and
Heather Lamoureux for assisting with the provision of the alternative credit data from Clarity
Services, Inc. Thanks also to Peter Choi for his excellent research assistance. The results
presented in this paper do not reflect the opinions of the aforementioned institutions, nor do they
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sarah Miller and Cindy K. Soo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Increasing Access to Formal Credit Reduce Payday Borrowing?
Sarah Miller and Cindy K. Soo
NBER Working Paper No. 27783
September 2020
JEL No. G5,G51

                                           ABSTRACT

The use of high cost "payday loans" among subprime borrowers has generated substantial
concern among policymakers. This paper provides the first evidence of substitution between
"alternative" and "traditional" credit by exploiting an unexpected positive shock to traditional
credit access among payday loan borrowers: the removal of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy flag. We find
that the removal of a bankruptcy flag on a credit report results in a sharp increase in access to
traditional credit and raises credit scores, credit card limits, and approval rates. However, despite
meaningful increases in access to traditional credit, we find no evidence that borrowers reduce
their use of payday loans, and our confidence intervals allow us to rule out even very small
reductions in payday borrowing. Furthermore, we find evidence that flag removals increase the
use of other alternative credit products such as online subprime installment loans. These results
indicate that marginally improving access to less expensive formal credit is insufficient to
meaningfully shift borrowers away from high cost subprime products. We discuss likely
explanations for this including increased marketing of subprime products associated with the flag
removal, the imperfect substitutability between cash and credit for low income borrowers, and an
insufficiency in the size of the increase in credit access associated with the flag removal.


Sarah Miller
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
mille@umich.edu

Cindy K. Soo
University of Michigan,
Ross School of Business,
701 Tappan Street,
Ann Arbor MI 48109-1234
csoo@umich.edu
                                            I.    Introduction

       The use of high-cost "payday" loans by low income borrowers has generated substantial con-

cern among policymakers. Some regulators point to studies that show payday loan borrowers are

extremely credit constrained and argue subprime borrowers are driven to use payday loans because

their access to traditional credit products is limited. These regulators view policies to encourage

banks and credit unions to extend credit to low income, high risk clientele as a way to reduce the

use of these payday loan products.1 At the same time, other studies find that some borrowers

puzzlingly take out high-interest payday loans even when they have less expensive credit card liq-

uidity available. If borrowers are taking out payday loans for other reasons than credit constraints,

improving access to traditional credit may not actually change payday loan borrowing behavior.2

Identifying the causal impact of improved credit access is challenging, as those with higher credit

scores or credit card limits likely vary on unobservable dimensions such as delinquency risk, finan-

cial knowledge, or other characteristics that may affect the propensity of these borrowers to use

payday loan products. Addressing this question has also been difficult empirically because the use

of subprime products such as payday loans are not reported on standard credit reports. Analyzing

the impact of credit access on payday borrowing behavior requires linking information on subprime

credit behavior with information on traditional credit activity, as well as a source of exogenous

variation in traditional credit access.

       In this paper, we address this empirical challenge by linking a new administrative panel of

payday loan and other "alternative" credit borrowers with their traditional credit reports. Using

this linked panel, we are able to implement an identification strategy that exploits an exogenous

positive "shock" to traditional credit access: the removal of a bankruptcy flag from a borrower's

credit report. The Fair Credit Reporting Act requires credit bureaus to remove Chapter 7 flags after

10 years, generating a sharp increase in credit scores at the date of the flag removal. We analyze

Chapter 7 rather than Chapter 13 filings in order to focus on low income borrowers who are more

likely to take up alternative lending products.3 Previous research has found that the removal of
   1
     See, for example, "Banks Urged to Take On Payday Lenders With Small, Lower-Cost Loans" https://www.
nytimes.com/2018/02/16/your-money/banks-payday-loans.html.
   2
     For example, studies find some borrowers use payday loans even when they are able to borrow on their credit
card at much lower rates, and point to possible explanations of lack of knowledge or self-control (Pagel and Olafsson
(2016), Agarwal, Skiba, and Tobacman (2009), Melzer (2011)).
   3
     The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention Act imposed income means testing for Chapter 7 filings in 2005, in order


                                                         2
these flags immediately increases credit scores and results in higher credit limits and higher approval

rates (Gross, Notowidigdo, and Wang (2018); Dobbie et al. (2017); Dobbie, Goldsmith-Pinkham,

Mahoney, and Song (2019); Musto (2004)).4 Studies have also found that bankruptcy flag removals

have a precise zero impact on labor market outcomes (Dobbie et al. (2019)), allowing us to rule

out income effects. Thus with this newly linked panel, our work provides the first evidence as to

whether improving access to "traditional" credit reduces payday borrowing.

    We obtain payday and alternative credit outcomes from an "alternative" credit bureau, Clarity

Services ("Clarity"), that specializes in provides underwriting services for the subprime consumer

population, including those with typically thin or no file credit reports.5 We link individuals in the

Clarity database from 2013 to 2017 with their standard credit reports from Experian, one of the

three major credit reporting agencies. These linkages allow us to see changes in both traditional

and non-traditional credit product use that occurs around the time a bankruptcy flag is removed.

Our data follows borrowing behavior through 4 years following the flag removal, allowing us to see

longer term outcomes. Our final sample includes 30,246 alternative credit users who have had a

Chapter 7 removal over our sample period. Our population of alternative credit users has limited

credit access and faces higher credit constraints relative to the average borrower. The average

alternative credit user in our sample has a total revolving credit limit of less than $2000 and has

used over 80 percent of their available credit, whereas the typical credit card borrower has an

average total limit of $18,000 and has only used approximately 54 percent.

    Using data from the traditional credit reports, we first confirm that bankruptcy flag removal

did create a positive shock to credit access among our sample. Credit scores jump sharply by

approximately 7 points upon flag removal, and continue to be approximately 6 to 7 points above

pre-flag removal trends at the end of four years. Consistent with prior studies, we find that this

jump in credit scores results in a corresponding increase in credit limits and credit approvals. The

total amount of credit available on credit cards increases to $63 immediately upon the removal

of a bankruptcy flag and to about $500 higher than the pre-flag removal mean by the end of four
to shuttle higher income borrowers into Chapter 13 filings instead. While prior studies such as Dobbie, Keys, and
Mahoney (2017) have used both Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 filings, their data filings are pre-2005, and thus before
the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention Act would have been imposed.
    4
      Due to the obscurity of bankruptcy flags on credit reports, survey evidence has demonstrated that the removal
of these flags are unexpected by borrowers (Gross et al., 2018).
    5
      Clarity Services is now a subsidiary of Experian, our standard credit bureau data source.
https://www.clarityservices.com/about-us/


                                                        3
years. This represents an approximately 25% increase in credit card limits by the end of our sample

period. Since an individual in our sample borrows approximately $340 per year in payday loans

on average, this credit card limit increase should be enough allow individuals to fully switch all

payday borrowing to less expensive credit card borrowing by the end of our sample period. We

also observe significantly higher approval rates for credit applications, which increase by about 8%

immediately and by about 14% by the end of our sample period. These results suggest that the

flag removal did indeed make it easier for the subprime borrowers in our sample to borrow through

traditional credit channels.

   Despite the clear improvement in access to mainstream credit, we do not observe any reduction

in payday loan usage. Our confidence intervals allow us to rule out decreases in monthly payday

borrowing of more than 4% (about $1.23) in the first year and more than 2% (about $0.50) by

the end of our sample period. Furthermore, we find monthly credit applications for payday loans

actually increase by 0.02 applications in the first year and continue to increase to 0.14 applications

over the pre-flag removal trend by the end of four years. Furthermore, we simultaneously find that

the applications and amount borrowed in online installment loans, a longer-term form of subprime

credit, increased significantly post flag-removal. These results hold across a variety of specifications,

sample definitions, measures of payday borrowing, and empirical approaches, as well as across many

subgroups. In summary, we do not find that the improved access to less expensive, traditional credit

meaningfully reduced use of "alternative" credit products; if anything, consumers increased their

use of some types of alternative products for which they might not have otherwise qualified.

   This result is puzzling given that credit card borrowing is substantially less expensive than

payday loans. We explore three potential explanations for why we do not observe any reductions

on payday borrowing: (1) the increase in credit score is insufficient to reduce alternative credit

use, (2) borrowers are targeted by increased credit marketing offers post-flag removal, and (3)

alternative credit users have a cash need that cannot be substituted with traditional credit such as

loans or credit card borrowing. We find that the magnitude of credit access increases does not have

any impact on reducing payday loan usage. Even subgroups that experience very large increases in

credit scores of 30 to 40 points do not reduce their payday loan usage and still increase their use of

subprime installment loans. We find that there are small, but statistically significant, increases in

the marketing of "pre-approved" payday loans and online subprime installment loans to subprime

                                                   4
borrowers following a bankruptcy flag removal. Finally, we discuss how the need for cash for some

expenses­such as to pay rent or repay informal loans from friends or family­may be driving our

sample's use of these high cost products.

   Our results imply that regulatory efforts to increase access to traditional credit are unlikely to

be successful at reducing payday loan borrowing unless they are quite substantial (generating larger

increases in credit access than those studied here) or they are coupled with other interventions (such

as information interventions, cash transfers, or other types of social support).



                                      II.    Background

   The payday loan industry has attracted criticism and scrutiny from both regulators and the

public at large. Payday loans are high-cost with interest rates ranging from 300% to 500%, and have

rollover features that can lead to debt traps for its borrowers. A number of studies suggest that

payday borrowers are highly credit constrained, and only borrow at such high-interest rates because

they lack traditional market alternatives. Bhutta, Skiba, and Tobacman (2015), for example, find

that borrowers apply for payday loans when they have limited access to mainstream credit and

severely poor credit histories. In a comprehensive survey of payday customers, Lawrence and

Elliehausen (2008) find that more than two-thirds turned to payday lenders after being turned

down by a traditional creditor and nearly all were fully aware of the finance charges associated

with the loans. Using natural disasters as an exogenous shock, Morse (2011) examines the causal

effect of payday lenders on welfare and finds that payday lending mitigates foreclosures and larcenies

in personal emergency situations. Some policy evaluations have found that restricting access to

payday loans either has no effect (Carter and Skimmyhorn, 2017) or a deleterious effect (Zinman,

2010) on borrowers' well-being. These studies suggest without a source of traditional credit market

access, eliminating payday options would shut down a much needed alternative source of financing

for these borrowers.

   At the same time, a number of other studies have found that payday borrowers do appear

to have access to liquidity. For example, Agarwal et al. (2009) find that payday borrowers have

substantial liquidity on their credit cards on the days they take out a payday loan. In another

survey of payday borrowers, Bertrand and Morse (2011) find that many respondents use loans


                                                  5
for temptation spending such as vacations, restaurants, electronics, and gifts. Using a detailed

administrative dataset from Iceland, Pagel and Olafsson (2016) similarly find evidence that some

payday borrowers are sufficiently liquid to borrow money less expensively and spend payday loans

on "unnecessary" items. The authors conclude that self-control or poor information are proximate

causes of payday borrowing, rather than liquidity constraints. Bertrand and Morse (2011) and

Burke, Leary, and Wang (2016) find that disclosing better information to payday borrowers reduces

the take up of payday loans significantly. Melzer (2011) finds that access to payday loans actually

make it more difficult for borrowers to pay other bills such as mortgages. Carrell and Zinman (2014)

find reduced job performance among military members associated with payday loan access. These

studies raise concerns that without proper regulation, payday lenders could mislead borrowers into

taking out loans unaware of high fees and adverse consequences on their credit.

   This paper uses the removal of a bankruptcy flag as an exogenous "shock" to payday borrowers'

ability to access traditional credit such as credit cards or personal bank loans which we describe in

further detail in the next section. The removal of a bankruptcy flag has been used in other contexts

to study the impact of poor credit on labor and credit market outcomes (Musto, 2004; Dobbie et al.,

2017; Gross et al., 2018; Dobbie et al., 2019; Herkenhoff, Phillips, and Cohen-Cole, 2016). Musto

(2004) analyzes the impact of removing bankruptcy flags on traditional credit records. He finds

sharp short run effects on credit scores and credit limits. Gross et al. (2018) and Dobbie et al.

(2019) build on this work and find that bankruptcy flag removals lead to not only an immediate

but a persistent increase in credit scores, as well as credit card limits and credit card balances.

Dobbie et al. (2019) examine effects of bankruptcy flag removals on employment, and find zero to

negligible effects on employment and earnings. To our knowledge, our study is the first to use this

approach to examine the substitution between "traditional" and "alternative" lending products.



                                     III.    Credit Data

   To analyze the impact of credit market access on payday borrowing, we construct a unique

panel dataset linking both traditional credit outcomes with a new administrative dataset of payday

borrowing outcomes.




                                                 6
A.        Traditional Credit Bureau Data

         In the United States, credit reports are provided by three main nationwide credit bureaus:

Equifax, TransUnion, and Experian. We obtain standard credit report data for this project from

Experian. Lenders use credit scores and information in credit reports to evaluate a borrower's ability

to repay a loan. Each credit file contains information across the following components: trade lines,

public records, collections, and inquiries (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2012).

         Trade lines are accounts in a borrower's name furnished by lenders to the credit bureaus.

Lenders generally report the type of credit (auto, mortgage, credit card), credit limit or loan

amount, account balances, payment history, and defaults. These files also may include dates an

account was opened or closed, whether or not an account is delinquent or in collection. The files

do not contain any terms of the loans such as interest rates, points, or fees or information on a

borrower's income or assets. Public records are obtained from the government and include any

bankruptcies, judgements, and tax liens. Additional third-party collection items are also reported

by collection agencies on behalf of lenders. Finally, inquiries are any requests to access a consumer's

credit file.6 Our data include all inquiries initiated by borrowers such as to apply for a credit card

or open a bank account. Only these type of inquiries are incorporated into a consumer's credit

score (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2012)).

         All credit bureaus employ a standardized data format so that lenders can submit and use

data from one bureau to another interchangeably. Lenders also typically pay an additional fee for

credit bureaus to provide a credit score they use to inform their underwriting. Credit scores are

calculated through bankruptcy prediction models. The most commonly known model was built by

the Fair Isaac Corporation (FICO), and provides a majority of third-party generic credit scores.

More recently, credit bureaus have jointly developed VantageScore, a comparable and competing

scoring model. Lenders also often have their own proprietary scoring models that use information

purchased from credit reports. There are numerous credit scoring models for different purposes.7

The same attributes, however, affect credit scores across models including borrowers' payment

history, delinquencies, number of accounts, and inquiries.
     6
     Credit bureaus classify these as "hard" inquiries. Soft inquiries are those initiated by lenders such as for bank
pre-screenings (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2012)).
   7
     FICO, for example, has 49 different models (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2012)).




                                                          7
         The most common credit scores assess the likelihood that a borrower will become over 90 days

delinquent within two years. Credit scores have a significant impact on a consumer's ability to access

credit. Events such as delinquencies, bankruptcy filings, and foreclosures can cause a significant

drop in scores that cause a lender to only offer a borrower subprime interest rates or deny a loan

altogether. Filing for bankruptcy, for example, can drop FICO credit scores, which range from 501

to 900, over 200 points.8

         The Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970 limits how long a credit bureau can maintain negative

information such as bankruptcy on a credit file. FCRA stipulates that bankruptcies cannot be

listed for more than 10 years after filings.9 Late payments, delinquencies, civil judgments, tax

liens, and collections are typically removed after seven years.


B.        Alternative Credit Data

         The main credit bureaus typically do not, however, collect information from institutions that

lend out alternative credit options such as payday loans. The utilization and characteristics of

these products are thus not reflected in standard credit reporting datasets. In this paper, we

present a novel dataset where we link traditional credit bureau outcomes to an administrative

panel dataset of payday borrowing outcomes from Clarity Services, Inc. ("Clarity"). Clarity is

a credit reporting agency that specializes in providing underwriting and information to lenders

offering alternative subprime products such as a payday loans. As with traditional credit bureaus,

lenders who use Clarity's services report all loan applicant information of their borrowers to Clarity

for verification.10 Clarity continues to then track all trade line activity on a subprime loan that is

taken up by the borrower. Thus, the information in Clarity's trade line database is analogous to the

information in standard credit reports. They similarly provide details on account type, balances,

payment histories, and delinquencies except on alternative subprime products. This information is

used by lenders who are interested in assessing default probabilities of applicants who are active in

the alternative credit market.
     8
      See Figure 1 in Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2012) and hypothetical FICO impacts at https://www.
myfico.com/credit-education/questions/credit-problem-comparison/.
    9
      15 U.S.C. states "Cases under title 11 or under the Bankruptcy Act that, from the date of entry of the order for
relief or the date of adjudication, as the case may be, antedate the report by more than 10 years."
  10
      As of 2012, all identity verification and fraud detection was provided by Experian to Clarity https://www.
prnewswire.com/news-releases/experian-provides-clarity-services-with-identity-verification-and-fraud-detection-cap
html


                                                     8
    Payday loans have been the most popular alternative credit product among borrowers in this

market. Payday loans are short-term, single payment loans named after the fact that borrower's

scheduled loan repayment coincides with their next payday from their employer. Payday loans

are unsecured by any collateral, but require evidence of a regular income and a checking account.

Lenders will typically accept a pay stub or Social Security check as income evidence. Loan amounts

are typically very small, ranging from $50 to $300, and very short-term, two to four weeks, depend-

ing on the timing of the borrower's income. Fees associated with these single payment loans are

typically very high relative to the loan amount, ranging from $10 to $20 per $100 borrowed. While

loan maturation is usually set to the borrower's next payday, lenders often provide the option for

borrowers to roll over or reborrow within a few days of the due date.

    More recently, payday lenders have also offered subprime installment loans as an alternative

credit option to consumers. These loans are offer repayment in a series of installments rather than

a single payment option within payday loans. These loans are therefore also larger in magnitude,

ranging from $500 to $5000. High-interest online installment loans have also come to market in

some states to get around regulations of traditional payday lending. While some online installment

lenders report to credit bureaus­and even advertise their products as a way to "rebuild your credit"­

others do not.11

    Payday and installment loans are offered both in storefront and online, with lenders offering

both storefront and online to reach a greater customer base. Online lending in particular has

been responsible for the most growth in subprime credit products in recent years.12 We present a

few examples from the websites of such online lenders in the Appendix Figure A1. These lenders

market their products to borrowers with bad credit, with some lenders who offer both payday and

installment loans marketing the installment loans as "payday consolidation loans."
  11
     In our own analysis, we found little evidence that the online installment loans recorded in the Clarity database
were reported to Experian. Correlation between the amount borrowed in installment loans recorded in Clarity and
the amount of installment loans recorded on the borrower's Experian credit report was positive but less than 0.10.
  12
     Online lending has increased 20 percent in volume and 19 percent in revenue from 2006 to 2011 whereas storefront
payday loan volume has decreased 7 percent in volume and 6 percent in revenue Nunez, Schaberg, Hendra, Servon,
Addo, and Mapillero-Colomina (2016).




                                                         9
C.      Linked Data Panel and Bankruptcy Sample

       Clarity covers over 60 million individuals, and covers over 70% of nonprime consumers across

the United States.13 Clarity collects data from both storefront and online lenders. We obtain a

random sample of 1 million individuals who have any record with Clarity between 2013 to 2017.

Clarity provides us with information on all inquiries and tradelines associated with this sample,

from which we construct monthly usage rates. We then link this panel to the history of their credit

file reports from Experian from June of each year over the same period.14 Linking these data

panels allows us to observe the effects on borrowing across both the mainstream credit market and

alternative credit market.

       From this panel, we restrict our sample to those who have had a Chapter 7 bankruptcy removal

during our sample period, 2013-2017. The Fair Credit Reporting Act requires that credit bureaus

remove Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 bankruptcy flags from individual credit reports after ten years.

We focus on Chapter 7 rather than Chapter 13 filings in order to focus on low income borrowers

who are more likely to take up alternative lending products. The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention

Act imposed income means testing for Chapter 7 filings in 2005, in order to shuttle prime borrowers

into Chapter 13 filings instead.15 Credit bureaus also voluntarily remove Chapter 13 flags after

seven years, which is confounded by effects of when other delinquencies are removed.

       Our final sample for analysis includes 30,246 "alternative credit" borrowers who appear both in

the Clarity data and also have a Chapter 7 bankruptcy on their credit record that is removed over

our sample period. The first three columns of Table I presents descriptive statistics for our analysis

sample for the years prior to the removal of the bankruptcy flag. The average credit score among

borrowers in our sample is 531, indicating the population is, on average, subprime. The average

credit card limit (all credit cards combined) is approximately $1977 and average utilization, i.e.,

the percentage of total revolving credit being used, is over 80 percent, indicating a fairly credit

constrained sample. Average monthly payday borrowing is approximately $29 (inclusive of months

with zero borrowing); monthly subprime installment borrowing is similar. About 17% of borrowers
  13
      www.clarityservices.com
  14
      In the main analysis, we use Experian credit report data from 2013 to 2017 so that the period of analysis is
identical across the Clarity and Experian data. In the appendix, we show that the results are robust to using 2006
to 2017 Experian data, which allows us to observe a longer pre-flag removal period for some borrowers.
   15
      While prior studies such as Dobbie et al. (2019) have used both Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 filings, their data
filings are pre-2005, and thus before the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention Act would have been imposed.



                                                       10
have at least one payday loan in any given year in our sample, and about 40% have at least one

payday inquiry (i.e. payday loan application).

   In the subsequent columns of Table I, we compare the characteristics of our analysis sample

with a random sample of borrowers who also have bankruptcy flags on their credit reports and a

random sample of credit reports from Experian. Columns 4 through 6 show statistics for credit

users with a bankruptcy flag from a random sample of Experian credit reports. Columns 7 and 9

show statistics for a random sample of Experian credit reports unconditional on bankruptcy flag

presence. We expect that payday loan borrowers to be worse of than both the average borrower and

an average borrower with a bankruptcy flag on her credit report. Columns (4) and (7) show that our

bankruptcy flag has substantially worse access to credit, lower liquidity, and more delinquencies than

a typical borrower and even relative to the typical borrower with a bankruptcy flag on her credit

report. These comparisons highlight the striking difference between users of alternative subprime

credit and typical borrowers. For example, on average, borrowers have credit limits across all open

credit cards of about $18,182, and even borrowers with a bankruptcy flag on their credit report

have credit card limits of $4,502. In contrast, our sample has a credit limit of only $1977. Similarly,

utilization rates in our sample are, on average, over 80 percent, whereas they are about 54 percent

in the population as a whole and 69 percent among those with a bankruptcy flag. Delinquencies

exhibit similar patterns, with total balance on third party collections and amount 30 days past

due or more higher in the Clarity sample relative to a typical borrower with a bankruptcy and

much higher than what's observed among a typical borrower unconditional on having a bankruptcy

flag. These comparisons highlight the fact that users of payday loans and other alternative credit

products are meaningfully more credit constrained and delinquency prone than a typical borrower,

even when compared to those with recent bankruptcies.

   It is important to note that because payday loans are not regulated by the Fair Credit Reporting

Act, Clarity only includes those loans originating from lenders who use their underwriting services.

Thus while Clarity's database covers over 70% of nonprime consumers across the U.S., Clarity may

not include information across all subprime loans taken out by each borrower. Checking for external

validity of Clarity's coverage is challenging, however, as data on payday loans has been difficult to

acquire. Nonetheless, in Table II we summarize and compare payday loan characteristics or our

sample and prior studies on payday loans to provide a benchmark of comparison across studies thus

                                                  11
far. In our sample of Clarity borrowers with bankruptcy flags, we find that the average number

of payday loans per year per borrower is 6. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau acquired

payday loan data from numerous storefront payday lenders in the supervisory process and report a

median of 6 payday loans per year (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2013), Burke, Lanning,

Leary, and Wang (2014)). Bertrand and Morse (2011) and Lawrence and Elliehausen (2008) survey

payday borrowers and find slightly higher averages of 9.2 and 8.3 loans per year respectively. The

average loan size of our analysis sample is somewhat higher ($551) compared to prior studies,

which find averages of approximately $360 of $392. Naturally, there are several differences across

our sample and other samples used in the literature that may make average loan size of number of

loans not directly comparable. These studies examine payday loans during earlier time periods than

our study, examine payday borrowers from specific states or specific lenders, and/or only examine

online or storefront lenders. Thus, because Clarity provides underwriting services across numerous

lenders for more than 2/3 of U.S. subprime borrowers, we believe Clarity offers the best existing

coverage of payday borrowing behavior across the United States.

       Still, it is important to be aware of the limitations of the data. If not all loans borrowed are

captured, effects on payday lending may be present, but not observable in our analysis. In addition,

we note that online payday lenders are more present in Clarity's database as they have become

more popular in recent years compared to time periods examined in prior studies and are also more

likely to need external information when processing loan applications.16

       In Figure 1, we examine the credit liquidity available to our sample of borrowers access at the

time they take out a payday loan.17 This figure shows the fraction of the sample who took out a

payday loan by their average utilization rate during the 6 month period in which the payday loan

fell. The majority of the borrowers appear to be highly credit constrained around the time they

took out a payday loan, with about 70 percent having utilization rates at 80 percent or higher at

the time they take out a payday loan and 34 percent either having no credit cards on file or using

100 percent or greater of their available credit. This is consistent with prior studies that documents
  16
     As an additional check, in Miller and Soo (ming) we find that payday loan usage of our Clarity analysis sample
reflects a similar fraction of use in the population of subprime borrowers as reported by the Survey of Consumer
Finances.
  17
     Note that utilization rates are not defined for borrowers who have no source of revolving credit, as is the case for
approximately 25% of the borrower by year observations in our data. We assign such borrowers a utilization value of
100 percent, as they have no credit available for use.



                                                           12
most payday loan borrowers are credit constrained (Bhutta et al., 2015).18 The fact that payday

loan borrowers have limited access to formal credit suggests that we might a priori expect an

alleviation of that constraint to result in less payday loan usage­that is, borrowers may be using

expensive payday loans as a last resort. At the same time, a substantial minority use payday loan

products even with more than 20 percent of their credit card credit available and some payday loan

users exhibit considerable formal credit availability at the time of the payday loan. Borrowers who

use payday loans even when less expensive traditional credit is available may exhibit this behavior

due to poor information about the costs of payday borrowing; as a result, changes in access to

credit may be less salient for this group.



                                     IV.      Empirical Analysis

       We employ an event-study framework following Dobkin, Finkelstein, Kluender, and Notowidigdo

(2016), Gross et al. (2018), and Dobbie et al. (2019). Specifically, we exploit the required flag

removal of Chapter 7 bankruptcy flags by the Fair Credit Reporting Act to examine the causal

impact of traditional credit access on subprime borrowing outcomes. We first explore our outcomes

graphically using the following nonparametric estimation:



                                                        15
                                    yit = y + c +              I(rit   ) +     it                                (1)
                                                       =-12


where rit indicates the month since bankruptcy flag removal. To reduce noise, we group these

monthly observations into quarters, denoted  . Coefficients  capture the changes in credit out-

comes by quarter relative to the the quarter of the flag removal. The parameter y represents fixed

effects for calendar year while c represents cohort year fixed effects that indicate the year the

bankruptcy was filed. This event study estimation explores how outcomes evolve around the time

of the bankruptcy flag removal after accounting for contemporaneous time trends and differences

across filing cohorts.
  18
    This is in contrast to Agarwal et al. (2009), however, that finds two-thirds of their sample have more than $1000
in credit card liquidity when taking out a payday loan, the majority of our sample has less than $400 in credit card
availability.




                                                         13
   After exploring these patterns graphically, we estimate the impact of the flag removal more

formally by assuming that, in the absence of a flag removal, credit outcomes would have continued

to evolve along their pre-existing trend. This approach ascribes any deviation from the pre-trend

to a causal impact of the flag removal. Prior studies have shown that over time, post-bankruptcy

borrowers gradually build back their new credit and overall improve their financial portfolio (Han,

Keys, and Li (2018), Jagniani and Li 2014). In our graphical figures, we also plot a linear estimation

in the pre-flag removal period to look for any common pre-trends that may be occurring across

borrowers before their bankruptcy flag is removed. Consistent with prior studies, we find pre-trends

that are roughly linear for both traditional credit outcomes and alternative credit outcomes. Thus,

our final specification further controls for this linear pre-trend, represented by t:

                                                       4
                            yit = tpre + y + c +             y I(rit  y ) +   it                  (2)
                                                      y =1


We implement this pre-trend specification by excluding the pre-flag removal event time indicators in

equation (1) and instead including a linear "time to removal" term, denoted tpre . This term should

account for any pre-existing linear time trend (Gross et al., 2018). Coefficients y estimate the

impact of bankruptcy flag removal on credit outcomes relative to how these outcomes would have

progressed otherwise, while removing any common calendar time and mean effects across cohorts.

We group these indicators into year (y), rather than reporting them by quarter or month, for the

ease of reporting.

   The interpretation of our event study design also assumes bankruptcy flag removals are an

exogenous shock to credit supply that is unanticipated by borrowers. Because credit bureaus are

required by the FCRA to remove flag at a set period, consumers might anticipate this removal

by applying for new credit in the months immediately leading up to the flag removal. Because of

the obscurity of credit reporting, however, most consumers may not even be aware of upcoming

flag removals and survey evidence is consistent with the idea that these removals are a surprise to

borrowers (Gross et al., 2018). Nonetheless, we can empirically test to see if borrowers anticipate

flag removals by looking for a gap in the number of inquiries in the months leading up to flag

removals. As we describe in the our following results, we do not find evidence of borrowers shifting

the timing of their credit card applications in anticipation of the flag removal.


                                                 14
     We conduct several "robustness checks" to confirm that our results are not sensitive to model

specification or sample choices. We examine whether the results change if we include individual

fixed effects in lieu of cohort fixed effects, include year by month (rather than year) fixed effects for

the Clarity data,19 if we expand the sample period in the Experian data to include years through

2007, and if we use a "control group" of bankruptcy filers whose flags were removed outside of our

sample period to identify the year fixed effects in our model. These robustness checks yield results

that are similar to those reported in our main specification. We discuss and report these in the

Appendix, rather than the main text.


A.    Impact of Bankruptcy Flag Removals on Traditional Credit Outcomes

     We first examine the impact of bankruptcy flag removals on the total number of bankruptcies

and credit scores. Figure 2 first plots the impact of bankruptcy flag removals on total bankruptcies

and credit scores. Figure 2 plots the event study coefficients within each event quarter across

each outcomes. The x-axis in these figures denote the number of quarters since the removal of the

bankruptcy flag, with 1 representing the quarter in which the flag is removed (dashed line). The

solid line in each plot is a linear fit to the pre-flag removal data. Consistent with a deterministic

relationship with bankruptcy flag removal, we observe a sudden drop in the number of bankruptcies

on a consumer's credit report. Table III reports the corresponding estimates of y . Note that

we report the average annual estimate for space saving reasons. We find that the number of

bankruptcies on a consumer's report falls significantly by about 0.886 in year 1, and remains lower

by about 1 by year 4. Note that the number of bankruptcies does not always drop to 0, as borrowers

can have multiple bankruptcies on their report.

     We also observe an equally sharp increase in consumers' credit scores. The second panel of

Figure 2 shows a sudden jump in credit score of an approximately 7 to 8 points. Table III reports

that credit scores increase significantly by an average of 7.1 points in the first year. This increase

remains high throughout our sample period, and is on average 6 points higher than the pre-flag

removal trend in year 4. These magnitudes are on par with magnitudes found in Dobbie et al.

(2019) (who find an initial jump of 9 points) and Gross et al. (2018) (who estimate a jump of
  19
     Note that since we only observe one month of data per year for the Experian data, including year fixed effects is
equivalent to including year by month fixed effects.



                                                         15
15 points). We would expect the difference in our estimates to be smaller, however, due to the

subprime population we examine in our study.20 The impacts on credit score remain elevated and

statistically significant throughout our post flag-removal period. These "first stage" results show

that removal of bankruptcy flag does indeed mechanically drop the number of bankruptcies and

provide sudden increase in credit access via credit scores.

       Like prior studies, we find that the increase in credit scores lead to a greater supply of credit

through higher credit card limits. The first plot of Figure 3 shows the impact of flag removal

on the total credit limit for a consumer across all credit cards. Consistent with prior studies,

impacts appear gradual, with greater diversions from the pre-flag removal trend after the first year.

The estimates in Table III demonstrate that these changes in credit supply are both statistically

significant and economically meaningful. Credit limits across all cards increase significantly by $63

in the first year, but are significantly higher by $243 in year 2 and $490 than what would have

been predicted based on the pre-flag removal trend by year 4. Prior to flag removal, the average

total credit limit was $1977. Thus, a $490 increase represents approximately 25 percent increase in

credit limits.21 An increase in credit limits of a few hundred dollars may appear modest; however,

it is important to recall that individuals in our sample only use about $340 in payday loans per

year on average (see Table I). An increase in credit limits the size of which we observe by year 3

would already allow them to switch all of their payday borrowing on to a less expensive credit card.

       We proxy lender approval rates with the number of new accounts opened per credit inquiry.

Like credit limits, we find trades per inquiry exhibit a small jump in the first year post flag-removal

and larger increases going forward. Estimates in Table III show that these increases are still

significantly higher than the pre-flag trend, in which lender approvals jump by 0.032 per inquiry in

year 1 and then to 0.06 per inquiry by year 3 and 0.054 by year 4. This translates to an increase

in approval rates of about 8% in the first year and about 14% by the end of our sample period,

and implies about 0.26 more accounts per year on average being approved relative to the pre-flag

removal period.22
  20
     Dobbie et al. (2019) examine Chapter 13 filers which on average have higher incomes and Gross et al. (2018)
analyze a representative sample of chapter 7 filers.
  21
     Dobbie et al. (2019) also find credit limits increase gradually each year following the flag removal, with an average
of $443 per year.
  22
     We arrive at 0.26 as 12 × (0.054 × (0.385 + 0.014), where 0.06 is in the increase in trades per inquiry, 0.385 is
the pre-flag removal average number of inquiries in a 30 day period, and 0.014 is the direct impact of the flag removal
on monthly inquiries. This is multiplied by 12 to arrive at an annual, rather than monthly, number.


                                                           16
   The third plot in Figure 3 shows the impact of flag-removal on the number of credit inquiries.

Inquiries are recorded when consumers submit applications for traditional credit products, and a

lender requests a credit check to review an applicant's credit. Note that credit applications are often

submitted in response to direct mail offers or targeted advertising, so examining inquiries combines

effects coming from both borrower demand and lender supply. Figure 3 shows a jump in total

number of inquiries post flag-removal, indicating that consumers are submitting more applications

for traditional credit products. Importantly, the plot shows does not show evidence of a jump in

demand in any months prior to flag removal, indicating borrowers are not shifting their demand for

credit in anticipation of their bankruptcy flag being removed from their credit report. Estimates in

Table III show that credit inquiries are significantly elevated the first year after the flag removal,

and then declines after the second year. Our data likely underestimates inquiries, however, as

lenders do not necessarily report every inquiry made. Auto and credit card inquiries in particular

are often only reported to one or two credit bureaus.

   Our analysis of credit limits and approvals indicate a sustained increase in availability of formal

credit for our sample of subprime borrowers. Given this increase in credit, we explore whether this

subsequently impacts borrowers' use of formal credit. In Figure 3, we plot the impact of flag removal

on borrowers credit card balance. As their credit limits increase each year, we find borrowers utilize

their credit availability by taking out more credit each year. Our estimates in Table III show that

credit card balances on average increase $50 in the first year, and increases to $340 over the pre-flag

removal trend by year 4. The final plot in Figure 3 examines credit utilization ­ the ratio of balance

to available credit. Borrowers at 100% utilization are "maxed out" and have no remaining revolving

credit to use. Figure 3 shows that initially post flag-removal credit utilization patterns do not differ

from their pre-flag removal trend, and by the third year utilization looks like it begins to flatten

and decline relative to the pre-removal trend. Our estimates in Table III match these patterns,

where estimates are not significant across the first three years and then negatively significant in

year 4. In other words, we find that borrowers start by using the increased credit liquidity they

receive, and this also translates into improved liquidity across their credit cards in the longer-term.

Our estimates are consistent with a pattern of increased availability and steady use of "traditional"

credit card credit.

   We also observe that the removal of a bankruptcy flag results in more borrowing across other

                                                  17
types of loans. The top panel of Figure 4 plots the number of auto loans and mortgages borrowed

post flag-removal. As we might expect for our subprime sample of borrowers, we find a sharp effect

on auto loan activity but a lesser impact on number of mortgage loans taken out. The number of

mortgages does not change immediately after the removal of the flag, although it appears to trend

upwards two or three years after the flag is removed. This is consistent with prior studies that

document and CFPB's recent concerns over high activity of subprime borrowers in the auto loan

market (Adams, Einav, and Levin (2009), Berger, Butler, and Mayer (2016)). These patterns are

reflected in our estimated in Table III, which finds that the number of auto loans increases by 0.07

in the first year and 0.24 by year 4. Our estimates on mortgage loans are negative but essentially

zero in magnitude.

       Even with greater credit usage, we find that increased credit access has positive impacts on the

amounts overdue our sample of borrowers hold. Access to credit may have a causal impact on a

borrower's ability to remain current on their accounts if it allows them to smooth over negative

shocks to earnings or expenses. The bottom panel of Figure 4 displays changes in total balance

of third party collections amount past due 30 days or more at the time of the flag removal and

documents a visible negative change in trajectory post-flag removal. Third party collections occur

when creditors are unable to collect on a debt and sell it to a third party. A bit more than one third

of such collections are medical bills, but utility bills, cell phone bills, or extremely derogatory credit

card bills may also be included. Table III reports significant reductions in collections of nearly $300

in the first year, $500 in the second year, and $817 by year 4. Relative to a pre-flag removal mean

of $3501, this represents a 23% reduction in total collections.23

       We do not, however, find significant reductions in the amounts past due over 30 days. This debt

includes only credit accounts such as loans or credit cards and excludes bills like utilities or hospital

bills. It also excludes accounts that have been turned over to third party collections, and instead

captures delinquencies that are between 30 and, typically, 180 days past due. Figure 4 shows the

amount in debt in third party collections and the amount of debt 30 days or more past due are

perhaps slightly lower than their pre-flag removal trend, but the effects appear to be, if anything,

quite small. The plots in Figure 4 suggest that overall delinquencies and debts were already in a
  23
    We run further robustness tests that shortens the pre-period to address potential outliers that may be present in
event quarters before t - 9. Even after removing these potential outliers, however, we still find a significant reduction
in collections post flag-removal though at smaller magnitudes relative to the fitted pre-trend ($69*).


                                                           18
declining trajectory pre-flag removal and traditional credit access had minimal, if any impact on

lowering amounts past due. Estimates in Table III are negative, but none are statistically different

than zero.


B.         Impacts of Flag Removal on Subprime Borrowing

          Now that we have established that our sample of borrowers experience an increase in formal

credit access and use, we address the question of whether this reduced their use of high-risk al-

ternative credit products. We first examine whether flag removal impacts payday loan borrowing.

The top graph in Figure 5 plots the flag removal impact on payday loan inquiries. We do not

find evidence that increasing access to formal credit reduced payday loan applications. Table IV

reports the corresponding estimates and show that, in fact, payday inquiries increased following

the removal of the bankruptcy flag (by 0.018 per month in year 1 and 0.144 per month in year 4).
24


          Figure 5 also indicates that the flag removal did not reduce the amount of payday loans bor-

rowed. Table IV estimates find no significant effect on the amount borrowed in payday loans in

the first 3 years, and a marginally significant increase in borrowing in year 4. The lower bound of

our confidence intervals allows us to rule out that there were decreases in average monthly payday

borrowing larger than $1.23 in the first year (about 4% relative to the pre-flag removal mean) and

we can rule out decreases of about $0.50 in year 4 (less than 2%). This analysis demonstrates

that the additional traditional credit access that resulted from the bankruptcy flag removal did not

reduce reliance on payday borrowing.

          We find no effect of bankruptcy flag removals on the average amount of payday loan borrowing

in each month. However, this null effect on average borrowing may mask important changes in

the distribution of payday borrowing that minimally affect mean borrowing. For example, the flag

removal may cause borrowers who only occasionally use payday loans to stop using them altogether,

while leaving the behavior of heavy payday loan users unchanged. If the average amount borrowed

is driven primarily by heavy users of payday loans, such changes may go undetected when examining
     24
    Just like credit inquiries in our Experian data set, it is important to note that credit inquiries for alternative credit
confound the effects of borrower demand and credit supply. Loans are recorded when consumers submit applications
for payday loans and a lender requests a credit check to review an applicant's credit with Clarity Services. Credit
applications are often submitted in response to targeted advertising. Furthermore, websites that advertise payday
loans may simultaneously query multiple lenders resulting in a high volume of inquiries through a single request.


                                                             19
average usage. In Appendix Figure 2, we explore the distribution of positive payday loan amounts

pre- and post- flag removal graphically. Visually, the distribution of payday loan amounts borrowed

appears to remain stable year to year, from pre- to post-flag removal. Appendix Table A1 tests

the impact of flag removal on the probability that a borrower has any payday loan borrowing, the

number of payday loans, and the probability that a borrower takes out payday loans of different

sized amounts, based on the distribution of payday loan borrowing. We find little to no impact of

the flag removal on the probability of having any payday loan nor on the distribution of loan sizes:

borrowers are no more likely to take out smaller or larger loan amounts post flag-removal than

before. Taken together, it appears the flag removal had little impact on payday loan borrowing

across many measures of payday loan usage.

     We also examine the impact of the bankruptcy flag removal on a second type of alternative

borrowing: subprime, mostly online installment loans. Figure 6 shows how installment loan in-

quiries and amounts changed around the time of the flag removal. Both of these measures appear

to have increased relative to the pre-flag removal trend. Table IV shows installment inquiries in-

crease at similar magnitudes to payday inquiries by 0.07 in the first year relative to the pre-flag

removal trend in year 1, and increases to 0.122 by year. It is interesting to note that Figure 6

shows that these increases are relative to an increasing pre-trend of subprime installment inquiries,

while Figure 5 shows the increases in payday inquiries are relative to a flat or slightly decreasing

pre-trend. In contrast to the largely null effects on payday amounts, subprime installment amounts

increase relative to their pre-flag removal trend. Figure 6 shows the amount of installment loans

borrowed to increase in a sharp change of trajectory post flag removal. Table IV reports that

average monthly borrowing of subprime installment products increases significantly by year 2, by

$4.16, a 19% increase relative to pre-removal mean, increasing to $7.86 by year 4, a 35% increase.


C.    Heterogeneity by Borrower Characteristics

     Borrowers with different characteristics may be affected by flag removals differently. While we

do not detect any reduction in payday loan borrowing on average, it may be the case that certain

groups of borrowers changed their behavior upon the removal of a bankruptcy flag. As pointed out

by Dobbie et al. (2017), using an individual's pre-flag removal credit characteristics, such as their

pre-removal credit score, may cause us to over-state the impact of the flag removal due to mean

                                                 20
reversion. So, in order to conduct our heterogeneity analyses, we follow the method used in Dobbie

et al. (2017) and predict pre-flag removal characteristics using variables that are not themselves

affected by the flag removal: state of residence and age. We then stratify our sample based on

these predicted values, rather than the actual values, in order to avoid spurious relationships due

to mean reversion.

     These heterogeneity analyses are reported in Table V. Instead of reporting the estimated coeffi-

cient for each year and each subgroup, we instead take the average effect over the 4 years via a linear

combination of our estimated yearly coefficients. We report the impact of the flag removal on credit

score and credit limit for each subgroup, and on payday and subprime installment inquiries and

amounts, rather than the full set of outcome variables. The subgroups we examine are comprised of

borrowers with higher or lower predicted income (as determined using Experian's predicted income

score), credit score, credit limit, payday loan usage and predicted mortgage in the period prior to

the flag removal.

     Across the subgroups, we observe significant increases in credit scores of between 4.7 and 9

points, and in credit card limits of between $183 to $431. Across all of these groups, inquiries for

payday loans increase following the flag removal, by between 0.074 and 0.098 inquiries per month.

For most groups, average amount borrowed in payday loans does not change significantly. We do

observe a significant increase in payday borrowing for those with predicted below average credit

limits in the pre-flag removal period, although it is important to note that these heterogeneity tests

are not adjusted for multiple comparisons.


D.    Summary

     Despite the fact that bankruptcy flag removals improve access to less expensive traditional

borrowing options (such as credit cards), they do not reduce a borrower's use of payday loans.

This is true across many measures capturing different margins of loan usage. The increased credit

associated with a flag removal also does not reduce the probability that a borrower takes out any

payday loan or the probability the borrower takes out loans of a particular size. We also examine

the impact of flag removals across subgroups defined by their pre-removal characteristics. Across

many subgroups, we see no evidence that the additional credit made available by the bankruptcy

flag removal reduces payday loan usage. Instead, flag removals appear to increase the use of

                                                  21
subprime, predominantly online installment loans, that they perhaps were unable to qualify for

prior to the flag removal. The insensitivity of payday loan use to changes in credit access is

puzzling given the high cost of these short-term loans. These results are robust across a large

number of alternative specifications and sample definitions (see Appendix). In the next section, we

explore various hypotheses as to why substitution away from payday loans does not occur.



V.       Why Do Borrowers Not Substitute Towards Less Expensive,

                                         Traditional Credit?

     Payday loans are an expensive form of credit, with interest rates far exceeding those of credit

cards or personal bank loans. However, results in the previous section indicate that, although

a flag removal increases credit scores and results in a substantial increase in credit card limits

and approval rates, borrowers do not reduce their use of high cost payday loans and, in fact, use

subprime installment loans at a higher rate. In this section, we explore different explanations as to

why this might be the case.


A.    The Increase in Credit Scores Associated with Flag Removal is Insufficient

     In Table III, we find that a flag removal is associated with an increase in credit score of about 7

points, and an increase in credit limits of about $63 immediately and $490 by year 4. It may be the

case that such an increase in available credit (while a large increase relative to the amount typically

borrowed in payday loans annually) is not enough to meaningfully alter borrowers' behavior, but

that larger increases in credit scores or credit limits would result in an observable effect on payday

loan borrowing.

     We examine this hypothesis by expanding the heterogeneity analyses conducted in Table V to

additional subgroups. We estimate our model within many subgroups by dividing the sample into 10

age groups based on the deciles of the age distribution in our sample. Then, within each age group,

we estimate our model separately by state. State by age groups with fewer than 500 observations

in the Experian data are dropped. This gives us over 120 subgroups defined by state and age, and

reveals that individuals with different ages, living in different states, experience different changes in

credit score following a flag removal. These differences may be due to their average pre-flag removal

                                                   22
credit characteristics as well as differences across state bankruptcy and credit regulations.25

       In Figure 7, we explore whether subgroups that experienced larger credit score improvements

following the flag removal were more likely to reduce their reliance on payday loans and subprime

installment loans. On the x-axis, we plot the average effect of the flag removal during the 4 post-

removal years on credit score.26 We observe that some of the age by state groups experienced much

larger increases in credit scores than the sample average­increases exceeding 20 or 30 points­while

other groups experienced smaller than average credit score increases as a result of the flag removal.

On the y-axis, we plot the impact of the flag removal on the amount borrowed in payday loans

(top panel) or subprime installment loans (bottom panel). We also include a fitted line on the

plot showing the relationship between these two variables. Similar to the heterogeneity analysis

presented in Table V, this analysis reveals no systematic relationship between the increase in credit

score experienced by the subgroup and the change in the amount of payday loans borrowed. Indeed,

even subgroups that experienced very large increases in credit scores do not appear to decreased

their use of payday loans in response. This pattern suggests that even large increases in credit

score, around the magnitude of 20 to 40 points, still do not seem to reduce payday borrowing.

Similarly, we find groups increased borrowing of subprime installment loans, with no clear pattern

between the size of the credit score increase and the size of the observed impact of the flag removal

on installment loan borrowing.


B.      Changes in Exposure to Marketing

       Previous research has documented that bankruptcy filers are often targeted for credit products

via mail promotions, and that these promotions are more likely to include higher annual fees and

lower credit limits relative to non-filers (Han et al., 2018). These descriptive statistics suggest that

the removal of a bankruptcy flag may improve credit card mail offers. However, it may also be

the case that a flag removal changes the marketing for payday loans that a borrower is exposed

to. If lenders increase marketing to subprime borrowers after a flag is removed, this behavior may

explain why borrowers are less quick to switch away from costly payday loan products and towards
  25
     This exercise was inspired by the one conducted in Dobbie et al. (2019), who present a similar analysis in Appendix
Table 16.
  26
     We arrive at a single number by averaging the four yearly post-flag removal indicators estimated as in equation
(1).



                                                          23
less expensive traditional credit.

       We explore this potential explanation by using a variable in the Clarity database that captures

one type of direct to consumer marketing. Clarity's underwriting services allow lenders to "pre-

screen" borrowers for payday loan or subprime installment credit offers. We use such pre-screen

approvals as a measure of marketing exposure of borrowers in our sample. It is important to

note that this measure captures only a small portion of the marketing experienced by borrowers;

however, such direct mail efforts may be correlated with other marketing activity, making them

informative about marketing exposure in general.27

       Figure 8 shows how the number of pre-screen approvals change around the time of the bankruptcy

flag removal for both payday loans and subprime installment loans. The top plot of Figure 8 shows

a small increase in the number of payday loan offers that borrowers receive post flag-removal. The

estimates are reported in Table VI. Although the estimates are positive and significant, they are

also fairly small, indicating average monthly pre-screened offers increased by only about 0.0007

per month. Similarly pre-screened offers for installment loans is positive and significant starting

in year 2, but also not of significant magnitude. The plot in Figure 8 also suggests that offers for

installment loans continued to increase from pre-flag removal trends.

       These results suggest that borrowers were exposed to more marketing following the flag removal,

but that on average these effects were small. If such small increases are correlated with increases in

other types of marketing, it may be the case that this marketing for subprime products is dampening

the tendency of borrowers to substitute from alternative credit to more traditional sources.


C.      Traditional Credit and Payday Loans Are Not Perfect Substitutes

       In this section, we discuss several ways in which payday loans may serve a different purpose

for low income borrowers than credit card liquidity and why these two products may not really be

substitutes. While we do not have direct evidence for these hypotheses, we hope this discussion

will be useful in outlining areas for future work on this topic.

       First, it is important to note that payday loans and subprime installment loans grant borrowers

immediate access to cash: once the payday loan is processed, borrowers either receive cash directly
  27
    For example, payday loan companies spent about $277 million on television and radio advertising from June 2012
to May 2013 and online advertising for these products is also common (Bourke, Horowitz, Lake, and Roche, 2014).



                                                       24
(if the payday loan is borrowed at a physical storefront) or the cash is deposited into the borrower's

checking account, allowing the borrower to withdraw it immediately. In contrast, it can be more

difficult to get a cash advance using a credit card. Typically economists ignore such distinctions,

since most goods can be purchased with a credit card. However, this distinction between cash and

credit card liquidity may be meaningful for low income populations who are more reliant on cash

for a larger portion of their transactions. For example, it is often not possible to pay for rent or

child support with a credit card, and informal loans between friends or family may need to be

paid back with cash. For these populations, we hypothesize that cash and credit are not perfect

substitutes, and that payday and subprime installment loans may be fulfilling a different purpose

than credit cards.

       Second, interviews with borrowers who are in the Clarity database reveal that some borrowers

in fact take out payday loans to pay credit card bills­that is, they substitute from relatively

inexpensive credit card credit to expensive payday loan credit (Nunez et al., 2016). One reason

for this is that payday loans are not reported to credit bureaus, so taking out a payday loan does

not affect borrowers' credit scores. At the same time, increasing credit card balances typically does

reduce credit score. For borrowers trying to rebuild their credit, this may make payday loans a

more attractive option even if they are more expensive. Furthermore, payday lenders do not always

send defaulted loans to third party collection agencies, in which case even defaults do not appear

on credit reports. This behavior makes them a safer option for borrowers in terms of preserving

their credit score.28

       One piece of evidence consistent with the idea that borrowers are responsive to what appears

on the credit report is the fact that we observe reductions in debt in collections following the flag

removal. Overdue debt held in collections has a negative impact on credit score, while amounts

borrowed in payday loans and subprime installment loans do not. Thus, borrowers, particularly

prior bankruptcy filers, may be motivated to pay off collections debt first in order to preserve

or continue to build back their credit profile. As described in our results, we find that total

collections drop consistently every year, by approximately $300 in the first year and by $817 by

year 4. However as we note earlier, these magnitudes is somewhat sensitive to dropping the earliest
  28
    For example, Nunez et al. (2016) describe an interview with a Clarity borrower who often defaults on her payday
loans. The borrower noted that lenders "stopped calling after about 3 months" and that "sometimes the loan accounts
go into collections, which does affect credit, but often they do not" See page 36 of Nunez et al. (2016).


                                                        25
quarters, in which case the effect size drops to only $69 in the first year. Appendix Table A4 shows

that when we examine collections by type, we find significant reductions across medical, banking,

retail, and utility collections. Medical collections make up more than 35% of total collections for

our payday loan sample, and drop by approximately $110 per year -- 15% of the pre-flag removal

average.

   Finally, we note that often economists conceive of borrowers using credit to smooth consumption

across periods. That is, borrowers may have an unanticipated expense in period t and take out a

loan to cover it, reducing consumption in future periods by a small amount rather than suffering a

large reduction in consumption in t. Payday loans have historically been marketed in this way: a

product to cover an unexpected expenses such as medical emergency or an auto repair. However,

a 2016 survey of Clarity subprime borrowers finds that the majority of borrowers (64%) take out

subprime loans to cover regular expenses such as utilities, groceries, rent, credit card and medical

debt (Nunez et al., 2016). For these borrowers, loans function more as an income supplement rather

than a credit product. Such borrowers may not be able to reduce use of payday loans unless they

either experienced an increase in income or a reduction in monthly living costs.



                                      VI.      Conclusion

   This paper is the first to examine the impact of increased access to traditional credit on the use

of payday and other subprime credit products. We employ a novel data set that links traditional

credit bureau outcomes with payday and subprime outcomes from a subprime credit agency. We

take advantage of the unanticipated increase in access to traditional credit products that occurs

at the removal of a Chapter 7 bankruptcy flag. We find that a bankruptcy flag removal results in

significantly higher credit scores and better access to credit for borrowers. However, despite this

improved access to traditional credit, we do not find any evidence that borrowers reduce their use

of payday loans in response. Our confidence intervals allow us to rule out all but extremely small

reductions in payday loan use. Across multiple subgroups, alternative specifications, sample defini-

tions, and measures of payday loan usage, we find no evidence that increased access to traditional

credit reduces payday loan behavior. Furthermore, we find evidence that borrowers significantly

increase their use of a different type of alternative credit product­subprime online installment loans.


                                                  26
   Our results suggest that policies that increase access to traditional credit for payday borrowers

may not be successful in reducing their reliance on payday loans. According to survey evidence

presented in Nunez et al. (2016), most payday loan borrowers use these loans to cover regular

expenses such as utility bills, groceries, medical bills, or rent, rather than to pay for one-off unex-

pected expenses. This suggests that policymakers looking to reduce reliance on such loans may be

more successful at achieving this goal if they implement policies that make it easier for low income

individuals to cover their basic needs; e.g. by improving labor market opportunities, expanding

access to low-cost health insurance, or strengthening the social safety net.




                                                  27
                                     REFERENCES

Adams, W., L. Einav, and J. Levin (2009). Liquidity constraints and imperfect information in

  subprime lending. American Economic Review 99 (1), 49­84.

Agarwal, S., P. Skiba, and J. Tobacman (2009). Payday loans and credit cards: New liquidity and

  credit scoring puzzles? American Economic Review 99 (2), 412­17.

Berger, E., A. Butler, and E. Mayer (2016). Credit where credit is due: Drivers of subprime credit.

  NBER Working Paper.

Bertrand, M. and A. Morse (2011). Information disclosure, cognitive biases, and payday borrowing.

  Journal of Finance 66 (6), 18651893.

Bhutta, N., P. Skiba, and J. Tobacman (2015). Payday loan choices and consequences. Journal of

  Money, Credit, and Banking 47 (2-3), 223260.

Bourke, N., A. Horowitz, W. Lake, and T. Roche (2014). Fraud and abuse online: Harmful practices

  in internet payday lending. Pew Charitable Trust Report.

Burke, K., J. Lanning, J. Leary, and J. Wang (2014). Cfpb data point: Payday lending. CFPB

  Report.

Burke, K., J. Leary, and J. Wang (2016). Information disclosure and payday lending in texas.

  Working Paper.

Carrell, S. and J. Zinman (2014). In harm's way? payday loan access and military personnel

  performance. Review of Financial Studies 9 (27), 28052840.

Carter, S. and W. Skimmyhorn (2017). Much ado about nothing? new evidence on the effects of

  payday lending on military members. Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (4), 606­621.

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2012). Key dimensions and processes in the u.s. credit

  reporting system: A review of how the nation's largest credit bureaus manage consumer data.

  Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Technical Report.




                                                28
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (2013). Payday loans and deposit advance products: A

  white paper of initial data findings. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Technical Report.

Dobbie, W., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, N. Mahoney, and J. Song (2019). Bad credit, no problem?

  credit and labor market consequences of bad credit reports. Journal of Finance.

Dobbie, W., B. Keys, and N. Mahoney (2017). Credit market consequences of credit flag removals.

  Working Paper.

Dobkin, C., A. Finkelstein, R. Kluender, and M. Notowidigdo (2016). The economic consequences

  of hospital admissions. American Economic Review 108 (2), 308­352.

Gross, T., M. Notowidigdo, and J. Wang (2018). The marginal propensity to consumer over the

  business cycle. Working Paper.

Han, S., B. Keys, and G. Li (2018). Unsecured credit supply, credit cycles, and regulation. Review

  of Financial Studies 3 (31).

Herkenhoff, K., G. Phillips, and E. Cohen-Cole (2016). The impact of consumer credit access on

  employment, earnings and entrepreneurship. NBER Working Paper.

Lawrence, E. and G. Elliehausen (2008). A comparative analysis of payday loan customers. Con-

  temporary Economic Policy 26 (2), 299­316.

Melzer, B. (2011). The real cost of credit access: Evidence from the payday lending market.

  Quarterly Journal of Economics (126), 517­555.

Miller, S. and C. Soo (forthcoming). Do neighborhoods affect credit market decisions of low-income

  borrowers? evidence from the moving to opportunity experiment. Review of Financial Studies.

Morse, A. (2011). Payday lenders: Heroes or villains? Journal of Financial Economics 1 (102),

  28­44.

Musto, D. (2004).    What happens when information leaves a market?          evidence from post-

  bankruptcy consumers. Journal of Business 77 (4), 725­748.

Nunez, S., K. Schaberg, R. Hendra, L. Servon, M. Addo, and A. Mapillero-Colomina (2016). Online

  payday and installment loans: Who uses them and why? MDRC Report.

                                               29
Pagel, M. and A. Olafsson (2016). Payday borrower's consumption: Revelation of self-control

  problems? Working Paper.

Zinman, J. (2010). Restricting consumer credit access: Household survey evidence on effects around

  the oregon rate cap. Journal of Banking and Finance 3 (34), 546­556.




                                               30
                       Figure 1. Are Payday Borrowers Credit Constrained?




Note: Figure shows histogram of average utilization for the last 6 months of payday borrowers measured
over the 6 month period during which they took out a payday loan. Red column shows borrowers who are
overdrawn on their existing credit lines (that is, utilization greater than 100%), borrowers at their credit
limit (utilization 100%), or borrowers with no revolving credit.




                                                     31
   Figure 2. Direct Impact of Bankruptcy Flag Removals on Bankruptcies and Credit Access




                                0.0
                                                                         q q
                                                                     q q
                                                                 q
                                                           q q
                                                       q
                                       q q
                                -0.2
                                               q q
           Total Bankruptcies

                                -0.4
                                -0.6
                                -0.8




                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                 q                 q q q           q q q q             q q
                                                                                     q q q q                   q



                                           -10               -5                  0                 5                10                  15

                                                       Quarters Relative to Flag Removal



                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                               q           q
                                                                                                                       q           q
                                20




                                                                                                                   q       q
                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                   q       q
                                                                                               q
           Credit Score




                                                                                         q q
                                                                                     q
                                10




                                                                                 q




                                                                           q q
                                0




                                                                     q q
                                       q
                                                           q q q
                                           q           q
                                -10




                                               q
                                                   q


                                           -10               -5                  0                 5                10                  15

                                                       Quarters Relative to Flag Removal

Note: Figure shows quarterly estimates from a regression that includes calendar year and year of
bankruptcy fixed effects relative to the quarter in which the flag is removed (quarter 0).
                                                                                 32
                          Figure 3. Direct Impact of Bankruptcy Flag Removals on Credit Access and Use


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                          3000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                             q q q                                                                                                                                                        q
     Credit Card Amount




                                                                                                                                                                           Trades per Inquiry
                                                                                                                                 q q




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                         q q                                                                                                                                                              q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                                                                                                             q q                                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                         q q                                                                                                                                                                      q
                          1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.00
                                                                                   q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q           q
                                                                   q q                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                           q q                                                                                                                                                                              q
                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                   q q                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                           q q                                                                                                                                                                          q
                          -1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.10
                                   q                                                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                           q q                                                                                                                                                                                      q



                                       -10                  -5                     0                         5               10                  15                                                                         -10                  -5                     0                 5               10                  15

                                                   Quarters Relative to Flag Removal                                                                                                                                                    Quarters Relative to Flag Removal
                          0.025




                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                        q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                           Credit Card Balance
                          0.015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     500 1000



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
     Inquiries




                                                                                                                 q                                   q
                                                                                       q                                     q                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                             q               q                                                                                                                                                                        q q   q
                                                                                                                         q           q q         q
                                       q                                           q
                          0.005




                                                                       q                                 q                                                                                                                                                              q q q q
                                                                                                     q               q           q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                   q           q               q           q
                                                       q
                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                        q q
                          -0.005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -500




                                                                   q                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                           q
                                           q       q                                                                                                                                                                            q q



                                       -10                  -5                     0                         5               10                  15                                                                         -10                  -5                     0                 5               10                  15

                                                   Quarters Relative to Flag Removal                                                                                                                                                    Quarters Relative to Flag Removal
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                      q q
                                                                                                                                                               q           q q                                      q               q
                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                       Utilization




                                                                                                                                                                       q                                        q                       q           q
                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                             q                                     q
                                                                                                                                                         q q
                                                                                                         -1




                                                                                                                                 q

                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                         -2




                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                         -3




                                                                                                                         q




                                                                                                                             -10                 -5                    0                                 5                   10                  15

                                                                                                                                         Quarters Relative to Flag Removal


Note: Figure shows quarterly estimates from a regression that includes calendar year and year of
bankruptcy fixed effects relative to the quarter in which the flag is removed (quarter 0).




                                                                                                                                                                   33
                           Figure 4. Impact of Bankruptcy Flag Removals on Traditional Credit Usage




                                                                                                                                                      0.02
                   0.3




                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                               q       q q q




                                                                                                                                                      0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                 q                 q             q                                                                    q               q                               q q             q
                                                                                                         q q                                                                          q
                   0.2




                             q                                                                                                                                                                                            q           q
     Auto Number




                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q




                                                                                                                                          Mortgages
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                           q
                                                                                             q                                                                                            q                                       q




                                                                                                                                                      0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                   0.1




                                                                                 q       q                                                                                                                                    q                   q
                                 q                                                   q                                                                                q                           q               q
                                                 q               q           q                                                                                                                q




                                                                                                                                                      -0.01
                                             q               q
                   0.0




                                                     q               q q                                                                                                          q
                                     q
                                                         q                                                                                                                q

                                                                                                                                                                              q
                   -0.1




                                                                                                                                                      -0.02

                                         q



                                 -10                 -5                      0                   5             10                15                                   -10                 -5                      0                   5                10                 15

                                             Quarters Relative to Flag Removal                                                                                                    Quarters Relative to Flag Removal
                   500




                                             q
                                                                                                                                                      400




                                         q                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                  q               q
                                                 q       q                                                                                                                            q
                                     q               q       q                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                      200




                                                                 q
     Collections




                                                                     q                                                                                                                    q
                   0




                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                          Past Due




                             q                                           q                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q           q
                                                                             q q                                                                                                                                      q
                                 q
                                                                                     q q                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q           q
                   -500




                                                                                                                                                                          q                                               q       q q             q
                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                      -400 -200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q               q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                             q q                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                   q q                                                                                                                                                        q
                   -1000




                                                                                                                             q       q
                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                    q q



                                 -10                 -5                      0                   5             10                15                                   -10                 -5                      0                   5                10                 15

                                             Quarters Relative to Flag Removal                                                                                                    Quarters Relative to Flag Removal


Note:Figure shows quarterly estimates from a regression that includes calendar year and year of
bankruptcy fixed effects relative to the quarter in which the flag is removed (quarter 0).




                                                                                                                                         34
             Figure 5. Impact of Bankruptcy Flag Removals on Payday Loan Usage




                                1.0
             Payday Inquiries

                                0.5


                                               q


                                                   q
                                       q q
                                                       q
                                                           q q q q q
                                0.0




                                                                     q q q
                                                                                       q
                                                                                           q q q q
                                                                                                     q q q q q
                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                         q q q
                                                                                                                               q
                                -0.5




                                           -10                 -5                 0             5               10           15

                                                       Quarters Relative to Flag Removal
                                10




                                               q
                                       q
                                           q
                                5
             Payday Amount




                                                   q q
                                                               q
                                                           q       q q       q
                                0




                                                                         q
                                                                                 q q
                                                                                       q
                                -5




                                                                                           q q q
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                         q q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                               q q
                                -10




                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                     q q q
                                -15




                                           -10                 -5                 0             5               10           15

                                                       Quarters Relative to Flag Removal

Note: Figure shows quarterly estimates from a regression that includes calendar year and year of
bankruptcy fixed effects relative to the quarter in which the flag is removed (quarter 0).




                                                                                  35
           Figure 6. Impact of Bankruptcy Flag Removals on Installment Loan Usage




                                     1.0
                                                                                                                                    q q q q q
             Installment Inquiries



                                                                                                                                q
                                     0.5

                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                         q

                                                                            q q q
                                     0.0




                                                                        q q
                                                                    q
                                                          q
                                                    q q q
                                            q q
                                     -0.5




                                                -10                 -5                   0                    5             10                  15

                                                            Quarters Relative to Flag Removal
                                     15




                                                                                                                                                    q
             Installment Amount

                                     10




                                                    q                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                    q       q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                     5




                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                                              q q
                                                        q                                         q       q
                                            q
                                                                                q       q q
                                                                                    q
                                     0




                                                q           q
                                                                    q       q
                                                                q       q                             q
                                     -5




                                                -10                 -5                   0                    5             10                  15

                                                            Quarters Relative to Flag Removal

Note: Figure shows quarterly estimates from equation (1), which includes calendar year and year of
bankruptcy fixed effects relative to the quarter in which the flag is removed (quarter 0).




                                                                                         36
Figure 7. Impact of Flag Removal on Subprime Borrowed Amounts vs Credit Score, by Age x
State Groups
                Change in Payday Loan Amount Borrowed



                                                                               qq                   q

                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                        q
                                                             20




                                                                                        q                   qq
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                            q                                              q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                       q            q      q
                                                                       q                q q q
                                                                       q                                 q                                     q    q
                                                                                  q                      q          q
                                                                             q   q     q                q                                      q
                                                                   q       q                                                q q
                                                                           q q      qq                              q         q   q                       q
                                                                                     q q                                                 q
                                                             0




                                                                             q qq    q                                                         q
                                                                                                                                               q                      q
                                                                            q        q                       q
                                                                                                             q          q    q          q       q                              q
                                                                                                            q                          q
                                                                   q q         q
                                                                                   q                                    q
                                                                                                        q                     q
                                                                                                q           q
                                                             -20




                                                                                                    q
                                                                       q                                                                            q
                                                                                    q

                                                                                                                                           q
                                                             -40




                                                                                                                q



                                                                   0                                10                            20                     30               40

                                                                                                                             Change in Credit Score
                Change in Installment Loan Amount Borrowed




                                                                                                            q
                                                             100




                                                                                                                        q    q
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                             50




                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                    q                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                          q q                                                                         q
                                                                           q                q q q                                                                 q
                                                                       q  qq q                                                                 q                               q
                                                                   q qq q      q      q   q        q                                   q
                                                                     qq         qqq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  q                                               q q
                                                                     q       q       q q qq q                                         q        q
                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                   q                qq            q                                                       q
                                                             0




                                                                          q         q      q
                                                                        q
                                                                        q     q q       q q q                                                       q
                                                                                 q       q                                                     q
                                                                            qq                                                                 q
                                                                                    qq
                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                             -50




                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                   q
                                                                           q                q
                                                                                                                              q



                                                                   0                                10                            20                     30               40

                                                                                                                             Change in Credit Score



Note: Figure shows estimates of impact of a flag removal on credit score (x axis) against impact of the flag
removal on payday borrowing (y axis, top panel) and subprime installment loan borrowing (y axis, bottom
panel) for 123 regressions estimated within groups defined by age and state. These regressions include
calendar year and bankruptcy year fixed effects, as well as a linear pre-trend.




                                                                                                                                      37
    Figure 8. Impact of Bankruptcy Flag Removals on PreScreen Offers of Subprime Loans




                                               0.004
                Payday Prescreen Offers


                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                            q       q q q
                                                                                                                                        q

                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                              q q
                                               0.002



                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                      q

                                                                                                  q
                                               0.000




                                                                                        q
                                                                                    q       q q
                                                                            q q
                                                                        q
                                                                    q
                                               -0.002




                                                              q q
                                                        q q



                                                          -10                -5                   0                   5             10                   15

                                                                    Quarters Relative to Flag Removal
                                               0.10
                Prescreen Installment Offers




                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                               0.06




                                                                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                  q
                                               0.02




                                                                                                      q       q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                            q q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                    q
                                               -0.02




                                                                                q
                                                                            q
                                                                    q q
                                                              q q
                                                        q q



                                                          -10                -5                   0                   5             10                   15

                                                                    Quarters Relative to Flag Removal

Note:Figure shows quarterly estimates from a regression that includes calendar year and year of
bankruptcy fixed effects relative to the quarter in which the flag is removed (denoted quarter 1).




                                                                                                  38
                              Table I Pre-Flag Removal Bankruptcy Sample Descriptive Statistics and Comparisons


                                                            Active Alternative            Random Sample of
                                                             Credit Users with           Credit Reports with               Random Sample of
                                                             Bankruptcy Flags             Bankruptcy Flags                  Credit Reports
                                                          Mean      SD         N       Mean      SD         N          Mean     SD          N
      Traditional Credit Outcomes
       Credit Score                                       531.39    65.52    94,672    615.94      84.91    908,485    662.64     128.46    19,168,533
       Credit Card Limit (All Cards)                     1977.39   5408.47   94,672    4502.30    9121.60   908,485   18181.59   29058.92   19,168,533
       Number of Inquiries Past 30 Days                   0.192     0.398    94,672     0.169      0.427    908,485    0.106       0.341    19,168,533
       Trades per Inquiry                                 0.385     0.695    47,256     3.141      6.455    323,188    3.557       7.326     4,526,254
       Total Amount in Collections                       3500.53   6332.75   94,672    1076.62    8326.93   908,485   1057.63     6362.53   19,168,533
       Total Number of Bankruptcies on Credit Report      1.124     0.625    94,672     1.064      0.318    908,485    0.050       0.236    19,168,533




39
       Utilization (%) on All Revolving Accounts           82.70    30.20    69,519     68.61      33.18    673,996     54.17      35.62    14,321,852
       Amount 30 Days or More Past Due                   1659.89   8769.83   94,672    1335.38   11780.91   908,485    896.76    12838.61   19,168,533
       Number of Auto Trades                                1.96    1.92     94,672      1.91       2.25    908,485      1.14       1.85    19,168,533
       Number of Mortgages Open                            0.102    0.325    94,672     0.139      0.400    908,485     0.297      0.639    19,168,533

      Alternative Credit Outcomes (Monthly)
      Amount Borrowed in Payday Loans                     28.57    160.01    628,793    N/A       N/A        N/A       N/A        N/A         N/A
      Number of Payday Loan Applications                  0.518     2.10     628,793    N/A       N/A        N/A       N/A        N/A         N/A
      Amount Borrowed of Subprime Installment             22.31    233.97    628,793    N/A       N/A        N/A       N/A        N/A         N/A
      Number Subprime Installment Applications            0.189     1.25     628,793    N/A       N/A        N/A       N/A        N/A         N/A

     Note: N represents individual by year observations for traditional credit outcomes and individual by month observations for alternative credit
     outcomes. Trades per inquiry defined only for consumers with a positive number of inquiries. Utilization defined only for consumers with at least
     one revolving credit account.
                                 Table II      Comparison Summary Payday Loan Characteristics Across Prior Studies


                Payday Loan Characteristics:      Avg # Per Year    Avg Loan Size ($)                  Data Sample Description

                Miller and Soo, 2020                     6                  551               Clarity sample with Ch. 7 bankruptcy flags

                CPFB 2013, 2014                          6*                 392            Storefront payday lenders in supervisory process

                Bertrand and Morse 2009                 9.2                372.5               Texas survey of 1,441 payday borrowers




40
                Elliehausen and Lawrence 2008           8.3                 n/a             National phone survey of 450 payday borrowers

                Skiba and Tobacman 2011                 n/a                 360            141k bankruptcy filers from Texas payday lender

                Fritzdixon and Skiba 2016               n/a                 363          2,942 online payday borrowers from Tennessee lender

     Note: This table summarizes payday loan characteristics as reported across prior studies of payday loan borrowers and our sample of payday loan
     borrowers. Column 2 reports the average number of payday loans per borrower and column 3 reports average loan size conditional on taking out a
     loan over the 12 months. Column 3 provides a brief description of the sample examined in the corresponding study. Note that studied samples do
     vary by geography, size, storefront or online loans, and time period, but provides a benchmark reference of our sample relative to prior literature.
     *CPFB reports median and not the mean number of loans per person per year.
         Table III      Effect of Bankruptcy Flag Removal on Access to Traditional Credit


                                    Year 1 Effect   Year 2 Effect   Year 3 Effect   Year 4 Effect

        Bankruptcies (#)              -0.886***       -0.935***      -0.990***       -1.033***
                                      (0.00296)       (0.00466)      (0.00688)       (0.00929)

        Credit Score                   7.134***       7.306***        6.955***        5.910***
                                        (0.508)        (0.799)         (1.125)         (1.464)

        Credit Limits                  62.91**        242.9***        424.8***        490.4***
                                       (29.61)         (53.76)         (88.77)         (111.4)

        Trades Per Inquiry            0.0320***      0.0350***       0.0622***        0.0543**
                                      (0.00903)       (0.0129)        (0.0176)        (0.0226)

        Credit Inquiries              0.00967***      0.00966*        0.0102           0.0140
                                       (0.00358)      (0.00510)      (0.00689)       (0.00886)

        Credit Card Balancee           49.71***       152.4***        258.9***        340.4***
                                        (18.81)        (32.51)         (47.45)         (64.17)

        Utilization                     0.194             -0.287        -0.888       -2.129***
                                       (0.268)           (0.408)       (0.557)        (0.718)

        Auto Loans (#)                0.0734***       0.175***        0.226***        0.242***
                                      (0.00634)       (0.0108)        (0.0162)        (0.0218)

        Mortgages (#)                -0.00510***    -0.00784***      -0.0139***      -0.0189***
                                      (0.00156)      (0.00255)        (0.00369)       (0.00488)

        Collections                   -299.1***       -503.1***      -728.8***       -817.5***
                                       (33.17)         (54.68)        (77.05)         (101.8)

        Amount 30 Days Past Due         -76.08            -103.8        -92.93          -219.1
                                       (57.78)           (87.52)       (118.8)         (154.5)

        N = 282,050

Note: This table presents estimates of model (1). Each row represents estimates from a separate regression.
The model includes year and bankruptcy removal year fixed effects and a linear "pre-trend" term. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the individual level. See text for more details.




                                                    41
      Table IV Effect of Bankruptcy Flag Removal on Use of Alternative Credit Products


                                 Year 1 Effect   Year 2 Effect   Year 3 Effect   Year 4 Effect

           Payday Inquiry          0.0182**       0.0603***        0.121***        0.144***
                                   (0.00774)       (0.0111)        (0.0152)        (0.0199)

           Payday Amount             0.368           0.983           1.464          3.535*
                                    (0.813)         (1.236)         (1.614)         (2.057)


           Installment Inquiry     0.0698***      0.0575***        0.129***        0.122***
                                   (0.00848)       (0.0127)        (0.0187)        (0.0274)

           Installment Amount        1.220         4.155***        7.092***        7.863***
                                    (1.053)         (1.505)         (2.042)         (2.586)


           N = 1,684,190

Note: This table presents estimates of model (1). Each row represents estimates from a separate regression.
The model includes year and bankruptcy removal year fixed effects and a linear "pre-trend" term. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the individual level. See text for more details.




                                                    42
                         Table V Effect of Bankruptcy Flag Removal: Heterogeneity by Pre-Flag Removal Characteristics


                                              Predicted Income         Credit Score            Credit Limits         Payday Loan Usage       Predicted Mortgage
                                             Below       Above       Below      Above        Below      Above        Below      Above        Below      Above
                                             Median      Median      Median    Median        Median     Median       Median    Median        Median     Median
                   Experian Outcomes :
                   Credit Score             6.521***    7.344***    7.227***    6.507***    7.261***    6.592***    7.565***    6.316***    4.743***    9.049***
                                             (1.128)     (1.138)     (1.146)     (1.118)     (1.120)     (1.144)     (1.171)     (1.099)     (1.136)     (1.130)

                   Credit Limits             365***      252.2**     182.5*      414***     430.5***     183.7*      381***       234**      278***      331***
                                             (79.44)     (105.3)     (99.76)     (88.79)     (82.76)     (102.9)     (88.10)     (98.06)     (95.75)     (91.98)

                   N:                        140,608     141,442     136,174     145,876     140,398     141,652     133,642     148,408     141,525     140,525

                   Alternative Outcomes :
                   Payday Inquiry           0.0975***   0.0740***   0.0791***   0.0917***   0.0796***   0.0924***   0.0765***   0.0957***   0.0878***   0.0850***
                                             (0.0178)    (0.0182)    (0.0185)    (0.0176)    (0.0184)    (0.0177)    (0.0185)    (0.0174)    (0.0188)    (0.0172)




43
                   Payday Amount              1.237       1.953       2.080       1.079      4.503**      -1.195      1.518      1.691*       2.060       1.590
                                             (2.272)     (1.283)     (1.693)     (1.964)     (1.933)     (1.797)     (2.400)     (0.915)     (1.472)     (2.151)

                   Installment Inquiry      0.102***    0.0891***   0.132***    0.0632***   0.127***    0.0636***   0.0691***   0.122***    0.129***    0.0624***
                                            (0.0210)     (0.0181)   (0.0198)     (0.0195)   (0.0218)     (0.0173)    (0.0202)   (0.0190)    (0.0201)     (0.0193)

                   Installment Amount       6.708***      3.379       3.387     6.524***     4.342**     5.792**      2.781     7.453***    6.547***      3.665
                                             (1.919)     (2.638)     (2.362)     (2.235)     (2.030)     (2.527)     (1.915)     (2.667)     (2.022)     (2.521)

                   N:                        857,745     826,445     775,454     908,736     841,333     842,857     871,315     812,875     823,459     860,731



     Note: This table presents estimates of model (1) for different subgroups. Each row represents estimates from a separate regression. Subgroups are
     defined using predicted values of characteristics listed in the top row, with predictions based on age and state of residence fixed effects. The model
     includes year and bankruptcy removal year fixed effects and a linear "pre-trend" term. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
     See text for more details.
          Table VI Effect of Bankruptcy Flag Removal on "Pre-screened" Loan Offers


                                    Year 1 Effect   Year 2 Effect    Year 3 Effect    Year 4 Effect

  Prescreen Payday Offers           0.000512***      0.000432***      0.000694***      0.000705***
                                     (9.79e-05)       (0.000124)       (0.000143)       (0.000180)

  Prescreen Installment Offers         0.00105        0.00845***       0.0105***        0.0174***
                                     (0.000752)        (0.00120)       (0.00145)        (0.00188)

  N = 1,684,190

Note: This table presents estimates of model (1). Each row represents estimates from a separate regression.
The model includes year and bankruptcy removal year fixed effects and a linear "pre-trend" term. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the individual level. See text for more details.




                                                    44
     Does Increasing Access to Formal Credit Reduce
                   Payday Borrowing?

                                          Appendix

                                  Sarah Miller     Cindy K. Soo



          Robustness checks and alternative sample definitions

   In this appendix, we verify our results do not depend on particular specifications of our em-

pirical model by exploring a variety of alternative specifications. We show the results for these

specifications for our primary outcomes related to credit access (credit score and credit limit across

all credit cards) and alternative borrowing (number of inquiries and amount borrowed per month

for payday loans and installment loans). Similar results for other outcomes are available from the

authors upon request.

   Our results for these robustness checks are reported in Appendix Table A2. In the first row

under each listed outcome variable, we include individual fixed effects, rather than cohort year fixed

effects, to account for any change in the composition of individuals in our sample over time.

   The second row under each outcome variable shows an alternative specification in which we

include a "control group" in the model, similar to the approach used in Dobbie et al. (2017). For

the control group, we include borrowers who had Chapter 7 bankruptcy flags removed either prior to

the beginning of our sample period (before 2013) or after the end of our sample period (after 2017).

These borrowers are similar to our main sample in that they also experienced a bankruptcy in the

recent past, but they do not experience a flag removal over our sample period. These borrowers can

be used to identify the year effects and account for any contemporaneous year shocks that occur

over our sample period, analogous to a "difference in differences" design.

   We implement this by estimating the following model, similar to equation (1) in the main text:



                                                       4
          yit = tpre × FlagRemoved i + y + c +               y I(rit  y ) × FlagRemoved i +   it .   (1)
                                                      y =1



                                                 45
   Here, the indicator variable FlagRemoved i equals 1 if individual i is in our main sample, who

experienced a bankruptcy flag removal between 2013 and 2017, and 0 if individual i is in the control

group that had a flag removal before 2013 or after 2017. The coefficient  therefore captures the

relative trend in our flag removal group, relative to the time trend estimated by y . In this revised

model, the estimates y are identified in part by the calendar time trend experienced by the control

group.

   The third row under the traditional credit outcomes shows results that use Experian credit

report data from 2006 through 2017. In our main results, we limit the years of Experian credit

report data to match those we have available in Clarity, to improve the direct comparability of these

results. In this alternative version, we show that results are similar if we instead use all available

years.

   For alternative credit outcomes, the third row shows results that include year by month fixed

effects, rather than year fixed effects. Note that because we only observe Experian credit reports

once per year, including year fixed effects is equivalent to including year by month fixed effects for

these outcomes. The inclusion of the year by month fixed effects in models using the (monthly)

Clarity data allows us to account for any contemporaneous time effects that occur within a calendar

year.

   Across all specifications, we find that the flag removal significantly increased access to traditional

credit but does not significantly reduce payday loan usage, and our confidence intervals are such that

we can rule out even small decreases in payday loan borrowing. We also find significant increases in

online installment loan inquiries and borrowing following the flag removal. This analysis supports

the results in the main text, and suggests that our qualitative results are not sensitive to changes

in our model specification or sample inclusion criteria.

   We also examine whether our findings on payday loan usage are dependent on the coding of

our outcome variable. In our main analysis, we examine whether the total amount of payday or

subprime installment borrowing changed following the removal of a bankruptcy flag. However,

it may be the case that, while the average amount of alternative borrowing did not change, the

probability of having very large (or small) dollar values of subprime borrowing was affected. We

explore this hypothesis by coding our alternative borrowing outcome variables in the following way:

whether the consumer has any payday or subprime installment borrowing, whether the amount

                                                  46
borrowed in the month is between $1 and $299 (inclusive), between $300 and $449, between $450

and $633, and at or above $634. The end points of these bins correspond to the quartiles of

the payday amount distribution in months when consumers have a positive amount of payday

borrowing.

   These results are reported in Appendix Table A1. We do not find statistically significant changes

in the probability of taking out loans of a certain size. These results suggest that the modest effects

of expanded traditional credit access we find on average monthly alternative borrowing are not

masking more substantial effects at other parts of the borrowing distribution.




                                                  47
           Figure A1. Examples of Online Payday and Subprime Installment Lenders




Note: Presents examples of advertising and presentation of online payday and installment loan lenders.
Source: https://www.paydaychampion.com/ (upper panel), https://www.opploans.com/ (lower panel)




                                                   48
Figure A2. Changes in the Distribution of monthly borrowing amounts by year relative to flag
removal




Note: Presents box and whisker plots of the monthly number of payday loans (top panel) and monthly
payday borrowing amount (lower panel) by year relative to the flag removal.




                                                 49
Table A1 Effect of Bankruptcy Flag Removal on Taking out Any Payday Loan, Number of
Payday Loans, and Probability of Taking Out Payday Loan of Different Sizes


                                    Year 1 Effect   Year 2 Effect   Year 3 Effect   Year 4 Effect

       Any Payday                     0.000412         0.00235       0.00364*        0.00530*
                                      (0.00107)       (0.00167)      (0.00220)       (0.00279)

       Payday Loans (#)                0.00077         0.00302        0.00500        0.00698*
                                      (0.00161)       (0.00249)      (0.00330)       (0.00419)

       Payday Amount Quartile 1        -1.42e-05      0.000549        0.000905        0.00109
                                      (0.000476)     (0.000711)      (0.000925)      (0.00116)

       Payday Amount Quartile 2        -0.000455      -0.000280      -0.000550        4.52e-05
                                      (0.000493)     (0.000785)      (0.00102)       (0.00132)

       Payday Amount Quartile 3        0.000476       0.00144*       0.00215**        0.00206
                                      (0.000506)     (0.000785)      (0.00103)       (0.00131)

       Payday Amount Quartile 4        0.000405       0.000634        0.00114         0.00210
                                      (0.000533)     (0.000803)      (0.00105)       (0.00131)

Note: This table presents estimates of model (2) for our alternative credit outcomes. Each row represents
estimates from a separate regression of each different outcome. The model includes year and bankruptcy
removal year fixed effects and a linear "pre-trend" term. Robust standard errors are clustered at the
individual level. See text for more details.




                                                    50
Table A2 Effect of a Bankruptcy Flag Removal on Traditional Credit Outcomes: Alternative
Specifications and Sample Definitions


                              Year 1 Effect   Year 2 Effect   Year 3 Effect   Year 4 Effect      N

      Credit Score
      Individual FEs            7.094***        7.238***        7.034***        6.125***      282,050
                                 (0.497)         (0.773)         (1.074)         (1.390)
      Control Group             6.907***        7.144***        6.675***        5.681***      921,452
                                 (0.527)         (0.816)         (1.116)         (1.433)
      All Years                 6.707***        6.670***        6.245***        5.098***      371,955
                                 (0.360)         (0.557)         (0.770)         (0.999)
      Credit Limits
      Individual FEs            74.80**         263.5***        452.1***        525.0***      282,050
                                (33.23)          (60.33)         (100.5)         (125.0)
      Control Group              73.48          259.4***        457.3***        542.4***      921,452
                                (55.01)          (90.26)         (118.5)         (165.7)
      All Years                  21.70          179.9***        336.4***        370.6***      371,955
                                (21.24)          (37.81)         (64.07)         (91.82)
      Payday Inquiries
      Individual FEs           0.0181**        0.0600***        0.123***        0.146***      1,684,190
                               (0.00768)        (0.0110)        (0.0152)        (0.0199)
      Control Group            0.0161**        0.0627***        0.119***        0.139***      5,523,530
                               (0.00775)        (0.0111)        (0.0152)        (0.0198)
      Year Month FEs            -0.00001        -0.00474        0.00566         -0.00766      1,684,190
                               (0.00767)        (0.0111)        (0.0152)        (0.0198)
      Payday Amount
      Individual FEs              0.418            1.042          1.706          3.737*       1,684,190
                                 (0.828)         (1.255)         (1.626)         (2.079)
      Control Group               0.181            0.950           0.636          2.121       5,523,530
                                 (0.813)         (1.236)         (1.615)         (2.050)
      Year Month FEs              0.311           -0.293          -0.380          0.596       1,684,190
                                 (0.816)         (1.244)         (1.629)         (2.096)
      Installment Inquiries
      Individual FEs           0.0691***       0.0559***        0.127***        0.127***      1,684,190
                               (0.00845)        (0.0127)        (0.0190)        (0.0281)
      Control Group            0.0715***       0.0526***        0.126***        0.120***      5,523,530
                               (0.00853)        (0.0127)        (0.0187)        (0.0269)
      Year Month FEs           0.0246***        0.0326**        0.0410**         0.0488*      1,684,190
                               (0.00840)        (0.0127)        (0.0189)        (0.0277)
      Installment Amount
      Individual FEs              1.203         4.256***        7.131***        8.024***      1,684,190
                                 (1.063)         (1.525)         (2.058)         (2.604)
      Control Group               1.113         4.130***        6.670***        7.210***      5,523,530
                                 (1.048)         (1.502)         (2.007)         (2.534)
      Year Month FEs              1.436           2.346         5.530***         5.027*       1,684,190
                                 (1.065)         (1.519)         (2.082)         (2.632)

Note: Each row represents estimates from a separate regression. Robust standard errors are clustered at
the individual level. See text for more details.



                                                     51
              Table A3 Summary of Total Collections by Type (Pre-Flag Removal)


                                                        Mean         SD         N


                               Total Collections       3500.53    6332.748    94672


                               Medical Collections     1251.31    4535.557    94672


                               Banking Collections     487.05     1753.075    94672


                               Retail Collections      272.31     1257.694    94672


                               Utility Collections     462.64     928.6727    94672




Note: This table presents the breakdown of total collections by type of collections for our analysis sample
of alternative credit users with bankruptcy flags on their credit report.


             Table A4 Effect of a Bankruptcy Flag Removal on Collections by Type


                                   Year 1 Effect     Year 2 Effect   Year 3 Effect    Year 4 Effect

           Total Collections         -299.1***        -503.1***       -728.8***        -817.5***
                                      (33.17)          (54.68)         (77.05)          (101.8)

           Medical Collections        -56.86**        -112.0***       -152.3***         -122.8*
                                       (23.15)         (38.76)         (55.58)          (73.73)

           Banking Collections       -78.41***        -147.1***       -222.1***        -292.8***
                                      (10.80)          (16.91)         (24.00)          (31.68)

           Retail Collections        -54.10***        -88.20***       -117.7***        -136.1***
                                      (9.198)          (13.90)         (17.67)          (22.78)

           Utility Collections        -13.53**           -7.160            0.735          9.890
                                       (5.650)          (9.273)           (13.17)        (17.31)

           N = 282,050

Note: Each row represents estimates from a separate regression. The model includes year and bankruptcy
removal year fixed effects and a linear "pre-trend" term. Robust standard errors are clustered at the
individual level. See text for more details.



                                                        52
