                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

    SHALE SHOCKED: CASH WINDFALLS AND HOUSEHOLD DEBT REPAYMENT

                                      J. Anthony Cookson
                                          Erik P. Gilje
                                       Rawley Z. Heimer

                                      Working Paper 27782
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27782

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020

We thank the following sources for providing funding support for this project: Wharton Dean's
Research Fund, the Wharton Alternative Investments Initiative, the Rodney L. White Center for
Financial Research, the Jacobs Levy Equity Management Center for Quantitative Financial
Research, the National Bureau of Economic Research Household Finance Working Group and
the Sloan Foundation, and the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. In addition, we are grateful
to individual feedback from Asaf Bernstein, John Campbell, Sudheer Chava, Henrik Cronqvist,
Julia Fonseca, Andreas Fuster, Julio Galvez, Ali Hortaçsu, Sasha Indarte, Mark Jansen, Yaron
Levi, Yueran Ma, Mike Palazzolo, Mikael Passo, Carlos Parra, Matthew Plosser, and Vincent
Yao, as well as the participants at seminars and workshops at the University of California-
Berkeley, Boston College, FRB-Chicago, FRB-Kansas City, Notre Dame, Penn State University,
University of Kansas, Depaul University, University of Colorado­Boulder, Emory University,
PUC Chile, University of Delaware, and feedback from conference presentations at the 2018
University of Chicago Empirical Asset Pricing Conference, the 2018 London Business School
Summer Symposium (Early Ideas), the 2018 FRB-Philadelphia Conference on Consumer
Behavior in Credit and Payments Markets, the 2019 Boulder Summer Conference on Consumer
Financial Decision Making, the 2019 Frontiers in Finance Conference, the 2019 Cornell IBHF
Symposium, the 2019 University of Kentucky Finance Conference, the 2019 UNC-Duke
Corporate Finance Conference, the 2019 FIRS Conference, the 2019 Helsinki Finance Summit,
the 2019 European Finance Association Conference, the 2019 Denver University Summer
Conference, the 2019 Northern Finance Association Conference, the 2019 Washington University
Finance Conference, the 2019 Tel Aviv University Finance Conference, the 2020 CFP Board
Academic Research Colloquium, and the 2020 SFS Cavalcade Conference. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views ofthe National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by J. Anthony Cookson, Erik P. Gilje, and Rawley Z. Heimer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Shale Shocked: Cash Windfalls and Household Debt Repayment
J. Anthony Cookson, Erik P. Gilje, and Rawley Z. Heimer
NBER Working Paper No. 27782
September 2020
JEL No. G5,G50,G51

                                         ABSTRACT

How do persistent cash flow shocks affect debt repayment across the distribution of households?
Using individual data on natural gas shale royalty payments matched with credit bureau data for
215,639 consumers, we estimate that individuals repay 33 cents of debt per dollar of windfall,
and that initially-subprime individuals repay approximately 5 times more debt than initially-prime
individuals do. This difference in debt repayment is driven by changes to revolving debt balances.
Finally, we show that debt repayment precedes durable goods consumption, particularly for
households who were initially financially constrained. These results shed new light on how
deleveraging affects household consumption.

J. Anthony Cookson                              Rawley Z. Heimer
University of Colorado                          Boston College
995 Regent Dr.                                  Carroll School of Management
Boulder CO 80309                                140 Commonwealth Avenue
tony.cookson@colorado.edu                       Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3809
                                                heimer@bc.edu
Erik P. Gilje
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
gilje@wharton.upenn.edu
1     Introduction

Household debt is a crucial determinant of macroeconomic outcomes. Indeed, when faced with

an unexpected negative shock, like a recession, households with high leverage curtail their con-

sumption the most (Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013); Baker (2018)).1 Theoretically, the key friction

that high-leverage imposes on consumption responses is that liquidity- or financially-constrained

households first have to repay debts (Eggertson and Krugman (2012)). Yet, two features of how

household leverage varies in the cross-section call into question whether indebted households are

truly constrained and whether such households would actually deleverage in response to shocks.

Namely, household debt is greater for wealthy individuals who are presumably less financially con-

strained (Mason (2018)) and many wealthy households revolve substantial amounts of unsecured

debt (Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman (2003); Kaplan and Violante (2014)). To help resolve this

tension, this paper provides direct estimates of the marginal propensity to repay debt (MPR) out

of unanticipated cash flows, and shows how debt repayment depends on whether the household is

initially constrained.

        It is challenging to evaluate how cash flow shocks affect household deleveraging because

cash flow shocks are difficult to disentangle from changes to other economic outcomes. In partic-

ular, the economic recovery from the Global Financial Crisis coincided with declines in household

debt, falling unemployment, rising asset prices, and low interest rates. Recent papers make progress

on identifying channels by using macroeconomic models to quantify the effects of financial con-

straints (see e.g., Korinek and Simsek (2016); Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017); Jones, Midrigan,

and Philippon (2018)). Our paper complements this structural-modeling approach by studying a

setting in which cash flow shocks are unrelated to macro factors that typically confound inference

about household deleveraging.

        To address the central identification challenge, we study the dynamics of debt repayment for

a novel sample of individuals who receive unexpected and continuing payments from the discovery

and extraction of natural gas at the onset of the Fracking Revolution. Specifically, we study how $1.2

Billion in royalty windfalls over 11 years affect the debt repayment decisions of 215,639 individuals

who own subsurface mineral rights in the Barnett Shale in Texas. The cash windfalls in our sample
    1 Not only does household debt affect consumption, but it holds back investment, weakens labor supply, and amplifies
asset prices (Melzer (2017); Bernstein (2016); Favara and Imbs (2015)).


                                                           1
vary widely, ranging from $78 in the first percentile to $46,245 in the 99th percentile. Further, our

sample of windfall recipients includes individuals who live in every U.S. state. The out-of-area

individuals in our sample receive payments because subsurface rights are separate from surface

rights (e.g., land), and are inherited through family ties.

       With this uniquely-detailed information, we attribute variation in household debt repayment

to the cash received by individuals, which in our setting, is distinct from changes to local conditions

after the discovery of shale. Further, individuals in our sample span every credit score category,

including 43,829 subprime individuals. Our sample has significant overlap with demographics of

the U.S. population. Crucially, these payments were unexpected at the beginning of our sample

and are largely driven by factors external to the individuals we study (i.e., the price of natural gas

and the number of wells drilled). In this way, our setting enables us to address the most salient

endogeneity issues in estimating the dynamics of deleveraging, as well as understanding sources of

heterogeneity in household deleveraging decisions.

       Our main specification examines how the size of unexpected windfalls (payments/income,

annualized) affects household leverage (debt payments/income). We estimate a treatment intensity

difference-in-difference specification, which contrasts how household leverage differs for individ-

uals for different payments-to-income before (2005) versus after the Fracking Revolution (2015).

Using this benchmark specification, we estimate the marginal propensity to repay debt (MPR) out

of the mineral rights windfalls to be 0.33. That is, on average across individuals in our sample, 33%

of an additional dollar of mineral payments effectively goes toward repaying existing debts. We

also estimate the analogous specification in the 2005-2015 panel, exploiting differential timing for

when individuals begin receiving payments. In these dynamic specifications, we observe a smooth

adjustment from no effect in the year of first payment to the long-run effect six years after receiving

the first payment.2

       We find that there is substantial heterogeneity in the MPR, depending on the initial credit-

worthiness of individuals receiving the shock. Specifically, we consider heterogeneity by whether

an individual is initially subprime (credit score < 620) versus initially prime (credit score > 720).

For subprime individuals, we estimate a MPR that is roughly 5 times the MPR for the prime sub-
   2 In addition to exploiting variation in mineral payments / income, our sample also contains a set of control individuals

who do not receive cash payments. Although mineral ownership is not randomly assigned, the dynamic specifications
show no differential pre-trends, which supports our identification assumption in the difference-in-difference tests.


                                                            2
sample. Specifically, we estimate that 77% of the wealth shock is used for debt repayment for

subprime individuals, but only 14% is used for debt repayment for prime individuals. The nature of

this heterogeneity is consistent with subprime individuals responding to significant debt overhang.

Furthermore, under the assumption that none of the windfall is directed toward direct saving, the

subprime estimate places an upper bound on subprime individuals' marginal propensity to consume

(MPC) of 0.23.

        Digging deeper into the difference between subprime and prime debt repayment, we examine

how the cash flow shocks affect major categories of debt. Using these specifications, we attribute

much of the overall difference between subprime and prime debt repayment to different effects of

cash flows on revolving debt balances (e.g., credit cards). For subprime individuals, a standard

deviation increase in payments (1.42 pp) leads to roughly a 5.5% reduction in revolving debt ($462

on an initial base of $8,345). By contrast, prime individuals increase revolving debt balances by

approximately 7% (nearly $600) in response to a standard deviation increase in cash windfall. These

differences are consistent with subprime individuals using the cash flow shock to repay revolving

debts, whereas prime individuals use the shock mostly for additional consumption that is reflected

in greater monthly credit card balances.3

        Finally, we show how debt repayment facilitates consumption out of cash flow shocks by

studying an important aspect of durable goods consumption -- automobile purchases inferred from

individuals' credit histories (Benmelech, Meisenzahl, and Ramcharan (2017) and Dupor et al.

(2019) validate this measure of consumption). As a first step, we confirm that subprime individ-

uals exhibit a positive and significant sensitivity of automobile consumption to cash flow shocks,

whereas prime individuals do not. Then, we highlight the importance of debt repayment for this

consumption response: subprime individuals repay significantly more debt than prime individuals

before making their first purchase, suggesting that deleveraging prior to consumption is important

for understanding the consumption response of subprime consumers. Lastly, we use data on credit

inquiries to understand whether the consumption response for subprime individuals is the result
   3 The change in revolving debt balances in response to wealth shocks reflects an unknown mix between debt repayment

and consumption. However, the heterogeneous response of revolving debt to the wealth shock suggests that subprime
consumers forgo consumption relative to prime consumers. Given the likely negative effects on credit scores from high
credit card utilization, the revolving balances of subprime individuals are more likely to reflect higher initial balances for
expensive debts (i.e., individuals holding credit card balances month-to-month) than greater transactional consumption
using credit cards (i.e., individuals who pay the full credit card balance each month).



                                                              3
of credit constraints. Credit constraints matter: subprime individuals are significantly more likely

than prime individuals to have been denied credit prior to their first post-shock auto purchases, ac-

counting for other factors. These findings imply that it is important to understand the debt response

to unexpected cash flow shocks. Apart from debt overhang, which affects households beyond its

consumption implications, the interaction between consumption and debt responses is important to

understand, yet understudied in the broader literature.

      The primary contribution of this paper is to provide novel estimates of how unanticipated

cash flows affect household deleveraging. Our findings emphasize the crucial role of heterogeneity

in credit access and the effect of debt repayment on the consumption response to shocks. Though we

are not the first paper to study the effects of cash flow shocks on household borrowing, there are fun-

damental differences between our paper and prior research on debt repayment. Agarwal, Liu, and

Souleles (2007) and Agarwal and Qian (2014) study debt repayment out of one-time income shocks,

which are qualitatively different than the unexpected and persistent stream of royalties from shale

natural gas extraction. Dynamic theories of consumption choice predict different responses depend-

ing on whether the shocks are transitory or persistent. As such, our analysis of initially unexpected

and continuing cash flows provides guidance for policies that involve recurring payments, such as

extended unemployment insurance or a universal basic income, while prior work is best suited to

study one-time transfers, such as tax rebates or stimulus checks. Similar to our work, some papers

estimate the effects of sustained shocks to wealth on household leverage, using fiscal shocks (De-

myanyk, Loutskina, and Murphy (2019)) and shocks to import competition (Barrot et al. (2017)).

However, these papers rely on regional aggregates, which cannot distinguish local economic effects

(e.g., employment opportunities) from the effect of the shock. Our individual-level data provide two

distinct advantages. First, we more cleanly estimate the elasticity of deleveraging with respect to

cash payments, separate from local area confounding variation. Second, our individually-matched

data enable us to evaluate individual-level heterogeneity.

      Though our paper focuses primarily on debt repayment, our paper is closely linked via con-

sumption theory to recent work studying heterogeneity in households' marginal propensity to con-

sume out of income and wealth. Understanding the consumption response to shocks (expected or

unexpected, and permanent or transitory) has important implications for understanding consumer

theory and for policy-making. The canonical permanent income hypothesis suggests that consump-

                                                  4
tion should be proportional to disposable resources and that all consumers respond similarly to

shocks (Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010)). However, numerous empirical studies document that con-

sumers consistently deviate from the predictions of theory. To reconcile these findings, papers have

argued for the role of credit and liquidity constraints (e.g., Zeldes (1989); Baker (2018)) and a litany

of behavioral rules (e.g., Campbell and Mankiw (1989); Kueng (2018)). When applied to policy,

recent papers estimate the consumption response over several years to government spending (Dupor

et al. (2019)), tax rebates (Sahm, Shapiro, and Slemrod (2015); Baugh et al. (2018)), housing vari-

ables (e.g., Berger et al. (2017); Ganong and Noel (2018)), and employment (e.g., Ganong and Noel

(2019)). This literature argues that household balance sheets are an important source of heterogene-

ity in the observed consumption responses. However, the majority of this literature tends to treat

the household balance sheet as exogenous. Relative to these works, our paper finds that household

balance sheets respond dynamically to cash windfalls, suggesting that debt repayment decisions and

household leverage are important outcomes unto themselves.

      In recognizing the importance of household debt, we relate to an emerging literature on how

household debt responds to a variety of shocks to household budget constraints, as well as to other

variables that affect household decisions. For example, previous work has examined factors that

affect household liquidity, such as resets to adjustable rate mortgages (Fuster and Willen (2017);

Di Maggio et al. (2017)) and government policies targeted to mortgage owners (Scharlemann and

Shore (2016); Abel and Fuster (2020)). In a complementary vein, a separate line of work consid-

ers how demand-side factors affect household leverage, such as beliefs, personal experiences, and

social networks (Bailey et al. (2019); Brown, Cookson, and Heimer (2019); Kalda (2020)). Other

papers study precisely how households develop behavioral rules for debt repayment (Gathergood

et al. (2019); Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2020)). We contribute to this literature by showing the

debt repayment effects of a pure expansion to the household budget constraint in the form of cash

transfers, as opposed to other shocks to household finances that may require individuals to be finan-

cially sophisticated (e.g., mortgage modifications) or have questions about external validity (e.g.,

lottery winners). In light of prior research on large wealth shocks, which has found little evidence

of improvements to financial decisions (Hankins, Hoekstra, and Skiba (2011); Briggs et al. (2020)),

our finding that households improve their household balance sheet by repaying debt out of their

shale cash windfalls is not obvious, ex ante.

                                                   5
        Finally, our paper relates to a growing literature on the economic effects of shale devel-

opment. Existing literature has documented that natural gas shale development has led to job

growth (Feyrer, Mansur, and Sacerdote (2017)), lending (Gilje, Loutskina, and Strahan (2016);

Gilje (2019)), and changes in house prices (Muehlenbachs, Spiller, and Timmins (2017)). Our work

is the first to use individual level data on cash payments from shale extraction to trace out the effects

of shale development on household outcomes.4 More closely related to our study, Brown (2018)

examines the local effects of the oil and gas boom in the U.S. on consumer debt accumulation, while

Haughwout et al. (2016) and Cunningham, Gerardi, and Shen (2017) study the effects on financial

distress. Some of these studies use the FRBNY - CCP/Equifax panel data set to measure credit

outcomes. However, these studies rely on local aggregates of drilling intensity, rather than trace out

the effects of royalty payments to individuals. As such, our paper is in a unique position to evaluate

the role of ex-ante heterogeneity in households' balance sheets and consider the effects on non-local

beneficiaries of the Shale boom.



2     Data and Institutional Setting

The analysis uses several data sets that are novel to the literature. Below we outline the data and its

construction.


2.1     Oil and Gas Lease and Royalty Data

When an oil and gas firm decides to drill and develop an oil and gas reservoir, it must first nego-

tiate a contract, often with a private individual for the right to do so. These are the individuals in

our sample. Contracts to develop oil and gas compensate a mineral owner on two different dimen-

sions. First, prior to any extraction, a mineral owner will receive an upfront bonus payment, which

will typically be a dollar per acre value. For example, a person receiving a $5,000 per acre bonus

that owns 10 net mineral acres would receive a check for $50,000. Second, once extraction com-

mences, individuals receive a royalty stream based on their share in a well. Royalty percentages
    4 Bellonet al. (2020) estimate the impact of large cash windfalls from shale extraction on self-employment decisions
using the same data on individual-level cash windfalls as in this paper. Bellon et al. (2020)'s identification contrasts large
windfall recipients (>$50,000) with others. By contrast, this paper explicitly focuses on the deleveraging decisions out of
moderately-sized cash payments (i.e., less than annual income), which more closely resemble the size of the fiscal policy
shocks considered in macro models.



                                                              6
in our sample range from 12.5% to 30%, with 18.75% being the most common. An individual's

dollar royalty payment is also scaled by their interest percentage in a drilling unit. Royalties are

computed based on gross revenues, and no costs can legally be deducted from the gross revenue.

For example, if a well generates gross revenue of $10,000 in a month, and an individual owns 10

net mineral acres at a 20% royalty on a 400 acre drilling unit, that individual would receive a check

for $10,000*10/400*20% = $50 for that month.

        Accurate data on payments that individuals receive is exceedingly difficult to obtain and com-

pute. In all states except Texas, royalty ownership interests in wells are held by private companies

and not released to the public. Public county court records can be used to compute ownership per-

centages, but this often requires manually searching county indices and filings, and oil and gas firms

typically pay an average of $50,000 per well to compile accurate royalty owner information from

these public records. To put this in perspective, the number of wells in our sample is 7,041. For-

tunately, in the state of Texas, producing royalty interests are required to pay property tax, unlike

other states. Texas requires all oil and gas firms to turn over their so-called "pay decks" with detailed

well-by-well ownership interest information to the state. This royalty interest information is then

used to compute an ownership value based on the production profile of each well. Because property

tax information is public information in the state of Texas, one can conduct open record requests

to obtain the detailed title and ownership information that private firms paid millions of dollars to

construct. Appendix Figure A.1 provides an example of the raw mineral appraisal rolls which are

used in this study. The data is often provided in PDF format. The data requires substantial effort

to translate into a format conducive to analysis. In our study, we focused on compiling mineral

appraisal roll data for the four main producing counties in the Barnett Shale going back to the year

2000.

        Mineral roll appraisal data is highly attractive to work with because the address provided on

the rolls is the address at which people receive their tax bills. This accurate address is useful for

ensuring a high quality merge with credit bureau data. However, it is not enough to simply know

a person's name, address, and well ownership percentage. One must match these percentages with

well production and natural gas pricing. For each well in our sample, we compile monthly produc-

tion data from the oil and gas regulatory body in Texas, the Texas Railroad Commission. We then

multiply production by prevailing spot natural gas prices reported by the U.S. energy information

                                                   7
administration for a given month, this computation gives us the total gross revenue of a well, which

is sufficient to calculate the amount of each individual check.

      In our sample, royalty payments from production account for 60% of total payments. The

remaining payments are the bonus payments that mineral owners received at the time a lease was

signed. To compute bonus payments, we conducted public record requests for all oil and gas leases

from the four counties in our study, as well as county indexes. The lease bonus payment in many

cases is not reported on a lease because it is not required to be. However, many leases do have

this information, as well as net acreage amounts. Based on the leases that do have lease bonus

information we estimate a regression which that predicts the dollar per acre amount a lease bonus

is, based on time fixed effects, county fixed effects, and operator fixed effects. The R-squared we

obtain from the regression is 0.82. We then use this predicted amount to estimate the lease bonus

amounts for the rest of our sample for which we do not have this information. An example of a

lease in our sample is provided in Appendix Exhibit A.2.

      Once we have computed lease bonus payments and royalty payments for the sample, we then

merge the royalty payment data and the lease bonus payment data to obtain our overall payment

amounts. The first panel in Table 1 provides and overview of the distribution of payments. Overall

the payment someone receives is a function of prevailing natural gas prices, the amount of net

mineral acreage they own, and the amount of natural gas produced on their mineral acreage. The

high correlation between monthly payments and natural gas prices can be seen in Figure 1, which

plots the aggregate monthly payments in our sample versus the prices of natural gas. For our sample

we compute the monthly correlation of payments and natural gas prices to be 0.61.


2.2   Barnett Shale Overview

The focus of our study is the sample of oil and gas mineral owners who own minerals in the Barnett

Shale from 2005 through 2015. The Barnett Shale was the first shale gas development in the United

States. Shale gas had historically been uneconomic to drill and develop. However, the combination

of horizontal drilling with hydraulic fracturing ("fracking"), by Devon Energy and George Mitchell,

led to a technological breakthrough which allowed vast new quantities of natural gas to be devel-

oped. According to the U.S. Energy Information administration, shale gas production was less than

1% of total U.S. natural gas production in the year 2000, but by 2015 accounted for 46.2% of total

                                                  8
U.S. gas production. Moreover, the Barnett shale was the first, and among the most prolific shale

development in the United States, and the four Barnett Shale counties we focus on in our study

accounted for 17.3% of total U.S. shale gas production when production from the shale field peaked

in 2012. Figure 2 plots the number of Barnett Shale wells over time. There is a 14-fold increase

in shale wells during the time period of our study. We start in 2005 largely because that is towards

the beginning of the shale discovery (only 6.7% of our mineral owners were getting any payments

at that time), and it is the first time period which high quality credit bureau data was available to us.

To provide a spatial perspective of the development over the Barnett over time, we plot shale well

development over different years on a map of Johnson county in Figure 3. As can be seen, there is

a high degree of spatial heterogeneity that existed over time, as development ramped up.

      The development of the Barnett Shale offers several attractive features. First, shale develop-

ment was unexpected by the industry, and even less expected by households in our study. Indeed,

Chevron CEO John Watson was famously quoted as saying "'fracking' took the industry by sur-

prise" (2011 WSJ). Accordingly, mineral ownership in the Barnett Shale represented a deep out of

the money option, which had minimal value until there was a technological breakthrough. For those

fortunate to own minerals, which typically occurred through family ancestry, the shale breakthrough

led to the deep out of the money option becoming a vary valuable cash flow stream when natural

gas was drilled. Therefore, although people who own minerals are certainly different than the av-

erage credit profile in the United States, the shock they experience "within" person was due to an

exogenous technological breakthrough over which they had little control.


2.3   Royalty Owners versus Average Household Nationally

A question central to the identification we use in our study is why some people own mineral roy-

alties while others do not. The National Association of Royalty Owners estimates that 12 million

people in the United States own oil and gas minerals. Mineral interests can be associated with real

estate ownership, but often it is not. Mineral rights are frequently severed from surface rights, and

held by individuals whose family lived in the area generations ago. Because undeveloped minerals

represent a deep out of the money option, little value is ascribed to minerals until there is drilling ac-

tivity. Therefore, it is common in surface real estate transactions for minerals to be severed. This is



                                                    9
especially true in areas with shale because buyers would not have expected development and would

therefore pay little extra to own the minerals and surface.

       Figure 4 plots the locations of mineral owners in our sample. These individuals live in all 50

states, the District of Columbia, and three U.S. territories. In total, 10% of the royalty payments in

our sample are received by people who do not live in the four Barnett Shale counties of our study.

The state in our sample with the second highest gross mineral payments is California, consistent

with the mass migration patterns of Texans during the Dust Bowl. In most instances, mineral inter-

ests can be traced back generations, as families pass down the mineral rights. Further, the variation

we use across most of our empirical tests is not the extensive margin of owning mineral rights, but

the intensive margin of how large the payments are. That is, conditioning on individuals with the

same mineral acreage ownership, we examine the impact of receiving large payments versus small

payments, which is driven entirely by the timing of drilling and the intensity of production, factors

external to the households we study.

       Beyond these desirable features of the variation in mineral payments, the sample of mineral

rights owners ­ though different than the U.S. population on average ­ has significant overlap with

the overall U.S. distribution of borrowers. Accordingly, our findings have a stronger claim for

external validity than analyses that rely on very particular shocks. To highlight this overlap, we

compare our sample of oil and gas royalty owners to a random sample of U.S. borrowers provided

by Experian. As Figure 5 shows, our overall sample has 43,829 people who are subprime. Our

sample has a significant number of observations in each credit category.


2.4    Experian Data Overview

From the raw data we compiled, we identified approximately 500,000 mineral rights owners, and

computed a monthly panel data set of the payments received by rights owners from 2000 onward.

We contracted with Experian to merge the mineral rights data with individual-level credit bureau

data.5 We provided information on payments, names and addresses, and Experian conducted the

merge on name and address. In addition, Experian provided us with two control samples, (i) a

sample matched on the geography and age distribution of our Experian records, and (ii) a nationally
   5 Copyright  2018 Experian. All rights reserved. Experian and the Experian marks used herein are trademarks or
registered trademarks of Experian Information Solutions, Inc. Other product and company names mentioned herein are
the property of their respective owners.


                                                       10
representative sample. The merge with credit bureau data returned an 80 percent hit rate, leaving us

with approximately 400,000 consumers who received mineral rights payments. Each of our control

samples has approximately 300,000 individuals, leaving us with approximately 1.1 million credit

histories.

       For each individual in our sample, we observe an annual snapshot of credit bureau character-

istics (credit score, estimated personal incomes modeled using actual W2 statements from the IRS,

an internal debt-to-income measure, plus 250 credit attributes). Our primary outcome variable is the

omnibus debt-to-income ratio from Experian, which reports the percentage of an individual's annual

debt obligations relative to annual income. By scaling debt payments to income, rather than overall

debt levels to income, this measure captures the percentage of income devoted to the individual's

debt payments, and is similar to the metrics of debt burden used in screening credit applications. In

other tests, we also evaluate the impact of shale wealth shocks on specific categories of debt, i.e.,

the total amounts of revolving credit, auto loan balances and mortgage debt, as well as measures of

the financial risk on consumer balance sheets (e.g., delinquencies, bankruptcies and credit scores).

For simplicity of presentation, the main tests restrict attention to two snapshots of the data ­ year

2005 and year 2015 ­ but we also use the annual snapshots to examine the dynamics of how the

short run effects translate into longer run effects on household debt.


2.5   Sample Summary

From the full sample of data, we make a number of sampling restrictions to standardize the sample

characteristics and measurement of the key variables. Starting from a sample with 404,937 individ-

uals in our mineral payment sample, we restrict attention to individuals (and matches) for whom

we have valid data for the entire 11-year panel. We also restrict attention to treated individuals for

whom we observe their bonus payment to ensure we reliably identify the first date at which the in-

dividual begins receiving payments. Beyond these broad choices, our final analysis sample focuses

on the sample of individuals who receive moderate payments (< 100% of 2005 income).

       These sampling restrictions leave us with a final sample of 215,639 treated individuals (matched

with 215,639 control individuals). Panel (c) of Table 1 reports the number of observations dropped

by each sampling restriction. The sample size is reduced the most by choices that ensure the pay-



                                                 11
ments and their timing are measured accurately (i.e., the observe bonus payment filter and the re-

striction on mineral acreage owned).

      Table 1, Panel (a) reports detailed summary statistics on the distribution of payments in the

sample and credit characteristics of the individuals in the sample with valid data on mineral acreage

owned. We note that total mineral payments and mineral payments as a percentage of income are

both right skewed. For example, although the median payment-to-income percentage is 5.7%, the

mean payment-to-income percentage is 11.2%.

      Table 1, Panel (b) reports summary statistics on credit characteristics from the Experian data.

The main dependent variable, debt payments-to-income (DTI)(%), has a relatively symmetric dis-

tribution, with a median DTI of 13.0% and a mean DTI of 15.6%. Consistent with broader samples

of credit bureau data, the distribution of credit scores in our data is left skewed. However, consistent

with our contextual description, the individuals in our sample have credit scores that are slightly

above national averages, with a mean of 718 and a median of 739.0.

      To provide context for our main tests, it is useful to contrast mineral rights payments recipi-

ents with those in our control sample. To construct a useful sample of control individuals, we refine

the geography-age matching provided by Experian with a propensity score matching procedure in

which we match on initial credit score in 2005 and length of credit history. We select controls with

replacement and we restrict matched controls to be individuals who live in the same three digit zip

as the mineral owner.

      Table 2 reports how recipients of cash windfalls compare to control individuals who do not

own mineral rights. The central identification assumption of empirical tests is that in the absence

of receiving cash windfalls from mineral ownership treatment and control individuals would have

had outcomes (e.g., DTI or revolving balances) that would have trended similarly. Tests later in the

paper provide evidence supporting the parallel trends assumption.

      In addition to having parallel trends, Table 2 presents summary statistics prior to treatment

(year 2005) for individual characteristics related to debt (i.e., DTI, revolving balances, credit scores,

and the share of subprime individuals) and other personal characteristics (i.e., age, income and

amount of mineral acreage owned), separately for mineral windfall recipients and control individu-

als. For the outcomes of interest, there is substantial overlap in the distributions of mineral windfall

recipients and control individuals. For example, the interquartile range of DTI for mineral payment

                                                   12
recipients is from 8% to 29%, whereas it ranges from 2% to 24% for our control sample. Comparing

the means of the two samples, we observe some initial differences in the observed characteristics

between our sample of cash windfall recipients and the control sample.6 Indeed, the fixed effects we

employ in our empirical tests reduce the possibility that level differences in treatment and control

groups affect the magnitudes of the estimates we present in the subsequent analysis, in particular the

use of individual fixed effects subsumes any remaining individual level differences. Ultimately, our

empirical design relies on the absence of differential pre-trends for mineral owners versus our sam-

ple of non-mineral owners, not random assignment of mineral ownership. This approach is widely

used in the literature (e.g., Yagan (2015)). In our setting, this approach is well supported. We show

that after adjusting for fixed effects, and plotting our key outcomes in event time (see section 4.1)

the empirical evidence is consistent with parallel trends.



3      Conceptual Framework

Our focus in this study is to estimate the marginal propensity to repay debt (MPR) and understand

its heterogeneity across individuals. The MPR is the amount of debt repaid per additional dollar of

wealth received by the household.

           Household debt tends to be viewed within the context of canonical theories of intertempo-

ral consumption choice. In this framework, individuals have preferences over initial and future

consumption given by



                                                  ui (c0i ) +  · Ei [u (c1i )]                                               (1)

where c0i is consumption at time 0, the discount factor  is less than 1, and Ei is the expectations of

individual i. The individual's utility function ui (·) is an increasing and concave function. Household
    6 Inthe appendix Table A.1, we present a more formal balancing analysis. We observe that the raw differences in
these individual characteristics that are statistically significant, but the large size of our sample is a contributing factor to
the statistical significance. However, most of these differences become statistically insignificant upon including the set of
fixed effects that are included in our subsequent regression analysis. More important than the statistical differences, Table
A.1 also shows that the differences in these individual characteristics are small in economic magnitude. For example, the
largest differences are in DTI and revolving credit, which are just 2.7% and 1.6% of a standard deviation larger for the
treatment group relative to the control group.




                                                              13
debt enters into the consumer's decision-making as part of the intertemporal budget constraint:


                                             c0i = y0i - Rb0i + b1i .                                            (2)


The individual's initial wealth is y0i and she chooses c0i in order to maximize her lifetime utility.

In this formulation, period 0 debt outstanding b0i is a state variable. Debt can be rolled over to

subsequent periods at cost R. Subsequent period debts b1i are used to finance consumption in t = 1

and beyond. In the model, debt enters into the individuals' decision-making only as a means to

facilitate future consumption.

       The literature uses this framework to develop predictions about the impulse response of con-

sumption to anticipated and unanticipated cash flows. For simplicity of presentation, consider the

following general estimating equation:


                                        log cit = i + 1,1 log yit + 1,it                                         (3)


where i is an individual specific fixed effect that would include factors such as unobserved pref-

erences and  is the usual error term. The coefficient 1,1 is the consumption response to cash

flow changes, which is determined by structural parameters that are unobservable to the empiricist,

particularly beliefs about the persistence of the shock.

       The predictions on 1,1 are well-known and they are summarized by Jappelli and Pistaferri

(2010) and Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013). First, known as the permanent income hypothesis, pre-

dictable changes in cash flows should have no effect on current consumption. The best predictor of

current consumption is past consumption.

       However, in our setting, the cash windfalls from shale natural gas were unforeseen, which

leads to a more nuanced set of predictions, which we describe as follows. As Mian, Rao, and Sufi

(2013) outline, under the strong assumption of complete markets, individuals hedge against cash

flows shocks and 1,1 is expected to be close to zero. On the other hand, when consumers lack

access to credit or have limited borrowing capacity there will be cross-sectional variation in 1,1

reflecting individuals' ability to smooth shocks.7 As such, the aggregate consumption response to
  7 As a technical note, Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) describes how precautionary savings motives (e.g., Carroll and

Kimball (1996)) and liquidity constraints (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler (1989); Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)) can generate



                                                         14
cash flows will vary depending on the distribution of the shocks. Recent work finds support for

this prediction. Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) document heterogeneous consumption responses to

the reduction in housing wealth during the Great Recession, with housing wealth and variation in

leverage as proxies for financial constraints. Baker (2018) uses ratios of household debt to assets (or

income) for variation in financial constraints and shows that it explains the cross-sectional variation

in MPC to negative income shocks.

        These theoretical predictions and studies of heterogeneous MPCs caused by financial con-

straints serve as a springboard for our analysis. Connecting these studies back to theory, the cross-

sectional variation in 1,1 from equation 3 is determined by variation in initial debt b0 , a state

variable in the households' intertemporal budget constraint. Related to this implication, there is

an important unexplored prediction of the financial constraints view: household debt will be re-

paid out of positive cash flow shocks, particularly for households who are initially constrained and

seek to unwind these financial constraints. This prediction can be captured in the following general

estimating equation:

                                           log bit = i + 2,1 log yit + 2,it                                              (4)

in which 2,1 is the MPR that our tests explicitly estimate.

        Despite the clear theoretical predictions, the extent to which individuals would actually repay

debts in response to cash flow shocks is less clear because the prediction rests on the assumption

that household debt constitutes a financial constraint. Indeed, several facts about the cross-section

of household debt and household borrowing behaviors cast doubt on this assumption. First, house-

hold leverage is greater for individuals who are unlikely to have difficulty accessing credit markets.

Using data from the Survey of Consumer Finances, Mason (2018) shows that the bottom 20% of

the income distribution holds almost no debt at all, while the top 20% holds the most debt. As such,

levels of household leverage and debt to income ratios do not purely reflect a household's degree

of financial constraint. Second, there is substantial evidence that unconstrained households carry

expensive debts that are difficult to explain using standard theory. In particular, Laibson, Repetto,

and Tobacman (2003) and Gross and Souleles (2002) document a "debt puzzle" in which a substan-
similar predictions. In particular, low net worth households would have a larger consumption response under the precau-
tionary savings motive, but low net worth also implies greater financial constraints (e.g., insufficient collateral) and such
constrained households would also have a larger consumption response to shocks.



                                                            15
tial fraction of unconstrained households carry revolving balances on their credit cards. Laibson,

Repetto, and Tobacman (2003) explains this behavior using a consumption model with impatient

consumers. Such consumers would, instead of paying down debts, use unanticipated cash flows to

increase near-term consumption, a finding supported by Olafsson and Pagel (2019) who estimates

an MPC greater than one. In a similar vein, Kaplan and Violante (2014) point to many households

appearing liquidity constrained because they hold substantial illiquid assets. Such households are

not credit constrained in the traditional sense because illiquid assets are frequently used as collateral.

Third, there is evidence that individuals use heuristics to determine how much debt they should re-

pay (see e.g., Gathergood et al. (2019); Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2020)). This finding suggests

that households may have target debt levels and therefore b0 represents the individuals' preferences

towards debt.

      Given the above considerations, our goal is to test the unexplored prediction of the financial

constraints view that households deleverage in response to unexpected positive cash flow shocks.

As such, the following presents an organizational framework and road map for our empirical tests:

   1. We estimate heterogeneity in the MPR (equation 4) while sorting individuals by a direct

      measure of financial constraints: individuals' credit scores. To the extent that individuals use

      unanticipated cash windfalls to repay burdensome debts and ease financial constraints, we

      would expect to find that a negative MPR. The magnitude of the MPR response will vary by

      whether or not people have good (prime) or bad (subprime) credit scores.

   2. Next, we document the implications of debt repayment by estimating cross-sectional variation

      in MPC (equation 3) also based on individuals' credit scores. In accordance with theory, and

      like Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) and Baker (2018), we expect to find a greater elasticity of

      consumption out of cash flow shocks for constrained individuals. We build upon this work by

      testing how the consumption response parallels the debt response, with such tests precisely

      capturing their interdependence and joint dynamics.

   3. We conclude with tests of how the dynamics of the consumption response depend on the

      binding nature of credit constraints when individuals carry burdensome debts. Completely

      unlike prior studies, our data allow us to test which individuals have been denied credit.



                                                   16
      We use our data to show that the consumption dynamics are intertwined with individuals'

      successes and failures in obtaining credit.

The following section proceeds to our tests.



4     Main Results

In this section, we provide evidence on how wealth shocks from mineral payments affect household

leverage. In addition to estimating the marginal propensity to repay debt (MPR), the tests in this

section also provide evidence on the heterogeneity in the MPR ­ both in terms of initial creditwor-

thiness and the size of the wealth shock.


4.1   Household Leverage

As a first step towards estimating the effect of wealth windfalls on debt repayment, we estimate

a coarse specification, estimated separately for subsamples of individuals who received moderate

payments (<100% of annual income in 2005) versus large payments (>100% of annual income in

2005). Specifically we estimate the following regression:




                   DT Iit = i + zt + at + kt + 1 Treatment i × postt + X  + it ,                 (5)


where DT Iit is annual debt payments as a percentage of income for individual i in year t . The key

term of interest is the difference-in-difference term Treatmenti × postt . The variable Treatmenti ,

is a dummy for whether an individual received mineral payments (Treatmenti = 0 for propensity-

matched control individuals), and postt is a dummy for whether the observation occurs after the

Fracking Revolution (2015). The specification is a long difference that compares individuals' DTI

in 2015 to their DTI in 2005. To understand the role of heterogeneity, we also separately estimate

this specification on subsamples based on the initial credit scores of individuals (i.e., subprime

versus prime).

       Table 3 reports the results of estimating equation (5). For the full sample of initial credit

scores (columns 1 and 2), the coefficient estimate of interest, 1 , equals approximately -1.55. Eco-


                                                    17
nomically, this means that individuals that receive moderate (or large) payments have a reduction of

1.55 of their DTI relative to control individuals, which is approximately 9% of the sample average

DTI and 11% of the sample standard deviation for DTI. We see stark differences in debt repayment

based on initial credit. Initially-subprime individuals (columns 3 and 4) reduce their DTI by ap-

proximately ten times as much as initially-prime individuals (columns 5 and 6). These differences

in debt repayment by initial credit status are a first-order feature of our setting, and thus, we consider

heterogeneity by initial credit status in all subsequent tests.

          Importantly, the estimated amount of debt repayment from Table 3 is similar for individuals

who receive large payments (> 100% of annual income) to individuals who receive smaller payments

(< 100% of annual income). The odd numbered specifications restrict the sample to individuals who

receive moderate payments (up to 100% of annual income), while the even specifications include

only individuals who receive large payments (greater than 100% of annual income). For the full

sample, as well as the split samples of subprime and prime initial credit, we obtain similar coef-

ficient estimates for large and moderate payments. These similar estimates imply that additional

unexpected wealth (greater than 100% of annual income) does not lead to additional debt repay-

ment.8 As such, we focus the remainder of our tests on estimating the elasticity of wealth on DTI

for moderate-sized windfall payments up to 100% of annual income in 2005. Further, this restric-

tion ensures that our estimated elasticities are more relevant to policy parameters, as the moderate

payment sizes in our sample are more similar to the scope of typical fiscal policy interventions than

the very large windfalls in the right tail.

          To identify the MPR from this set of unexpected mineral payments (<100% of annual in-

come), we estimate the following treatment intensity difference-in-difference specification:




                       DT Iit = i + zt + at + kt + 1 Avg PT I i × postt + X  + it ,                                 (6)
   8 To  further support the choice of trimming the sample at 100% of annual income, we perform a non-parametric
analysis (specifically, we estimate a generalized additive model, GAM) in Appendix B in which we allow the estimated
elasticity of debt repayment to amount of debt repayment (in specification (6)) to depend flexibly on the size of the
payment relative to income. In this more flexible model, we find a diminishing marginal propensity to repay debt that is
effectively flat after 100% of annual income.




                                                          18
where DT Iit is annual debt payments as a percentage of income for individual i in year t . The

independent variable Avg PT Ii is the annualized amount of payments received (between 2005 and

2015) as a percentage of income for individual i. The post variable is an indicator for the post

period (equal to one for year 2015, and equal to zero for year 2005). The coefficient of interest

is 1 , which measures the impact of a one percentage point increase in annual mineral payments

relative to income (Avg PT Ii ) on the percentage of debt payments relative to income. Because both

variables are scaled by income and are annual measures, -1 measures the marginal propensity to

repay debt (i.e., the fraction of an additional dollar of mineral payments that is used to pay down

debt). To allow for local correlation in errors as well as serial correlation over time, we cluster

standard errors by ZIP3.

      Our preferred estimates of MPR come from our most restrictive specification in which we

include fixed effects that account for background determinants of household leverage. All specifi-

cations include individual fixed effects i . In addition, this specification includes ZIP3-year fixed

effects (zt ) to allow for differential trends in economic conditions across locations, and also in-

cludes age quintile by year and income quintile by year fixed effects (at and kt , respectively) to

account for different life-cycle and income profile effects on household leverage. In addition, our

preferred estimates are based on a sample of mineral payment recipients and matched controls who

are precisely matched (i.e., we retain observations in which the propensity-score matched individual

has a credit score within 100 points of the treatment individual). We will also present robustness to

these specification choices.

      Panel (a) of Table 4 presents our preferred estimates of the MPR. We separately estimate the

MPR for subsamples split by treatment individuals' initial credit scores (i.e., their credit scores in

2005). For the full sample of initial credit scores (columns 1 and 2), we estimate the MPR to be

approximately 0.3. The coefficient estimate equals 0.29 in the specification with individual fixed

effects and ZIP3-year fixed effects and it increases to 0.33 when we include the age and income

fixed effects. In context, this estimate implies that approximately 30% of each additional dollar

from mineral payments is used by individuals to repay debt. Under the assumption that saving and

labor are unaffected, we can attribute the remaining share of wealth to changes in consumption.

This estimate implies a MPC of approximately 0.70, which is comparable to the short run estimate

of 0.80 from Agarwal and Qian (2014).

                                                 19
      In columns (3) through (6), we examine heterogeneity in the effect of cash flow shocks by

initial creditworthiness. We find striking differences in the MPR based on the initial state of the

household's balance sheet. In columns (3) and (4), we estimate that initially-subprime individuals

have a MPR that is approximately 0.7, which implies that 70% of every dollar of unexpected cash

flows goes to repaying debt. By contrast, our estimates from columns (5) and (6) imply that the

MPR for prime-credit individuals is approximately equal to 0.1. These results show that consumers

with weaker financial health use additional cash flows to shore up their balance sheets, whereas

those with good financial health can use additional cash flow for other purposes.

      We complement these long run difference-in-difference estimates with evidence on the dy-

namics of debt repayment in the yearly panel data set. Specifically, we estimate leads and lags of the

effect of Avg PT Ii on DT Iit around the year of first payment. On average, roughly 40% of the total

windfall is received in the year of first payment, with the remaining payments accumulating over

the subsequent six years (see Figure 6). In addition, the date of the first windfall is when households

learn that they will receive the full stream of payments. This payment profile is similar for initially-

prime and initially-subprime individuals. Figure 7 presents our estimates of the dynamics of debt

repayment visually, with approximate 95% confidence bands. Apart from the different long-run

effects by initially-subprime and initially-prime consumers, the graph indicates a smooth transition

from no effect to the full long-term effect roughly five years after the first payment is received.

Moreover, the dynamics are not indicative of a short-run overreaction and subsequent reversion, nor

do they indicate any problematic pre-trends in the effect before payments have been issued.

      Next, we examine the robustness of our estimates to our assumptions about the sample re-

strictions. Table 4, Panel (b) reports the same set of specifications as Panel (a), but employs the

full sample of treatment-control matches, rather than just those precisely matched on initial credit

score. We find that the estimated MPR is stable and not statistically different from the estimates

on the more restrictive sample ­ the estimated MPR is 0.33 in column (1) and 0.37 in column (2).

Also, consistent with our preferred sample frame, initially-subprime households display a signifi-

cantly greater MPR than initially-prime households. Examining the heterogeneity based on initial

credit, the MPR for initially-subprime individuals increases slightly to above 0.8 (columns 3 and

4). However, the increase is not necessarily statistically meaningful as the smaller sample size of

the initially-subprime group comes with larger standard errors on the coefficient estimates. For

                                                  20
the initially-prime individuals (columns 5 and 6), the MPR estimates on the full sample are not

statistically different from the restricted sample estimates.

        At the local level, a potential explanation for the relation between wealth windfalls received

and debt repayment is that the windfalls reflect an improvement to the local area economy. Our main

specifications account for general improvements to the local area economy by identifying the MPR

from the difference between mineral recipients and control individuals and including ZIP3 by year

fixed effects. However, as an alternative technique to evaluate this explanation, Table 5 compares

estimates using the full set of individuals' locations (odd numbered columns) to a restricted sample

of individuals who reside outside of the Barnett Shale exploration area (even numbered columns).9

        The estimates of MPR (columns 1 and 2) are similar when we restrict to the out-of-area

sample, which drops more than 90% of the full sample's observations. Further, our finding of

greater MPR among initially-subprime households than the initially-prime households (columns 3

through 6) remains robust and significant in the out-of-area subsample. In fact, a one standard error

bound around the estimated elasticities on the out-of-area sample contains the estimated full sample

elasticity for all three estimated MPRs. These specifications employ individual fixed effects, but

not the time-varying fixed effects from our main specification in Table 4, Panel (a). We do not

include time-varying fixed effects in these tests. These fixed effects leave little variation to precisely

estimate a MPR because the out-of-area sample is widely spread across the country.10 The fact that

we obtain our core results on the out-of-area subsample gives us added confidence that the estimated

MPR reflects household leverage choices in response to receiving a cash flow windfall rather than

the result of changing economic conditions in geographic areas that experience drilling.


4.2    Types of Debts

Using data on balances from different categories of debt from Experian, this section sheds additional

insight into the composition of debt repayment across different debt types (i.e., revolving, auto and

mortgage credit). To understand the categories of debt that are most important for the heterogene-
   9 The Barnett Shale exploration area consists of Denton, Tarrant, Johnson and Wise counties in Texas. Individuals
residing outside of this exploration area comprise our "out of area" sample. In addition to the sample of out-of-area
mineral payment recipients, our control sample from Experian was constructed specifically to include individuals from
these out of area locations to serve as controls.
  10 Notably, in areas with few recipients, the time-varying fixed effects ­ e.g., ZIP3 by year FE ­ closely resemble

individual by year fixed effects, which would leave our specification tenuously identified. In practice, these fixed effects
do not much affect the estimated magnitudes, but their inclusion dramatically increases the standard errors.


                                                            21
ity in MPR we documented in the previous section, we estimate the following treatment intensity

difference-in-difference specification:




             log (1 + balancesit ) = i + zt + at + kt + 1 Avg PT I i × postt + X  + it ,           (7)


where the dependent variable is log transformed balances from either revolving, auto loan, or mort-

gage debt categories for individual i in year t . The independent variable Avg PT Ii is the annualized

amount of payments received (between 2005 and 2015) as a percentage of income for individual

i. The post variable is an indicator for the post period (=1 for year 2015, =0 for year 2005), i are

individual fixed effects, zt are ZIP3 x year fixed effects, at are age quintile by year fixed effects,

and kt are income quintile by year fixed effects. The specification also controls for the mineral

acreage owned by individual i. To allow for local correlation in errors, as well as serial correlation

over time, we cluster standard errors by ZIP3.

      As in the main specification, the coefficient of interest in this specification is 1 , which ap-

proximately equals the percentage impact on balances of a one percentage point increase in annual

mineral payments relative to income (Avg PT Ii ). We use the transformation log (1 + balancesit ) to

account for zeros in the balances of some credit categories. As such, 1 can be interpreted as ap-

proximately a percentage change increase in balancesit . In our sample, there are not many zeros

and the scale of the variable is typically far from zero. Thus, alternative solutions to the problem of

log transforming are likely to give quantitatively similar estimates.

      Table 6 presents the results from estimating equation (7), separately for subprime individ-

uals and prime individuals for revolving credit, auto loans, and mortgages. Across these credit

categories, the most striking difference between subprime and prime repayment of debts is that sub-

prime individuals reduce their revolving debts, whereas prime individuals increase their revolving

debts. To interpret the coefficient estimate for the subprime subsample, a one percentage point in-

crease in average payments-to-income leads subprime individuals to reduce their revolving balances

by approximately 3.9%. As the average revolving balance among subprime individuals is $8,345,

this represents a significant reduction in debt: a standard deviation increase in average payments-




                                                  22
to-income (1.42 pp) implies that subprime individuals repay $462 of their revolving debts.11 By

contrast, initially-prime individuals increase their revolving debt by 5.1% per one percentage point

increase in payments-to-income (an increase of approximately $580 for a standard deviation in-

crease in average payments-to-income). When we examine other categories of credit, we note that

the changes to auto loan and mortgage balances for both subprime and prime samples are insignifi-

cant, statistically and economically.

        Figure 8 presents a dynamic plot of how revolving credit changes around the year of first

payment. As in the analogous debt-to-income plot, the dynamic transition to the long-term effect

is smooth and does not appear to revert. Although there is some indication of a pre-trend for the

initially-prime sample, the initially-prime and initially-subprime samples exhibit similar patterns

in the years before receiving mineral payments. Thus, the main conclusion from this analysis ­

that subprime repay revolving debts while prime increase them ­ does not stem from changes to

revolving credit or trends that occur prior to the year in which individuals start receiving mineral

payments.



5      Debt Repayment and Auto Consumption

This section evaluates the implications of debt repayment by showing how it affects the consump-

tion response to unexpected wealth shocks. Existing literature has tied household debt levels to

consumption by households both at aggregated levels (Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013)) and at the indi-

vidual level (Baker (2018)). Broadly, this literature shows that individuals with higher debt burdens

exhibit a greater sensitivity of consumption with respect to income. Tests of such an effect tend to

be conducted by estimating cross-sectional variation in the marginal propensity to consume for indi-

viduals that vary by their debt levels at the time they experience the shock. However, this literature

leaves open lingering questions about the dynamics of repayment and how that tracks alongside the

consumption response. In particular, individuals may want to pay off all of their existing debts be-

fore consuming or they may prefer to retain some debts using the unexpected cash flow as a source

of liquidity. This section illustrates how the dynamics of debt and consumption operate jointly. The
    11 Summary   statistics by initial debt category (subprime versus prime) are reported in Appendix Table A.2.




                                                             23
joint response illustrates precisely how debt acts as a financial constraint impeding the consumption

response to unexpected cash flow shocks.

        To measure a consumption response, we first develop a reliable measure of consumption from

the credit bureau data. Prior work has often relied on revolving balances (from bank issued cards)

to measure consumption levels (Di Maggio et al. (2017)). However, a change in revolving balances

can capture a mixture of consumption responses and increased debts (i.e., rollovers) that individ-

uals are unable to repay, and even with the most comprehensive data on income, consumption is

difficult to measure accurately (Baker et al. (2018)). Given these challenges, we turn to a measure

of durable goods consumption from the credit bureau data that has recently been established in the

literature: car purchases. We proxy for an individual having purchased a new car by identifying

increases in year-over-year automobile loan balances. Two prior papers, Benmelech, Meisenzahl,

and Ramcharan (2017) and Dupor et al. (2019), have validated this measure by comparing auto-

mobile obligations in the credit bureau data to new vehicle registrations. We confirm the quality of

our measure by showing that our estimate of the time series of new vehicle purchases is visually

identical to that in Dupor et al. (2019) (see Appendix Figure A.3). Additionally, our focus on au-

tomobile consumption is appealing because it centers on the largest single consumption good that

most households would purchase (aside from a home purchase) and because automobile consump-

tion is a significant component of the aggregate cyclicality of consumption (see e.g., Benmelech,

Meisenzahl, and Ramcharan (2017)).

        We begin by estimating the following cross sectional treatment intensity specification:




                                     Autoi = z + a + k + 1 Avg PT I i + i ,                                           (8)


where Autoi is an indicator equal to one if individual i's auto loan balance increased year-over-year

at any point between 2005 and 2015.12 The independent variable Avg PT Ii is the annualized amount

of payments received (between 2005 and 2015) as a percentage of income for individual i. z are

ZIP3 by year fixed effects, a are age cohort by year fixed effects, and k are income quintile by
  12 Given  the repayment schedules for the typical auto loan, it is a strong indication of making a car purchase during a
year if an individual's outstanding auto loan balance increases from one year to the next. For each year in our panel, we
identify year-over-year increases in auto balances as automobile purchases, and our primary specification is an indicator
for whether the individual has at least one of these identified auto purchases between 2005 and 2015.


                                                           24
year fixed effects. The specification controls for a vector of control variables, including the mineral

acreage owned by individual i. To allow for local correlation in errors, we cluster standard errors by

ZIP3.

        Consistent with the literature's finding of excess sensitivity of consumption by indebted

households, we find significant heterogeneity by initial credit status in the auto consumption re-

sponse to mineral payments ­ subprime individuals exhibit much greater sensitivity than prime

individuals (Table 7). According to the coefficient estimates, a one standard deviation increase in

average PTI results in an 11.5% and 17.3% increase in the likelihood of purchasing a car for sub-

prime individuals (columns 3 and 4). There is no statistically significant effect for prime individuals

(columns 5 and 6).

        To assess how this consumption result relates to debt repayment, we undertake two additional

exercises. First, we examine cohorts of individuals whose first car purchase after beginning to

receive mineral payments occurs in the years {1, 2, ..., 6}. For each first-time car purchaser, we

compute how much debt has been repaid (in terms of DTI) as of the time of purchase. Figure

9 summarizes how this cumulative debt repayment varies by car purchase cohort and initial credit

score category. We find that subprime individuals repay more debt than prime individuals at the time

of the first auto purchase, especially for individuals who wait several years after receiving their first

mineral payment to make a car purchase. This result shows how subprime individuals engage in a

slow process of deleveraging, reducing debt overhang, before subsequently increasing consumption

by purchasing a new automobile.

        Second, in Figure 10, we demonstrate how the trajectory of first auto purchases is shaped by

the credit status of individuals. The figure plots the fraction of new automobile purchases made by

initially-subprime individuals. Similar to the debt repayment figure, it plots this fraction by each

year relative to the year that individuals start receiving royalty payments. The figure shows that

initially-subprime individuals increasingly comprise a larger share of new automobile purchases,

from two percentage points more in years 2 to 5, to over three percentage points more in year 6 after

mineral payments begin.

        We take our analysis a step further and trace out how credit access changes in response to

royalty payments in the lead up to new auto purchases. Figure 11 examines how access to credit

changes in the years after royalty owners begin receiving payment. We measure credit access by

                                                   25
taking the number of new credit lines divided by hard credit inquiries over the past year. This

measure of credit access has been validated by prior studies--it correlates with known measures

of credit supply in both the time series and cross-section (see e.g., Bhutta and Keys (2016); Akey,

Heimer, and Lewellen (2020)). A lower value for this variable means that a consumer has been

rejected from credit lines that they applied for. Two striking patterns emerge. First, subprime

consumers are more likely to have been denied credit prior to an auto purchase relative to prime

borrowers (hence the subprime line is below the prime line). Second, subprime borrowers who

wait several years to purchase a car tend to have been declined more prior to the purchase (the

coefficient for subprime at year 6 is below the coefficient at year 0 or year 1). This is consistent with

the deleveraging mechanism that motivates our work: subprime owners wait longer to purchase a

vehicle after receiving a payment experienced greater credit constraints in the form of credit denials,

and that the cash windfalls went toward debt repayment, prior to auto consumption.



6    Conclusion

An important class of macro models posits that households must repay debt before consumption

can recover from a recession with significant household debt burden. Yet, these debt repayment dy-

namics have not been, to date, studied in response to unexpected and persistent shocks to cash flow.

Using a novel set of such shocks to individuals from the extraction of shale natural gas, we find sub-

stantial heterogeneity in how households use unexpected cash to repay debt. Subprime households

use the additional cash flow to repay debt, consistent with these households facing a significant debt

burden. We link the debt repayment behavior in our setting to consumption responses of consumers

for durable goods. We find that debt repayment out of cash flow is important for the consumption

choices of subprime individuals, while being less important for prime individuals who are less credit

constrained before receiving the cash windfall.

      There has been substantial interest in both measuring a household's MPC and, to an additional

extent, understanding how this MPC interacts with household debt overhang. Our paper takes these

findings a step further, to directly trace out how consumption can be facilitated by deleveraging

of household balance sheets for subprime borrowers over time. Taken together, these results pro-

vide important insight into how models of household leverage and consumption relate to household


                                                   26
characteristics. Our evidence suggests that high initial household leverage may blunt the consump-

tion effects of unanticipated cash flows, as subprime individuals in particular pay down their debt

prior to consuming. These findings provide a novel perspective on why it is challenging to stimu-

late consumption by subprime individuals and link marginal propensity to repay debt with classical

marginal propensity to consume estimates.




                                                27
References
Abel, J., and A. Fuster. 2020. How do mortgage refinances affect debt, default, and spending?
  Evidence from HARP. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics forthcoming.

Agarwal, S., C. Liu, and N. S. Souleles. 2007. The reaction of consumer spending and debt to tax
  rebates ­ evidence from consumer credit data. Journal of Political Economy 115:986­1019.

Agarwal, S., and W. Qian. 2014. Consumption and debt response to unanticipated income shocks:
  Evidence from a natural experiment in Singapore. American Economic Review 104:4205­30.

Akey, P., R. Z. Heimer, and S. Lewellen. 2020. Politicizing consumer credit. Journal of Financial
  Economics Forthcoming.

Argyle, B. S., T. D. Nadauld, and C. J. Palmer. 2020. Monthly payment targeting and the demand
  for maturity. The Review of Financial Studies Forthcoming.

Bailey, M., E. Dávila, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel. 2019. House price beliefs and mortgage leverage
  choice. The Review of Economic Studies 86:2403­52.

Baker, S. R. 2018. Debt and the response to household income shocks: Validation and application
  of linked financial account data. Journal of Political Economy 126:1504­57.

Baker, S. R., L. Kueng, S. Meyer, and M. Pagel. 2018. Measurement Error in Imputed Consumption.
  Working Paper, Northwestern University .

Barrot, J.-N., E. Loualiche, M. C. Plosser, and J. Sauvagnat. 2017. Import competition and house-
  hold debt. FRB of New York Staff Reports 822 August.

Baugh, B., I. Ben-David, H. Park, and J. A. Parker. 2018. Asymmetric consumption response of
  households to positive and negative anticipated cash flows. Working Paper, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Bellon, A., J. A. Cookson, E. P. Gilje, and R. Z. Heimer. 2020.         Personal wealth and self-
  employment. NBER Working Paper No. 27452 .

Benmelech, E., R. R. Meisenzahl, and R. Ramcharan. 2017. The real effects of liquidity during the
  financial crisis: Evidence from automobiles. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132:317­65.

Berger, D., V. Guerrieri, G. Lorenzoni, and J. Vavra. 2017. House prices and consumer spending.
  The Review of Economic Studies 85:1502­42.

Bernanke, B. S., and M. Gertler. 1989. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations. The
  American Economic Review 79:14­31.

Bernstein, A. 2016. Household debt overhang and labor supply. Working Paper .

Bhutta, N., and B. J. Keys. 2016. Interest rates and equity extraction during the housing boom.
  American Economic Review 106:1742­74.

Briggs, J. S., D. Cesarini, E. Lindqvist, and R. Östling. 2020. Windfall gains and stock market
  participation. Journal of Financial Economics Forthcoming.



                                                28
Brown, J. P. 2018. Response of consumer debt to income shocks: The case of energy booms and
  busts. Working Paper 17-05, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Brown, J. R., J. A. Cookson, and R. Heimer. 2019. Growing Up without Finance. Journal of
  Financial Economics 134:591­616.

Campbell, J. Y., and N. G. Mankiw. 1989. Consumption, income, and interest rates: Reinterpreting
  the time series evidence. NBER macroeconomics annual 4:185­216.

Carroll, C. D., and M. S. Kimball. 1996. On the concavity of the consumption function. Economet-
  rica 64:981­92.

Cunningham, C., K. Gerardi, and L. Shen. 2017. Fracking and mortgage default. Working Paper .

Demyanyk, Y., E. Loutskina, and D. Murphy. 2019. Fiscal stimulus and consumer debt. Review of
  Economics and Statistics 101:728­41.

Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, B. J. Keys, T. Piskorski, R. Ramcharan, A. Seru, and V. Yao. 2017.
  Interest rate pass-through: Mortgage rates, household consumption, and voluntary deleveraging.
  American Economic Review 107:3550­88.

Dupor, B., M. Karabarbounis, M. Kudlyak, and M. S. Mehkari. 2019. Regional consumption re-
  sponses and the aggregate fiscal multiplier. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Eggertson, G. B., and P. Krugman. 2012. Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap: A Fisher-
  Minsky-Koo approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127:1469­513.

Favara, G., and J. Imbs. 2015. Credit supply and the price of housing. American Economic Review
  105:958­92.

Feyrer, J., E. T. Mansur, and B. Sacerdote. 2017. Geographic Dispersion of Economic Shocks:
  Evidence from the Fracking Revolution. American Economic Review 107:1313­34.

Fuster, A., and P. S. Willen. 2017. Payment size, negative equity, and mortgage default. American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9:167­91.

Ganong, P., and P. Noel. 2018. Liquidity vs. wealth in household debt obligations: Evidence from
  housing policy in the great recession. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

------. 2019. Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive and normative implications.
  American Economic Review 109:2383­424.

Gathergood, J., N. Mahoney, N. Stewart, and J. Weber. 2019. How do individuals repay their debt?
  the balance-matching heuristic. American Economic Review 109:844­75.

Gilje, E. P. 2019. Does local access to finance matter? evidence from us oil and natural gas shale
  booms. Management Science 65:1­18.

Gilje, E. P., E. Loutskina, and P. E. Strahan. 2016. Exporting liquidity: Branch banking and financial
  integration. Journal of Finance 71:1159­84.

Gross, D. B., and N. S. Souleles. 2002. Do liquidity constraints and interest rates matter for con-
  sumer behavior? evidence from credit card data. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117:149­85.


                                                 29
Guerrieri, V., and G. Lorenzoni. 2017. Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the liquidity trap.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132:1427­67.

Hankins, S., M. Hoekstra, and P. M. Skiba. 2011. The ticket to easy street? The financial conse-
  quences of winning the lottery. Review of Economics and Statistics 93:961­9.

Haughwout, A., D. Lee, J. Scally, and W. van der Klaauw. 2016. Hints of increased hardship in
  america's oil-producing counties. Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Jappelli, T., and L. Pistaferri. 2010. The consumption response to income changes. Annual Review
  of Economics 2:479­506.

Jones, C., V. Midrigan, and T. Philippon. 2018. Household leverage and the recession. Working
  Paper .

Kalda, A. 2020. Peer financial distress and individual leverage. The Review of Financial Studies
  33:3348­90.

Kaplan, G., and G. L. Violante. 2014. A model of the consumption response to fiscal stimulus
  payments. Econometrica 82:1199­239.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore. 1997. Credit cycles. Journal of political economy 105:211­48.

Korinek, A., and A. Simsek. 2016. Liquidity trap and excessive leverage. American Economic
  Review 106:699­738.

Kueng, L. 2018. Excess sensitivity of high-income consumers. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  133:1693­751.

Laibson, D., A. Repetto, and J. Tobacman. 2003. A debt puzzle. Knowledge, Information, and
  Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps 228.

Mason, J. 2018. Income distribution, household debt, and aggregate demand: A critical assessment.
 Levy Economics Institute, Working Papers Series .

Melzer, B. T. 2017. Mortgage debt overhang: Reduced investment by homeowners at risk of default.
 The Journal of Finance 72:575­612.

Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi. 2013. Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic
 Slump. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128:1687­726.

Muehlenbachs, L., E. Spiller, and C. Timmins. 2017. The Housing Market Impacts of Shale Gas
 Development. American Economic Review 105:3633­59.

Olafsson, A., and M. Pagel. 2019. Borrowing in response to windfalls. Working Paper .

Sahm, C. R., M. D. Shapiro, and J. Slemrod. 2015. Balance-sheet households and fiscal stimulus:
  Lessons from the payroll tax cut and its expiration. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Scharlemann, T. C., and S. H. Shore. 2016. The effect of negative equity on mortgage default:
  Evidence from hamp's principal reduction alternative. The Review of Financial Studies 29:2850­
  83.


                                                30
Yagan, D. 2015. Capital tax reform and the real economy: The effects of the 2003 dividend tax cut.
  American Economic Review 105:3531­63.

Zeldes, S. P. 1989. Consumption and liquidity constraints: an empirical investigation. Journal of
  political economy 97:305­46.




                                               31
7      Tables

                                                 Table 1: Summary Statistics
Note: This table reports summary statistics for our mineral payment and credit bureau data. The Mineral Payment data
has a unit of observation at the mineral owner level and provides summary statistics on the payments that mineral owners
receive along with the amount of net mineral acres they own. The Credit Data provides summary statistics on the credit
data used in our main regressions, and has a unit of observation at the individual-year level (the two years being 2005 and
2015). It includes both mineral owners and matched control individuals used in our panel.

                                             (a) Summary Statistics on Mineral Payments
    Variable                            N           mean     Std. Dev.      p1        p25         p50          p75          p99
    Total Payment ($)                215,639      5,683.90   9,338.45     77.89    1,003.68    2,717.39      6,281.98    46,245.85
    Income in 2005 ($1,000s)         215,639       51.40       22.22      22.00     38.00       46.00         59.00       138.00
    Total Payments / Income (%)      215,639       11.16       15.66      0.14       2.16        5.70         12.97        82.54
    Avg Payments / Income (%)        215,639        1.01        1.42      0.01       0.20        0.52          1.18        7.50
    Net Mineral Acres Owned          215,639        0.64        7.15      0.00       0.00        0.16          0.34        6.05
    Year of First Payment            214,845      2007.95       1.53      2005       2007        2008          2008        2012
    Reside in Barnett                215,639        0.90        0.30       0.00      1.00        1.00          1.00         1.00



                                        (b) Summary Statistics on Credit Characteristics
    Variable                          N          mean      Std. Dev.       p1         p25         p50           p75         p99
    Income in 2005 ($1,000s)       785,884       50.75       21.45       22.00       37.00       46.00         58.00       134.00
    Age in 2005                    783,669       49.51       13.46         22          40          49            58          84
    Credit Score (Vantage Score)   785,884      718.24       92.97      478.00      651.00      739.00        801.00       833.00
    ... Subprime (=1)              785,884        0.19        0.39        0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00        1.00
    ... Prime (=1)                 785,884        0.51        0.50        0.00        0.00        1.00          1.00        1.00
    Total Debt-to-Income (%)       785,884      15.60        13.53       0.00        3.00        13.00         24.00       53.00
    Revolving Balance              723,513     9,420.65   20,185.53       0.00      741.00     3,281.00     10,246.00    80,975.88
    Auto Loan Balance              333,716    20,469.92   16,974.78     788.00     9,478.00   16,662.00      26,652.00   79,430.50
    Mortgage Balance               411,687     132,040    157,078.05   1,270.86   56,715.00   96,073.00     155,801.00   704,578.02



                                   (c) Treatment Observations Satisfying Data Quality Filters
    Sampling Restriction                                           Number of Treated Individuals          Treatment Obs. Dropped
    Full Sample                                                              404,937                                -
    Valid Matches with nonmissing data in 2005-2015 panel                    367,727                              37,210
    Observe bonus payment                                                    234,385                             133,342
    Restrict to moderate payments (< 100% of 2005 income)                    215,639                              18,746




                                                                 32
                  Table 2: Initial Characteristics for Windfall Recipients versus Others
Note: This table reports characteristics in key variables observed in year 2005 prior to receipt of mineral payments for
recipients of cash windfalls versus control individuals based on a propensity score matching of credit score and length of
credit history. For each sample and characteristic, we report the mean, median, 25th percentile and 75th percentile.



                                                             Mineral Payment Recipients
        Variable                              Mean         Median 25th Percentile 75th Percentile
        Debt-to-Income (%)                     19.8          19.0         8.0             29.0
        Revolving Balance                    10,214.0      3,645.0       891.0          11,374.0
        Credit Score (Vantage Score)          705.1         720.0        637.0           790.0
        Initially Subprime (%)                 20.3          0.0          0.0              0.0

        Net Mineral Acres Owned                 0.64         0.16            0.00                 0.34
        Income ($1,000s)                        51.4         46.0            38.0                 59.0
        Age                                     48.6         48.0            39.0                 58.0


                                                             Control Sample Individuals
        Variable                               Mean        Median 25th Percentile 75th Percentile
        Debt-to-Income (%)                      15.2         13.0         2.0            24.0
        Revolving Balance                     9,134.0      8,337.8      2,619.0         437.0
        Credit Score (Vanage Score)            701.5        717.0        629.0          790.0
        Initially Subprime (%)                  22.4         0.0          0.0            0.0

        Net Mineral Acres Owned                 0.00         0.00            0.00                 0.00
        Income ($1,000s)                        47.8         43.0            35.0                 55.0
        Age                                     51.7         50.0            42.0                 60.0




                                                           33
           Table 3: Long-Run Debt-to-Income Effects for Moderate versus Large Payments
Note: The dependent variable is the total debt-to-income of the consumer provided by Experian. The unit of observation
is an individual-year in which two years are considered, 2005 (pre) and 2015 (post). The variable treatment is an indicator
for whether the individual received royalty and bonus payments as part of our sample from mineral owners in the Barnett
Shale between 2005 and 2015. The variable post is an indicator for whether the individual-year observation is in 2015.
Individuals who are not treated are matched controls (propensity score matching on ZIP3, 2005 credit score, and length
of credit history) drawn from the control sample from Experian. The interaction treatment x post captures the average
difference in the change in debt to income ratios between those receiving mineral payments and those in the control
sample. Mineral acres owned (Z) are the number of mineral acres owned by the individual, standardized to have a mean
of 0 and standard deviation of 1 for ease of interpretation. The odd columns present this effect for moderate payments
(total payments / annual income < 100%), whereas the even columns present this effect for large payments (total payments
/ annual income > 100%). Standard errors clustered by ZIP3 in parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.


                          dependent variable:                            Total Debt-to-Income
                    pre-period credit sample:        Full Sample                Subprime                      Prime
                     size of payments sample
                                                   less         more         less        more          less           more
 (more or less than 100% of annual income):
                                                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)
 treatment x post                               -1.579       -1.540       -3.309       -3.852       -0.366        -0.356
                                                 (0.154)      (0.143)      (0.532)      (1.118)      (0.142)      (0.326)
 mineral acreage owned (Z) x post                0.050         0.056       -0.068        0.317       0.089        0.066
                                                 (0.024)      (0.066)      (0.066)      (0.367)      (0.032)      (0.033)
 ZIP3-year FE                                       x            x            x            x            x                x
 age-year FE                                        x            x            x            x            x                x
 income-year FE                                     x            x            x            x            x                x
 individual FE                                      x            x            x            x            x                x
 Observations                                    785,884      68,587       146,298       9,212       403,572          40,985
 Adjusted R2                                      0.484       0.519         0.333        0.382        0.521           0.525




                                                           34
                                 Table 4: Long-Run Debt-to-Income Effects
Note: The dependent variable is the total debt-to-income of the consumer provided by Experian. The unit of observation
is an individual-year in which two years are considered, 2005 (pre) and 2015 (post). The treatment intensity variable
Avg payments/income is average annual bonus and royalty payment from Barnett Shale extraction between 2005 and
2015 as a percentage of 2005 income. The variable post is an indicator for whether the individual-year observation is
in 2015. Individuals who are not treated are matched controls (propensity score matching on ZIP3, 2005 credit score,
and length of credit history) drawn from the control sample from Experian. The interaction Avg payments/income x post
captures how a one percentage point increase in payments/income translates into a percentage change in debt-to-income
(i.e., the marginal propensity to pay down debt). Mineral acres owned (Z) are the number of mineral acres owned by
the individual, standardized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 for ease of interpretation. The sample is
restricted to individuals who receive payments up to 100% of their annual income in 2005. Panel (a) reports results on
the sample with matched control and treatment individuals that have credit scores within 100 credit score units in 2005.
Panel (b) relaxes restrictions on matched controls and includes the full sample provided by Experian. Standard errors
clustered by ZIP3 in parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.

                                (a) Estimates of MPR using precisely matched controls


              dependent variable:                                 Total Debt-to-Income
         pre-period credit sample:             Full Sample               Subprime                        Prime
                                           (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)
  Avg PTI x post                       -0.291        -0.330        -0.687        -0.772         -0.096      -0.141
                                         (0.046)      (0.041)        (0.100)       (0.118)      (0.068)      (0.057)
  mineral acres owned (Z) x post          0.023       0.083          -0.068         0.028       0.060       0.102
                                         (0.025)      (0.030)        (0.114)       (0.078)      (0.031)      (0.025)
  individual FE                             x            x              x             x            x           x
  ZIP3-year FE                              x            x              x             x            x           x
  age quintile-year FE                                   x                            x                        x
  income quintile-year FE                                x                            x                        x
  Observations                          682,627       682,627       119,567        119,567      365,471     365,471
  Adjusted R2                            0.467         0.490         0.255          0.304        0.503       0.524



                                           (b) Full sample estimates of MPR


             dependent variable:                                  Total Debt-to-Income
        pre-period credit sample:           Full Sample                  Subprime                       Prime
                                          (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)
  Avg PTI x post                      -0.325         -0.367       -0.891         -0.856        -0.044      -0.108
                                       (0.041)        (0.041)      (0.104)        (0.127)      (0.053)      (0.044)
  mineral acres owned (Z) x post        0.004         0.073        -0.132         -0.017       0.052       0.101
                                       (0.027)        (0.028)      (0.086)        (0.067)      (0.031)      (0.027)
  individual FE                            x             x             x             x            x            x
  ZIP3-year FE                             x             x             x             x            x            x
  age quintile-year FE                                   x                           x                         x
  income quintile-year FE                                x                           x                         x
  Observations                         785,884        785,884       146,298       146,298      403,572      403,572
  Adjusted R2                           0.458          0.483         0.281         0.328        0.497        0.521




                                                          35
       Table 5: Long-Run Debt-to-Income Effects ­ Estimates in Areas Unexposed to Drilling
Note: The dependent variable is the total debt-to-income of the consumer provided by Experian. The unit of observation
is an individual-year in which two years are considered, 2005 (pre) and 2015 (post). The sample is restricted to individuals
who receive payments up to 100% of their annual income in 2005. Sample and variable definitions are the same as in
Table 4. Standard errors clustered by ZIP3 in parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% level respectively.



             dependent variable:                                    Total Debt-to-Income
        pre-period credit sample:             Full Sample                    Subprime                       Prime
          out of area subsample?             no         yes               no          yes              no           yes
                                             (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
  Avg PTI x post                        -0.370         -0.460         -0.949         -1.607         -0.075      -0.040
                                          (0.039)        (0.177)        (0.085)        (0.739)      (0.054)     (0.180)
  mineral acres owned (Z) x post           0.016         -0.034         -0.102         -0.114       0.054       -0.121
                                          (0.023)        (0.156)        (0.082)        (0.597)      (0.026)     (0.182)
  individual FE                              x              x              x              x           x            x
  Observations                            785,884        71,014         146,298        11,639      403,572      36,897
  Adjusted R2                              0.452         0.378           0.270         0.233        0.491       0.409




                                                            36
                   Table 6: Effects of Cash Windfalls on Debt Repayment by Category
Note: The dependent variables are log transformed balances of consumer credit categories reported to Experian. Specifi-
cally, we estimate how receiving mineral payments affects revolving balances, auto loan balances and mortgage balances.
The unit of observation is an individual-year in which two years are considered, 2005 (pre) and 2015 (post). We restrict
attention to individuals (and their matched controls) who receive less than 100% of their income in 2005. The variable
Avg payments/income is average bonus and royalty payment from Barnett Shale extraction between 2005 and 2015 as
a percentage of 2005 income. The variable post is an indicator for whether the individual-year observation is in 2015.
Individuals who are not treated are matched controls (propensity score matching on ZIP3, 2005 credit score, and length
of credit history) drawn from the control sample from Experian. For subsamples based on credit score, the subsample
is based on the treated individual's initial credit status. Standard errors clustered by ZIP3 in parentheses.  ,  , and 
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.



             dependent variable:      % Revolving Credit          % Auto Loan Balance       % Mortgage Balance
        pre-period credit sample:     Subprime   Prime            Subprime   Prime          Subprime   Prime
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
  Avg PTI x post                      -3.908        5.052          2.474       -0.176         -0.942        0.161
                                       (1.522)      (0.525)       (1.534)      (0.999)        (1.324)      (1.713)
  mineral acres owned (Z) x post       -1.124       -0.034        -0.697       -1.533         -1.121        0.213
                                       (3.192)      (0.647)       (2.179)      (1.645)        (1.315)      (1.155)
  individual FE                            x           x              x           x              x            x
  ZIP3-year FE                             x           x              x           x              x            x
  income-year FE                           x           x              x           x              x            x
  age-year FE                              x           x              x           x              x            x
  Observations                          87,306      361,399        61,512      129,882        57,740       184,920
  Adjusted R2                            0.274       0.479          0.240       0.234          0.602        0.382




                                                             37
                         Table 7: Effect of Windfalls on Automobile Consumption
Note: The dependent variable is an indicator variable for whether the individual purchased a car, measured by whether
the individual's auto loan balanced increased year over year between 2005 and 2015, as in Dupor et al. (2019). The
specification is a changes specification in which the unit of observation is an individual observed in 2015, and the flow of
consumption is measured over the period 2005 (pre) through 2015 (post). We restrict attention to individuals (and their
matched controls) who receive less than 100% of their income in 2005. The variable Avg payments/income is average
bonus and royalty payment from Barnett Shale extraction between 2005 and 2015 as a percentage of 2005 income.
Individuals who are not treated are matched controls (propensity score matching on ZIP3, 2005 credit score, and length
of credit history) drawn from the control sample from Experian. For subsamples based on credit score, the subsample
is based on the treated individual's initial credit status. Standard errors clustered by ZIP3 in parentheses.  ,  , and 
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.



       dependent variable:                                         Auto purchase (=1)
  pre-period credit sample:                Full Sample                  Subprime                         Prime
                                          (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
  Avg PTI                             0.288            0.037       0.757         0.508         -0.001         -0.302
                                       (0.102)        (0.135)      (0.196)       (0.143)       (0.155)        (0.193)
  mineral acres owned (Z)             -0.169          -0.053       -0.059        -0.197        -0.156         -0.029
                                       (0.076)        (0.088)      (0.169)       (0.174)       (0.094)        (0.120)
  ZIP3 FE                                  x            x               x            x              x            x
  age quintile FE                                       x                            x                           x
  income quintile FE                                    x                            x                           x
  Observations                         431,278       431,278        87,658        87,658        215,116       215,116
  Adjusted R2                           0.006         0.087         0.007          0.077         0.006         0.088




                                                            38
8    Figures

                     Figure 1: Mineral Rights Payments versus Natural Gas Prices
Note: This figure plots the aggregate monthly payments received by minerals over time (primary y-axis), relative to
the price of natural gas ($/mmbtu, secondary y-axis). The mineral payment data is computed using the payment data
compiled from our study and the natural gas price data is obtained from the U.S. Energy Information Administration.




                                                        39
                    Figure 2: Wells under Production in the Barnett Shale over Time
Note: This figure plots the number of Barnett Shale wells over time in the four counties of our study: Wise, Denton,
Tarrant, and Johnson. The data on well numbers was obtained from Smith International Corporation and the Texas
Railroad Commission.




                                                        40
                       Figure 3: The Spatial Distribution of Wells (Johnson County)
Note: This figure plots a series of maps of snapshots of shale drilling activity over time. The yellow lines represent the
horizontal wellbores of the Barnett Shale wells.




                                                           41
                Figure 4: Locations of Individuals Receiving Mineral Rights Payments
Note: This figure plots the location of the different mineral owners in our study who own minerals in the Barnett Shale.
The location data is based on the zip code that mineral owners reside at according to property tax and credit bureau
records. Darker points indicate greater numbers of mineral owners in a location.




                                                          42
     Figure 5: Comparison of Mineral Rights Owners to the Nationally Representative Sample
Note: This figure plots the distribution of credit scores of the mineral owners in our sample relative to a national random
sample of people in the United Stats as of 2005. The blue bars represent the national random sample and the tan bars
represent the mineral owner sample. The national random sample is based on a national random sample of 259,634
people.




                                                           43
                 Figure 6: Average Mineral Payment Profile ­ Subprime versus Prime
Note: This figure presents the cumulative amount of the total payment as of years 1 through 6 after the year of first
payment by individuals who are subprime in 2005 (credit score less than 620) versus prime individuals in 2005 (credit
score greater than 720), using the time series of payments in our mineral payment sample.




                                                         44
                                      Figure 7: Debt-to-Income Dynamics
Note: This figure presents the dynamics in the effect of average payments-to-income on debt-to-income. Specifically,
the figure plots the coefficient estimates regression of debt-to-income on Average PTI interacted with leads and lags
relative to the first year the individuals receives a payment. We estimate separate leads-and-lags regressions for subprime
individuals and prime individuals. As in the analogous specifications in Table 4, we restrict attention to individuals (and
their matched controls) whose matched controls are within 100 credit score points in 2005 and individuals who receive
aggregate payments less than 100% of their income in 2005. Subprime coefficient estimates are indicated as black
diamonds, whereas the prime coefficient estimates are indicated as blue squares. Approximate 95% confidence intervals
are depicted by the dotted lines. Standard errors are clustered by ZIP3.




                                                           45
                                     Figure 8: Revolving Credit Dynamics
Note: This figure presents the dynamics in the effect of receiving mineral payments on logged (1+) revolving balances.
Specifically, the figure plots the coefficient estimates from a leads-and-lags regression of logged revolving balances on
Average PTI interacted with leads and lags relative to the first year the individuals receives a payment. We estimate
separate leads-and-lags regressions for subprime individuals and prime individuals. As in the analogous specifications in
Table 6, we restrict attention to individuals (and their matched controls) whose matched controls are within 100 credit
score points in 2005 and treatment individuals who receive aggregate payments less than 100% of their annual income.
Subprime coefficient estimates are indicated as black diamonds, whereas the prime coefficient estimates are indicated as
blue squares. Approximate 95% confidence intervals are depicted by the dotted lines. Standard errors are clustered by
ZIP3.




                                                          46
                     Figure 9: Cumulative Debt Repayment as of First Auto Purchase
Note: This figure presents a plot of the cumulative amount of debt repayment ­ difference in DTI relative to DTI upon
receipt of first mineral windfall ­ in the year of first automobile purchase after beginning to receive mineral windfalls.
Subprime coefficient estimates are indicated as black diamonds, whereas the prime coefficient estimates are indicated as
blue squares. The estimates are drawn from fixed effects specifications with cumulative debt repayment as the dependent
variable, and are conditioned on ZIP3 by year FE, income bin by year FE, and age bin by year FE. Approximate 95%
confidence intervals are depicted by the dotted lines. Standard errors are clustered by ZIP3.




                                                           47
            Figure 10: Likelihood of Initially Subprime Individuals Making Auto Purchase
Note: This figure presents estimates of the likelihood of initially subprime individuals to purchase an automobile for the
first time in year t after the date of receipt of first payment in year t = 0. The plot presents estimates and 95% confidence
intervals for the difference in the likelihood of auto purchases by subprime individuals, drawn from a linear probability
model with ZIP3 by year FE, income bin by year FE, and age bin by year FE. Standard errors are clustered by ZIP3.




                                                            48
                         Figure 11: Credit Denials Prior to First Automobile Purchase
Note: This figure presents estimates of how the timing of purchasing one's first automobile after the date of first receipt
                                                             new credit linest
in year t = 0 relates to the average annual supply ratio ( hard credit inquiriest ) taken over all years in the credit panel prior to
the auto purchase year. The plot presents estimates and 95% confidence intervals for the difference in the average supply
ratio (as compared to the baseline year t = 0). The specification includes with ZIP3 by year FE, income bin by year FE,
and age bin by year FE. Standard errors are clustered by ZIP3.




                                                                49
                Internet Appendix to:

Shale Shocked: Cash Windfalls and Household Debt
                   Repayment




                          i
A     Additional tables and figures
A.1     Examples of Raw Data

                           Figure A.1: Example of Raw Mineral Appraisal Roll
Note: This figure presents an example of the raw data from the tax appraisal rolls. We processed the raw text into our
mineral payments data by using appraisal rolls to merge with production data in order to compute precise values for
monthly mineral rights payments.




                                                          ii
                              Figure A.2: Example of a Mineral Rights Lease
Note: This figure presents an example of a mineral rights lease, with key information highlighted. We processed a large
sample of these leases to augment our tax appraisal data set, as well as to compute estimates of lease bonus payments.




                                                          iii
A.2     Summary Statistics

  Table A.1: Comparison of Initial Characteristics for Windfall Recipients versus Control Sample
Note: This table reports differences in key variables observed in year 2005 prior to receipt of mineral payments for
treated individuals versus control individuals based on a propensity score matching of credit score and length of credit
history. The Adjusted Difference column reports the difference between treatment and control samples after controlling
for mineral acreage and an indicator for whether the individual has a mortgage in 2005, and including ZIP3, age quintile,
and income quintile fixed effects. Statistical significance is based on clustering by 3 digit zip (similar to our main tests)
is reported. Statistically significant differences at the 5% level are indicated by  and 1% by  .

  Variable                          Treatment     Control    Difference    Adjusted Difference      % of Std. Deviation
  Debt-to-Income (%)                   19.8         15.2       4.6                0.4                     2.71%
  Revolving Credit ($1,000s)           10.2         8.3        1.9                0.4                     1.88%
  Credit Score (Vantage Score)        705.1        701.5       3.6                 1.2                    1.29%
  Initially Subprime (%)               20.3        22.4       -2.1                 0.1                    0.17%

  Net Mineral Acres Owned              0.6          0.0        0.6                   0.0                   0.00%
  Income ($1,000s)                     51.4         47.8       3.6                   0.2                   0.83%
  Age                                  48.6         51.7       -3.1                  0.0                   0.00%




                                                             iv
                            Table A.2: Summary Statistics by Initial Credit Score
Note: This table reports summary statistics for credit bureau debt variables, split by initially-subprime individuals versus
initially-prime individuals. The data have a unit of observation at the individual-year level (the two years being 2005 and
2015), and include both mineral owners and matched control individuals used in our panel.

 Variable                      N         mean       Std. Dev.         p1         p25         p50          p75          p99
 Subprime Sample
 Total Debt-to-Income (%)   146,298      20.50        14.93           0.00        9.00       19.00       31.00         59.00
 Revolving Balance          110,449    8,345.44     16,540.41         0.00       561.00     2,770.00    9,425.00     71,856.12
 Auto Loan Balance          73,090     20,725.57   16,628.14         808.00     9,835.00   16,857.50   26,862.00     79,918.00
 Mortgage Balance            71,292   109,967.90   120,110.49       4,926.28   55,459.00   86,892.50   131,171.25   507,913.76

 Prime Sample
 Total Debt-to-Income (%)   403,572     11.70        11.39           0.00         1.00       10.00       19.00        45.00
 Revolving Balance          397,770    8,027.36    19,511.59         0.00        669.00     2,749.00    7,978.00    76,372.00
 Auto Loan Balance          146,292   19,368.93    16,374.30        725.91      8,883.00   15,835.00   25,315.00    75,068.00
 Mortgage Balance           205,324   137,878.90   174,508.48        0.00      53,593.00   97,382.50   164,424.00   769,219.83




                                                                v
A.3     Debt-to-Income Robustness

Table A.3: Long-Run Debt-to-Income Effects ­ Restricting to Individuals who Own 0.5 or More
Mineral Acres
Note: The dependent variable is the total debt-to-income of the consumer provided by Experian. The unit of observation
is an individual-year in which two years are considered, 2005 (pre) and 2015 (post), restricted to individuals who receive
payments less than 100% of their annual income. Sample and variable definitions are as in Table 4, with the additional
restriction that the individual owns at least half an acre of mineral rights.Standard errors clustered by ZIP3 in parentheses.
 ,  , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.



       dependent variable:                                         Total Debt-to-Income
  pre-period credit sample:                Full Sample                    Subprime                         Prime
                                        (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)          (5)           (6)
  Avg PTI x post                    -0.265          -0.284          -0.446          -0.449        -0.092       -0.113
                                      (0.025)        (0.031)         (0.133)         (0.178)      (0.066)       (0.056)
  acres (Z) x post                     0.055         0.156           -0.354          -0.097       0.153        0.215
                                      (0.070)        (0.058)         (0.415)         (0.282)      (0.078)       (0.064)
  individual FE                          x              x                x              x             x            x
  ZIP3-year FE                           x              x                x              x             x            x
  age quintile-year FE                                  x                               x                          x
  income quintile-year FE                               x                               x                          x
  Observations                       121,114         121,114          13,171         13,171        65,578       65,578
  Adjusted R2                         0.495           0.516            0.296          0.341         0.514        0.531




                                                              vi
A.4     Categories of Credit ­ Broad Sample

                          Table A.4: Categories of Credit ­ Out-of-area subsample
Note: The dependent variables are log transformed balances of consumer credit categories reported to Experian. Specifi-
cally, we estimate how receiving mineral payments affects revolving balances, auto loan balances and mortgage balances.
The unit of observation is an individual-year in which two years are considered, 2005 (pre) and 2015 (post). We restrict
attention to individuals (and their matched controls) who receive less than 100% of their income in 2005, and for this test
whether the individual resides outside of the Barnett Shale area. Other variable definitions and sample choices are the
same as in Table 6. Standard errors clustered by ZIP3 in parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.

       dependent variable:        % Revolving Credit           % Auto Loan Balance           % Mortgage Balance
  pre-period credit sample:       Subprime   Prime             Subprime   Prime              Subprime   Prime
                                      (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
  Avg PTI x post                   -12.450         6.075          -0.135       -0.839         -2.193          1.153
                                   (11.631)       (4.456)         (8.449)      (5.064)        (7.151)        (7.679)
  acres (Z) x post                  -7.654        -2.881          -6.211        0.719         -4.929          0.311
                                   (13.085)       (5.418)         (5.896)      (5.863)        (5.928)        (7.298)
  individual FE                        x            x               x              x              x              x
  Observations                       9,202        36,362          5,540         11,814          4,397         19,594
  Adjusted R2                        0.309        0.407           0.205          0.216          0.293          0.350




                                                            vii
A.5     Debt-to-Income Changes Specification

                 Table A.5: Long-Run Debt-to-Income Effects -- Changes Specification
Note: The dependent variable is the cumulative debt repayment from the year of first mineral payment to 2015, com-
puted from the credit file provided by Experian. The unit of observation is an individual observed in 2015, restricted to
individuals who receive payments less than 100% of their annual income. The variable Avg PTI is average bonus and
royalty payment from Barnett Shale extraction between 2005 and 2015 as a percentage of 2005 income. Individuals who
are not treated are matched controls (propensity score matching on ZIP3, 2005 credit score, and length of credit history)
drawn from the control sample from Experian. For subsamples based on credit score, the subsample is based on the
treated individual's initial credit status. Standard errors clustered by ZIP3 in parentheses.  ,  , and  indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.

       dependent variable:                                    Cumulative debt repayment
  pre-period credit sample:              Full Sample                  Subprime                           Prime
                                      (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
  Avg PTI                         -0.708         -0.667            -1.170      -1.092         -0.330          -0.305
                                   (0.040)        (0.028)          (0.059)      (0.054)         (0.031)        (0.024)
  mineral acres owned (Z)          0.127          0.150             0.088       0.145           0.122          0.132
                                   (0.024)        (0.031)          (0.057)      (0.055)         (0.026)        (0.031)
  ZIP3 FE                              x             x                x             x               x             x
  age quintile FE                                    x                              x                             x
  income quintile FE                                 x                              x                             x
  Observations                     429,690        429,690           87,368       87,368         214,228        214,228
  Adjusted R2                       0.007          0.027             0.011        0.034          0.006          0.032




                                                            viii
A.6     Debt-to-Income Changes Specification

                           Figure A.3: Time Series Validation of Auto Purchases
Note: This figure presents the time series plot of aggregate auto purchases, plotted as an index relative to auto purchases
in 2010, based on the auto purchase classification that we use in our analysis of auto consumption. The time series
pattern matches closely with the time series pattern with vehicle registrations, as is reported in Figure A-2 from Dupor
et al. (2019)'s analysis of auto consumption.




                                                            ix
B    Nonparametric Effects of Royalty Payment Size
The specification in equation (6) assumes a constant MPR regardless of the size of the payment, but
as we motivated in the hypothesis development section, it is natural to expect that the MPR declines
as payment size increases.
       To estimate the nonparametric relationship between Avg PT Ii and DT Iit , we estimate a gen-
eralized additive model (GAM) for debt payments relative to income, separately for t = 2005 and
t = 2015:


            DT Ii(t ) = g(t ) (Avg PT Ii ) + s1(t ) (acresi ) + s2(t ) (agei ) + s1(t ) (incomei ) + i(t ) ,    (9)

where the dependent variable DT Ii is the percentage of debt payments relative to income for in-
dividual i, Avg PT Ii is the annualized mineral payment relative to income in 2005, acresi is the
number of net mineral acres owned by individual i, agei is the individual's age in 2005, and incomei
is the individual's income (provided by Experian) in 2005. The subscript (t ) indicates variables and
functions that differ for the separate estimations ­ e.g., the fitted nonparametric function of Avg PT Ii
in 2005 is denoted as g(2005) (Avg PT Ii ), whereas the estimated nonparametric function of Avg PT Ii
in 2005 is g(2015) (Avg PT Ii ).
        We estimate the difference-in-difference effect of Avg PT Ii by taking the difference (post
minus pre) of these estimated nonparametric functions that relate average payments-to-income to
debt-to-income:

                          1 (Avg PT Ii ) =g(2015) (Avg PT Ii ) - g(2005) (Avg PT Ii )                          (10)

       Because each generalized additive model conditions also on the nonparametric relationship
of DT Ii to age, income and mineral acreage owned, the resulting nonparametric estimates are free
of confounds related to lifecycle effects, income effects or unobserved characteristics that lead an
individual to own more mineral acreage. We compute standard errors using a block bootstrap by
ZIP3 to account estimation error in this multi-stage estimator and to account for local correlation of
the errors.
       Figure B.1 portrays the results from nonparametrically estimating the relation between Avg PT Ii
and DT Ii . Consistent with our motivating hypotheses, the marginal propensity to repay debt is
greatest for relatively modest wealth shocks and diminishes quickly as payment size increases. By
summarizing the slope of the best fitting line to the nonparametric relationship, Table B.1 provides
a numerical summary of this diminishing effect of additional wealth on the marginal propensity
to repay. For relatively small payments (Avg PT Ii < 25% of income), we estimate that 97.6% of
additional wealth goes toward repaying debt. By contrast, for relatively large payments (Avg PT Ii
> 50% of income), only 4.6% of the marginal dollar goes toward debt repayment. Using standard
errors from a block bootstrap by ZIP3, this decline in the MPR along the payment size distribution
is highly statistically significant.




                                                           x
      Figure B.1: Nonparametric Estimation of the Effect of Payment Size on Debt-to-Income
Note: This figure presents the results from a nonparametric estimation of the impact of mineral payments-to-income on
the debt-to-income ratio. Specifically, we estimate the effect of payments/income using a generalized additive model ­
estimated separately in the 2005 pre-period and in the 2015 post-period ­ that also controls nonparametrically for age,
income and mineral acres owned. For this plot, we compute the effect of payments at each payment-to-income ratio
as the difference between the smoothed functions (year 2015 minus year 2005). Dashed blue lines indicate the best
linear approximation to the nonlinear fit for payments/income less than 50% and greater than 50%. Standard errors are
computed as the standard deviation of the bootstrap sampling distribution using 200 bootstrap replications using a block
bootstrap by ZIP3. Dotted lines indicate approximate 95% confidence intervals.




                                                          xi
          Table B.1: Long-Run Debt-to-Income Effects, Heterogeneity by Payment Intensity
Note: This table presents several statistical tests to gauge the heterogeneity in the propensity to pay down debt by the size
of the payment. Specifically, we construct estimates for the MPR for four alternative ranges of payments: (i) below 25%
of annual income, (ii) below 50% of annual income, (iii) above 50% of annual income, and (iv) above 100% of annual
income. For each range of Payments/income (%), we estimate the marginal propensity to pay down debt by computing
the slope of the best fitting straight line to the nonparametric function in Figure B.1. To alleviate concern about outliers
and to improve the precision of the nonparametric method, we restrict attention to individuals who receive total payments
less than 200% of their annual income in 2005, and their matched controls. We cluster standard errors by ZIP3 using a
block bootstrap procedure that computes standard errors as the standard deviation of the bootstrap sampling distribution
using 200 bootstrap replications.  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.


                                                        Range of Payments/Income (%)

                                       Below 25%         Below 50%          Above 50%         Above 100%
                 DT I
                 Avg PT I               -0.975            -0.451            -0.046              -0.092
                                         (0.019)           (0.013)           (0.005)             (0.011)
              Nonparametric controls x year
                acreage owned          x                       x                  x                  x
                age                    x                       x                  x                  x
                income                 x                       x                  x                  x

              T-statistics for differences in marginal propensity to pay down debt
                Below 25%                  -           36.9            50.7                      49.4
                Below 50%                  -              -            33.0                      28.6
                Above 50%                  -              -               -                      -6.5




                                                            xii
