                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     USING TAXES TO MEET AN EMISSION TARGET

                                        Robert I. Harris
                                        William A. Pizer

                                      Working Paper 27781
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27781


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




Invaluable comments were received on several earlier drafts from Larry Goulder, Marc Hafstead,
Rob Williams, Gib Metcalf, and Rick Van der Ploeg, along with participants at the AERE 2020
Summer Conference, the Harvard-Berkeley-Yale Seminar on the Economics of Climate Change
and Energy Transition, the UMD Environmental Taxation Workshop, and the World Congress of
Environment and Resource Economists. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Robert I. Harris and William A. Pizer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Taxes to Meet an Emission Target
Robert I. Harris and William A. Pizer
NBER Working Paper No. 27781
September 2020
JEL No. H23,Q54,Q58

                                          ABSTRACT

A sizeable number of papers beginning with Roberts and Spence (1976) have studied the use of
price floors and ceilings (or "collars") to manage prices in tradable permit markets. In contrast,
economists have only recently begun examining polices to manage quantities under a pollution
tax. Importantly, it can be difficult to know how to evaluate these policies, as papers dating back
to Pizer (2002) suggest welfare is maximized by not focusing on quantities in the first place. In
this paper, we propose an objective function to evaluate these alternative "carbon tax policies to
meet an emission target." The objective function includes a discrete jump in marginal emission
consequences at the target, where the discontinuity can be interpreted as a true benefit measure or
a necessary political constraint. We parameterize these emission consequences using recent
legislative proposals, coupling this function with mitigation cost estimates to define the complete
objective. This objective identifies the first-best tax policy design, one that requires relatively
complex adjustments to mimic a tradable permit system. Turning to simpler, practical rules, we
find that such rules achieve much of the difference in expected net benefits between an ordinary,
exogenous tax and the first-best tax policy design. However, the ranking among simple rules
depends on the interpretation of the higher, above-target emission penalty as a political constraint
or a true benefit measure. We find that making these views explicit could facilitate billions of
dollars per year in welfare gains.


Robert I. Harris
Duke University
201 Science Drive
Durham, NC 27708
bobby.harris@duke.edu

William A. Pizer
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90312
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
billy.pizer@duke.edu
1       Introduction
Beginning with Weitzman (1974), economists have long appreciated the welfare difference
between price and quantity regulation, e.g., taxes and tradable permits, when costs are
uncertain. In particular, Roberts and Spence (1976) demonstrated that a tradable permit
system with a price floor and ceiling could improve welfare beyond taxes or permits alone.
Intuitively, taxes and permits alone are nested within the choice set of the blended hybrid.
Other papers have extended these results in different directions (Pizer, 2002; Burtraw, Palmer
and Kahn, 2010).
    Until recently, however, there has been no work examining the reciprocal idea of tax policy
that attempts to to achieve an emission target. One could imagine a number of reasons for
this omission. The political space, particularly in the United States, has been dominated by
tradable permits--though that is not true elsewhere (World Bank and Ecofys 2018). It is
trickier, as we discuss, to operationalize hybrid tax policies. Finally, as an empirical matter,
price regulation is often preferred on welfare grounds based on relatively flat marginal benefits
from abatement. This is particularly true for carbon dioxide and other stock pollutants
(Newell and Pizer, 2003), but also air pollution (Pope et al., 2015). Therefore, welfare gains
ought to come from adding price-like elements to a quantity regulation, not the other way
around.
    Regardless of the reason(s) for this gap and motivated by a half-dozen proposals in the
116th Congress, our paper responds by suggesting an objective function to first rationalize
this type of policy. Specifically, we are interested in a carbon tax that adjusts based on
observable information in order to try to achieve a given cumulative emission target. The
objective function we suggest is simply a minimization of the expected cost of reducing
emissions, plus a low penalty per ton for expected emissions below the target and a high
penalty per ton for expected emissions above the target.
    We consider two alternative interpretations for this form of the emission penalty. One
views the low penalty as the actual emission damage (e.g., the social cost of carbon) and the
high penalty for above-target emissions as a political constraint imposed by stakeholders.1
The other interpretation is that such stakeholder preferences actually define societal benefits.
That is, the high penalty is not a political constraint but an actual, revealed societal benefit
placed on mitigation of above-target emissions. In both cases, the objective is the same; the
    1
      In a non-stochastic framework, van der Ploeg (2018) considers how to maximize welfare with both a
social cost of carbon (SCC) and a cumulative emission constraint. He shows that the result involves pricing
carbon at a combination of terms reflecting the SCC and the cumulative emission target. He does not
consider the question of uncertainty in the cost of achieving the target or the related policy question of how
to adjust a carbon tax as emissions are observed.



                                                      1
difference is how the objective might or might not be separated into welfare and constraint.
    We glean stakeholder preferences from these motivating proposals introduced in the 116th
Congress while also considering estimates of climate damages (the "social cost of carbon"
or SCC). Costs are estimated from available modeling. We then use the identified objective
function to find the best policy both within and across a defined set of policy designs. These
designs include carbon taxes with different types of adjustments based on observed emissions.
The policy parameters within a particular design include alternative carbon tax levels and/or
growth rates as well as cumulative emission thresholds that select among the alternatives.
    We find, first, that a policy mimicking cap-and-trade with a price floor and ceiling per-
forms the best, as we would expect from the objective function. While the preference for
this policy does not depend on how we interpret the objective, the magnitude does. Viewed
as a politically-constrained welfare function, the exogenous, simple tax offers a $34 billion
per year improvement over no policy. Cap-and-trade offers a 9% or $3 billion further im-
provement. If we instead view the higher value placed on above-target mitigation as a true
benefit, rather than a constraint, the gain from the simple tax jumps to $660 billion per year
versus no policy; the cap-and-trade is 2% or $14 billion per year higher. This follows from
our calibrated above-target penalty mitigation benefit, which is more than four times higher
per ton than the below-target mitigation benefit.
    When we turn to taxes with different types of "practical" dynamic adjustments, we
find that they achieve between 37-96% of the simple tax-ETS2 difference, depending on
the welfare metric and adjustment. Generally, those that allow larger discrete price jumps
do better when the above-target mitigation value is interpreted as a welfare benefit. The
more gradual adjustment mechanism does better when the above-target mitigation value is
considered a political constraint. These differences add up to $2-3 billion per year.
    We recognize there could be considerable disagreement over the form of the objective
function, its interpretation, and its parameterization. However, yet another concern is how to
recognize policies that are implementable in practice. For example, observed policy proposals
have focused on a carbon tax that rises by one of two possible growth rates each period,
depending on observed emissions. That is, a relatively gradual tax change. The choice
variables are the two growth rates as well as the emission threshold that triggers the higher
rate. We have interpreted this as a constraint that practical policies must be simple. With
that in mind, we also consider policies that involve two distinct price paths with an emission
threshold that triggers jumps between one path and the other. While this is similarly simple,
the price changes we identify can be a factor of 30% or much more when cumulative emissions
trigger a change. Is this implementable, or are there yet other political constraints on how
   2
       We will interchangeably refer to a cap-and-trade policy as an emissions trading scheme or ETS.


                                                      2
much the price can change?
    Whether one agrees with our choice of objective and space of policies or not, the larger
purpose of this paper is to emphasize the value of (a) thinking carefully about the space of
practical policies in order to inform the carbon tax debate, and (b) considering the right
objective(s) to identify better and worse policies within that practical policy space. Here,
we suggest there is an implied objective defined by the trade-offs stakeholders are (or are
not) willing to make. Being explicit about such an objective then allows society to both
reduce costs and improve environmental outcomes. Such improvements may come from
both a better choice of parameters or an expansion of the policy space. While one can
always consider an unconstrained policy space and/or science-based assessments of benefits
and costs, those may not speak to stakeholders' revealed preferences and/or constraints
associated with the policy process.
    Our interest in this topic follows from from policy discussions that began in 2015. In that
year, U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders introduced S. 2399, The Climate Protection and Justice
Act. This bill would have implemented a carbon tax and, if the emissions exceeded certain
emission targets, authorized further regulations to achieve those targets. This approach
reflects an emerging, two-part dynamic in the domestic U.S. climate policy debate. First,
carbon taxes are increasingly seen as a viable policy option (discussed below). Second,
among some stakeholders, this is assumed to go hand-in-hand with the removal of some
or all regulatory authority under the Clean Air Act. This, in turn, has prompted other
stakeholders to seek assurances--one way or another--that a focus on emissions will not be
sacrificed. The idea of using a carbon tax to target emissions is one of those ideas (Murray,
Pizer and Reichert, 2017).
    Yet, in attempting to use a carbon tax to target emissions it is unclear how to define
success. Is exceeding the target 5% of the time success, but 5.01% failure? How do we
compare large exceedances 5% of the time with small exceedances 10% of the time? How
much are we willing to spend to reduce exceedances further? Is there any benefit to further,
below-target mitigation? One solution would be to represent the distribution of emission and
cost outcomes under alternative options and allow stakeholders to choose. This approach,
however, does not lend itself to easily identifying yet further improvements.
    With the introduction of a half-dozen proposals in the 116th Congress that are similar
to S. 2399, another approach suggests itself. Use these policies to identify the underlying
preferences lurking behind the proposals. Such preferences arguably represent the views
of at least the stakeholders supporting and promoting the proposals if not of society as a
whole. We believe this may be a helpful exercise, particularly when the parameters relate
to familiar concepts in other policies--e.g., emission targets, price floors, and price ceilings.


                                               3
By presenting the underlying preferences associated with these policies, and estimating the
relative advantage, we believe stakeholders and society can make more informed decisions.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews recent policy experience
and the relevant literature on hybrid instruments, including very recent papers on hybrid
price policies. In Section 3, we define our objective based on avoided climate damages
(mitigation benefits), mitigation costs, and an above-target emission penalty with competing
interpretations. We then discuss our parameter choices based on recent policy proposals and
estimates of the social cost of carbon. We also describe our mitigation cost model. Finally,
we use this objective to consider the effects of different policies and optimize over policy
parameters in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.


2       The path to hybrid (or dynamically-adjusted) taxes
Until very recently, both the theory and practice of environmental regulation focused on what
we would call hybrid quantity mechanisms. That is, regulation that targets the emission
levels based on a cap-and-trade program. Additional provisions are then added to limit
prices, typically a price floor introduced when allowances are auctioned and either a limited
or unlimited supply of additional, above-target allowances available at a higher price. Both
California and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative operate in this way.


2.1     Hybrid quantities
Both economic theory and political convenience have arguably played a role in this hybrid
quantity policy design. On the theory side, economists have provided evidence that price
policies will yield higher expected welfare. This follows early work by Weitzman (1974) who
highlighted the welfare difference between price- and quantity-based policies when costs are
uncertain. He showed that prices are favored when the slope of marginal benefits is relatively
flat compared to the slope of marginal costs.3 Meanwhile, significant evidence points to flat
marginal benefits related to climate change mitigation (Pizer, 2002; Newell and Pizer, 2003).
    There are a number of ways to understand this result that flat marginal benefits favor
price policies. The simplest is that benefits represent a public good being demanded by
    3
     Recent work by Pizer and Prest (2016) suggests that impending or expected policy updates can alter
the traditional Weitzman result. In particular, a welfare difference between taxes and tradable permits will
arise based on how the incentives they create diverge in response to expected policy changes. Real-time
incentives created by a tax policy do not change until the tax itself changes, regardless of expectations. But
real-time incentives created by a tradable permit policy can fluctuate based on market speculation. These
fluctuations can raise or lower welfare depending on whether price changes are driven by a genuine evolution
of costs and benefits, or not.


                                                      4
the government. A tax amounts to a flat demand curve; a tradable permit system amounts
to vertical demand. Which better approximates marginal benefits when marginal costs
(abatement supply) is uncertain? It depends on the slope: Flat marginal benefits are better
matched by a tax.
    It did not take long for others to realize that a slightly more sophisticated policy could
generally raise expected welfare compared to either a tax or a tradable permit policy. Both
Roberts and Spence (1976) and Weitzman (1978) suggest the idea of a tradable permit
system with a fee for emissions above the quantity target and a subsidy (or minimum price)
if emissions fall below the target. In the climate change context, this was noted by a number
of authors (McKibbin and Wilcoxen, 1997; Pizer, 2002; Burtraw, Palmer and Kahn, 2010).
    Of course, the choice between taxes and tradable permits has never been entirely (or even
largely) about expected welfare based on empirical evidence. Generally, tradable permits
have been favored in the United States for reasons ranging from Grover Norquist's demand
for no new taxes to environmental organizations preferring a policy focus on environmental
outcomes. Meanwhile, stakeholders on both sides have not been content with a permit
market where the price is not bounded. Businesses tend to be concerned about high prices
and environmental groups low prices. Thus, political interests have aligned to favor hybrid
quantity policies as well.


2.2    Hybrid taxes
The path to thinking about hybrid taxes began when carbon taxes themselves moved out
of the shadows in 2010. Several developments arguably conspired to make this happen.
First, the failure of a major effort to enact tradable permit legislation in 2009-2010 led some
proponents to reconsider the future prospects of such legislation (Lizza, 2010). Second, there
was considerable interest in comprehensive tax reform, manifest in two bipartisan reports on
the topic (National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, 2010; Debt Reduction
Task Force, 2010). Neither report explicitly mentions a carbon tax, but many viewed that
as a strategic rather than substantive omission (Bledsoe, 2012). Finally and more recently,
conservative supporters of climate action have more boldly articulated carbon taxes as an
alternative to regulation under the Clean Air Act (Baker et al., 2017). There was certainly
discussion of carbon taxes prior to 2010, but it did not garner the more serious political and
stakeholder attention of the last decade.
    Metcalf (2009) was the first to propose the more specific idea of a hybrid carbon tax
policy, e.g., a tax that would adjust in some way to achieve an emission target. This idea
also remained largely in the shadows until 2015, when two carbon tax bills were introduced


                                              5
with reference to an emission target (Sanders, 2015; Whitehouse, 2015). The Sanders bill
proposed a $15 per ton CO2 tax, rising at roughly 5% annually above inflation. In addition,
it specified a set of targets, declining to 1.3 billion tons in 2050 (17% of 2005 emissions). If
emissions were deemed to not be meeting the specified targets, additional regulations were
authorized and required. The Whitehouse bill proposed a $45 per ton CO2 tax rising at 2%
annually above inflation until such point as emissions fell below 20% of 2005 emissions. At
that point, the carbon tax would rise just at the inflation rate.
    These bills, particularly the Sanders bill, reflected underlying sentiments that both a
carbon tax was increasingly possible and that it would need to be responsive to observed
emissions. Such sentiments spurred additional research on various ways to increase emissions
certainty under a tax. An online forum of the Harvard Environmental Law Review conve-
niently compiled many ideas in one place (Aldy, 2017; Aldy et al., 2017; Hafstead, Metcalf
and Williams, 2017; Murray, Pizer and Reichert, 2017). One observation across these pa-
pers is that such policies can be organized by how they function in two key dimensions:
One dimension is whether the carbon tax dynamically adjusts or whether other tools (such
as regulation) are introduced. The other is whether such adjustments occur automatically,
triggered by observable events, or whether they are discretionary based on a procedural de-
termination. Among them, the idea of an automatically-adjusting (or "rules-based") carbon
tax figured prominently. Two authors went on to draft a more expansive paper on the topic
(Hafstead and Williams, 2019).
    More recently, in 2017 a coalition of largely conservative stakeholders put together a
comprehensive carbon tax proposal that would also seek to eliminate any further regulation
carbon regulation under the Clean Air Act. This was followed by expression, of environ-
mental advocates, that such an elimination would require an adjustment mechanism that
is sensitive to environmental outcomes. This was followed, in 2019, by the introduction of
eight carbon pricing bills in Congress. Seven of the bills are carbon taxes and four increase
the tax rate faster when cumulative emissions exceed certain targets.
    Discussion and research on increasing emissions certainty under a tax continued in a
very recent symposium of the Review of Environmental Economics and Policy (Aldy, 2020;
Brooks and Keohane, 2020; Hafstead and Williams, 2020; Metcalf, 2020). The symposium
papers, Brooks and Keohane (2020) in particular, note that cumulative emissions uncertainty
poses a political challenge--the support of the environmental community is contingent on
ensuring desired emission outcomes. For a tax to garner broad enough political support, it
will need to be responsive to emissions. In addition to the political economy motivations,
two themes from this symposium are (1) how to design a tax adjustment mechanism and
(2) how to evaluate the performance of such a mechanism. Assuming the mechanism is


                                               6
automatic, design considerations include the frequency, type, and size of adjustment, the
target emissions path, and whether to allow downward price adjustments (Hafstead and
Williams, 2020; Metcalf, 2020).4 Evaluating the performance of a tax mechanism is viewed
as more of a question: How should the mechanism trade off costs and emissions certainty?5
Then, what is the right emissions measure: average cumulative emissions, the probability
of achieving the target, the 97.5-percentile of the emissions distribution, the magnitude of
expected exceedances, or something else?
    While our paper also considers different design options, our main contribution is to make
this second theme explicit in our objective function. The symposium papers note that a sin-
gular focus on achieving a particular emissions target may come at the expense of increased
compliance costs--that is, measuring the success of the policy based on environmental out-
comes is distinct from a traditional focus on welfare. Our objective function makes this
explicit by building in the societal (or political) value of achieving the emission target that
is implicitly revealed by the proposals in the 116th Congress.


2.3     Distinctions between hybrid taxes and hybrid quantities
The different ways quantity and price hybrid policies seek to control uncertainty in price
and emissions, respectively, also raises an important distinction that has been somewhat
overlooked in the literature. In particular, intervention to manage prices under a quantity
policy is almost always forward looking, while intervention to manage quantities under a
price policy is almost always backward looking. Moreover, managing prices "works" in the
sense of directly limiting prices, while managing emissions (as we shall see) requires trial and
error.
    Why? Part of the reason is that for most emission problems, and certainly climate
change, the quantity we are trying to manage is really the cumulative stock of emissions
over some time period. At a minimum, we are thinking about a year; but perhaps we have
in mind cumulative emissions over many decades. Meanwhile, the more frequent emission
flow (over a day, a month or even year) can be quite cyclical and noisy. Conveniently, a
well-functioning market associated with a quantity policy provides information about prices
that is both almost continuous and forward-looking. That is, when firms buy and sell
emission allowances, they are thinking about the cumulative supply and demand over the
current compliance period, responding to expectations about both future emission limits
and abatement costs. Why sell an allowance now that you think will fetch a higher price
   4
    Aldy (2020) again discusses a more discretionary review and updating process.
   5
    In addition to these dimensions, Aldy (2020) also posits other metrics for judging discretionary adjust-
ments, including temperature, competitiveness, and comparable international action.


                                                     7
later in the same compliance period? Likewise, why buy one if you think the price will fall?
With banking (and perhaps borrowing), this reasoning can project far into the future. The
conclusion in the literature is that expected prices in an allowance market should and do rise
at the interest rate in order to equate cumulative supply and demand over time (Yates and
Cronshaw, 2001; Schennach, 2000). Moreover, when we alter the allowance supply based on
a price floor or ceiling, the price (path) adjusts almost immediately. This allows policies
to easily manage prices: Price floors and ceilings operate by simply subtracting or adding
allowances until the price limit is met. This often happens all at once, when an auction is
held with a price floor or ceiling.
    The reverse is not true with a price policy. Continuous emission monitoring may allow
relatively frequent observations of emissions. However, current, observed emissions generally
reflect only the current emission price (the tax), not any expectation about the future. That
is, while arbitrage opportunities link prices over time in an allowance market, there is no
similar link among emissions over time under a carbon tax.6 The exception would be the
extent to which long-term capital investments, rather than frequent operational choices,
determine emissions.
    More to the point, as we adjust the price we only see the impact on emissions as they
occur over time. There is no sense, comparable to the above quantity management, where
we could adjust prices and quickly see a transparent outcome reflecting expected emissions
through the end of a policy horizon. Rather, we must adjust the price, see what happens,
and then perhaps adjust the price again. Viewed this way, adjusting the price to control
emissions may be better thought of as a dynamic adjustment process, a name which reflects
their characteristic of updating over time to control cumulative emissions (and that we will
use for the remainder of this paper).
    Unless, that is, we use a sophisticated emission and mitigation model to project effects
into the future and determine the necessary tax adjustment each period. This would not be
transparent. Rather, it would attempt to replicate what an allowance market with banking
(and borrowing) does each period: Determine a market price to balance expectations about
supply. Setting a price this way would necessarily involve tax adjustments over time in
response to new information.
   6
      We note that Heutel (2020) considers a policy where firms can opt to pay a tax in the current period or in
a future period. He shows that firms can be induced to pay all the tax in the future period, once uncertainty
is revealed, by implementing an arbitrarily high tax in the first period. This has important implications
for the choice of tax or trading policies based on whether they effectively make use of new information over
time. However, the particular point here is that trading policies reveal future market expectations over time
(through observed prices) in a way that tax policies do not (through observed emissions). Price policies
will require government modeling and expertise to construct that information. We discuss how a tax policy
might mimic emissions trading below and in Section 4.1.



                                                       8
   This leads to the question that motivates this paper: How do we best design a dynamic
adjustment process? Indeed, what defines "best"?


3    Defining and evaluating an objective function for
     carbon tax adjustments
The traditional metric for normative policy analysis is welfare--benefits minus costs--and
we continue to consider that our guiding principle. In particular, we are going to suggest as
an objective to maximize the function,

                      S                                                                T
           - S -1            s
                           aET            s
                               + (b - a)(ET  ¯ )1(ET
                                            -E     s  ¯) +
                                                     >E                                      e-(t-t0 ) Cts (es
                                                                                                             t)    (1)
                     s=1                                                              t=t0


where s  {1, ..., S } indexes uncertain states of nature, t  {t0 , ..., T } indexes time, es
                                                                                           t is
                                              s      t    s
annual emissions in period t and state s, Et =       r=1 er or cumulative emissions,  is a
                      ¯ } are climate damage parameters, and C s (es ) is a state- and time-
discount rate, {a, b, E                                          t   t
dependent cost function. In this way, the first two terms represent damages and the third
term costs.
    Alternatively, we can rearrange Equation (1),

               S                T                                          S
     -S   -1           s
                     aET   +          e   - (t-t0 )
                                                      Cts (es    -S   -1                  s
                                                                                 (b - a)(ET  ¯ )1(E s > E
                                                                                            -E          ¯)
                                                            t)                                     T              (1a)
               s=1             t=t0                                        s=1


Here, we interpret the first two terms as true damages and costs. The third term represents
a political constraint that above-target emissions be penalized additionally relative to the
true benefit parameter a. Regardless of the interpretation of the third term--true damages
or a political constraint--the objective function and our calibration remains the same. We
discuss additional details of this interpretation as a political constraint in Appendix A.
    It is useful to note that the climate damage/penalty terms reflect an underlying marginal
damage/penalty function of the form

                                           s
                                      M D(ET ) = a + (b - a)1 ET
                                                               s  ¯
                                                                 >E                                                (2)

E¯ is the cumulative emissions target over the period of interest and we assume b > a,
implying higher marginal damages/penalty when the target is exceeded.
    For our exercise, we choose the discount rate  = 4%. This is halfway between the benefit
discount rate (3%) and cost discount rate (5%) used in the 2015 Regulatory Impact Analysis

                                                                 9
of the Clean Power Plan (U.S. EPA, 2015). In this analysis, it principally guides how we
trade off mitigation costs over time and how quickly optimal carbon prices will grow. A low
rate will encourage relatively flat prices over time while a higher rate implies lower prices
now and higher prices in the future.
    We also focus on the 2020-2050 time period, which has been most relevant in recent
policy discussions. Thus t runs from t0 = 2020 to T = 2050. As a final preliminary, we
consider S = 10, 000 uncertain future outcomes.
    We now discuss the remainder of the terms and parameters in more detail.


3.1    Revealed marginal damages and/or political pressure
While evidence suggests relatively flat marginal benefits (Pizer, 2002; Newell and Pizer,
2003), considerable stakeholder attention has focused on emissions or cumulative emissions.
This includes previous global calls for emissions to be cut by 50% by 2050 (or 80% by
developed countries) (Wintour and Elliott, 2009), more recent calls for climate neutrality by
2050 (Climate Home News, 2019), as well as setting the social price of carbon based on an
emission target (United Kingdom, 2009).
     This is also manifest in the noted tax proposals that indicate one tax rate if an emission
objective is achieved, and another tax rate if it is exceeded. One interpretation is a revealed
marginal damage function with a discontinuous jump at the cumulative emissions target--
i.e., Equation (2). Marginal damage functions of this form are notionally implied by any
policy defined by an emissions goal and, hence, by the recent literature on hybrid taxes.
     Alternatively, we can view this policy feature as a necessary political compromise. En-
vironmental advocates will require some attention to a cumulative emission target and, if a
low carbon tax is insufficient, a higher carbon tax must be applied. From this perspective,
the attention to a particular cumulative emission target does not reflect true damages, but
a feature of the political landscape.
     In either case, the target and above-target damage penalty point to some type of policy-
revealed preference, either among stakeholders influencing the policies or, in a welfare sense,
for society as a whole. That is, hybrid quantity policies with specific emission targets de-
veloped over the past two decades and more recent carbon tax proposals that refer to a set
of emission targets both reveal a preference for quantifying success in terms of achievement
of a particular emissions outcome. There is a revealed notion that we should differentially
value emissions below the cumulative target from emissions exceeding the cumulative target.
     While a strict emphasis on emissions would indicate a "vertical" damage function or
political constraint on emissions, this discontinuous horizontal function would seem to better


                                              10
reflect actual preferences or constraints. That is, there is value to reducing emissions below
the target and some willingness to exceed the target if at least some significantly higher
effort (e.g., higher tax) is applied. This most explicitly began with Metcalf (2009).
    Metcalf's proposal implicitly assumes such an objective given his choice of a penalty
growth rate for years in which emissions exceed a threshold level. Similarly, Hafstead and
Williams (2019) evaluate various choices in designing an updating mechanism to achieve
emissions certainty objectives, all of which suggest that achieving a particular target is
important. Despite this type of feature being implicitly revealed through policy proposals
and recent literature, we are the first to explicitly include it in the policymaker's objective
function.
    In order to calibrate this model and determine a, b, and E      ¯ , we turn to these recent
proposals in the 116th Congress. In particular, we examine the NPV carbon prices when
the emission target is met to determine a, and the NPV carbon prices when the emission
target is exceeded to determine b. Averaging across all years and proposals (see Appendix
C) we find a = $34.1 per ton and b = $142.5. Similarly, we cumulate (where necessary
interpolating or extrapolating) the triggering annual emission targets to yield a 2020-2050
cumulative target. Averaging across the proposals, and converting to a CO2 target, we find
E¯ = 78.5 billion metric tons of CO2 (see Appendix C).
    The preceding discussion looks to policy proposals to reveal climate damage parameters.
If we view the above-target penalty as a political constraint, we should instead look to
objective estimates of climate damages. For example, IWG (2016) reports central estimates
of $42 per ton in 2020 rising to $69 in 2050. In NPV terms at our 4% discount rate, $69 in
2050 would be $28 in 2020. Averaging these numbers, $42 and $28, we find an approximate
mitigation benefit of $35 per ton over cumulative emissions to 2050. Hence, we view our
parameter estimate of a = 34.1 as representative of both revealed preference and an objective
estimates of climate damages.


3.2    Model of costs
Having defined the climate damage/penalty parameters in (1), our other task is to define
costs or Cts (es
               t ). This amounts to building a simulation procedure, or "test track," that allows
us to simulate the economy's response to a carbon tax with various dynamic adjustment
mechanisms. Such a test track should reveal both costs and emissions outcomes. The
goal is to have a tractable procedure that remains consistent with historical trends and is
informative about future emissions.




                                               11
   We break task this into two parts by defining

                                              1            1
                             Cts (es    ~s
                                   t) = e t
                                                      s 2
                                                1,t (rt           s 3
                                                        ) + 2,t (rt )                           (3)
                                              2            3

where e~s                                                    s
                                                                  es
        t is baseline emissions in state s and period t and rt = (~
                                                                        s
                                                                             es
                                                                   t - et )/(~t ) is the fraction of
emissions reduced. We define costs this way in order to derive marginal costs of abatement
(the negative of the derivative of costs with respect to emissions) as

                                              dCts (est)
                            M Cts (rt
                                    s
                                      )=-           s
                                                                s
                                                         = 1,t rt        s2
                                                                  + 2,t rt                      (4)
                                                det

That is, marginal costs expressed in terms of reduction fraction are quadratic, with the
restriction that M Cts = 0 when rt s
                                     = 0.
    We approach costs this way based on the idea that estimated marginal mitigation costs
tend to be more consistent when viewed in terms of fractional reductions (Weyant and Hill,
1999). We then intend to choose the parameters  based on modeling estimates.
    In particular, we use the Dynamic Integrated Economy/Energy/Emissions Model (DIEM-
CGE) (Ross, 2014), a dynamic computable general equilibrium model, to derive the  's. We
simulate a number of different price paths and emission reduction in that model. We then fit
the results in each time step of the model to Equation (4). Again, M Ct (·) is the economy-
wide marginal cost ($/MtCO2 ) for reducing emissions by the proportion rt below baseline
emissions in year t. Here we have dropped indicator for state s, as the DIEM-CGE model
is not stochastic. That is, we allow this function to evolve over time t, as calibrated by
DIEM, but focus our uncertainty analysis on baseline emissions not marginal costs in terms
                         s
of percent reductions rt   . Total costs are then given by (3) for each year with stochastic
emissions est described next. We report annualized net present value costs (using our 4%
discount rate) in our results. Appendix D contains more detail on this procedure.


3.3    Model of emissions
Rather than using the single emission forecast in DIEM-CGE, we construct stochastic emis-
sion forecast based on two sources of uncertainty: (1) underlying economic growth, and
(2) aggregate emission intensity. Using U.S. carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions data from the
World Resources Institute's Climate Data Explorer Tool (2015) and real GDP time series
data in chained 2009 dollars from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (2018), we estimate




                                                   12
the following models:

                       log (GDPt ) =  log (GDPt-1 ) + µg (1 - ) + t                       (5)

and

         CO2                   CO2                    CO2
  log               = 1  log               + 2  log               + µr (1 - (1 + 2 )) + t (6)
         GDP    t              GDP   t-1              GDP   t-2


where , 1 , and 2 are autoregressive coefficients, t and t are shocks identically and
independently distributed N (0, g ) and N (0, r ), respectively, where g and r are estimated
from the data, and µg and µr are drift coefficients. That is, we estimate an ARIMA(1,1,0)
process with drift of the log of GDP and an ARIMA(2,1,0) process with drift of the log of
the ratio of emissions to GDP (these models being chosen based on the Akaiki information
criteria). Following this estimation, we use these models to forecast baseline emissions from
2016 through 2050. We draw 10,000 sequences s for {t , t } and use equations (5) and (6)
to generate 10,000 sequences of baseline emissions, e  ~s
                                                        t . For more details on our estimation
and forecasting procedure, see Appendix B.
    We graph historical emissions through 2015 along with our projections for 2016 through
2050 in Figure 1. We also plot the annual target path that we derive from proposals of the
116th Congress following the procedure described in Appendix C. Our cumulative target for
2050, E¯ , is defined as the sum of these annual targets. Figure 3 in the Appendix shows that
business-as-usual (BAU) emissions fail to meet the cumulative target for 2050 in all 10,000
runs of our forecast. In fact, mean BAU cumulative emissions are 181 billion metric tons
while our cumulative target is 78.5 billion metric tons (the vertical line in Figure 3).


4     Policies and results
In this section we develop and discuss the different types of policies that we will analyze
using the model developed in the preceding section. We begin by discussing the bounding
cases of a simple tax and ETS, and then introduce hybrid policies. In all cases, we imagine
a cumulative target of 79 billion tons CO2 for emissions over the 31 years from t0 = 2020
to T = 2050. We then turn to the numerical analysis to understand how different policies
achieve different outcomes.




                                              13
             Figure 1: Historical (1929-2015) and Projected (2016-2050) Emissions




4.1    Approaches to hybrid (or dynamically-adjusted) tax policies
All of the policies that we consider involve a price being set each period t, in many cases
differentiated by observable emissions in each state, es t , but in all cases being equated by firms
to marginal costs. This price most often reflects a tax, but sometimes can be interpreted as
a market price arising among clever forward-looking agents.
    We start by noting that, based on the objective (1), there is a first-order condition for
an optimum
                     M C (es
                           t )e
                                - (t-t0 )
                                          + a + (b - a)E[1(ET s
                                                                >E  ¯ )|t, s] = 0

where E[()|s, t] is a shorthand for the expectation of () at time t in state s. We further note
that at time t in state s, future values est+u remain uncertain (both because of uncertain
future baseline emissions e  s
                            ~t+u and the choice of est+u ). That is, the marginal cost should
equal the expected marginal damage from the constraint on cumulative emissions in period
T , given what we know in period t and state s. This condition also must also be met in




                                                14
expectation as we think about future marginal costs,

                E[M C (es
                        t+u )e
                               - (t+u-t0 )
                                           |t, s] + a + (b - a)E[1(ET
                                                                    s  ¯ )|t, s] = 0
                                                                      >E

     The first-order condition reflects the desire (or political need) to set the NPV marginal
cost in each period and state of nature to equal expected marginal damages and/or political
constraint. Expressed in terms of NPV dollars today (2020), this marginal value lies in
the interval [a, b] by construction. There is also an expectation that welfare (constrained)-
maximizing prices will rise at the discount rate in the future.
     We can imagine this price arising from a market of clever agents facing an emission trading
scheme (ETS) policy with cumulative cap E       ¯ along with price floor ae(T -t0 ) and price ceiling
be(T -t0 ) in the last period T . These agents therefore attempt to glean a + (b - a)E[1(ET       s
                                                                                                    >
E¯ )|t, s] in each period t and state s in order to figure out if the cumulative cap will be exactly
binding in the last period or if price floor or ceiling will be triggered.
     The first policy (a) that we consider is exactly that--a policy that sets the price in
each period t and state s based on observed emissions up to that period, knowledge of the
(deterministic) cost function (4), and knowing the stochastic process for future e        ~s
                                                                                           t+u . This
information is coupled with goal of maximizing the expected objective (1) or, equivalently,
minimizing expected costs and the firm's payments in the last period to purchase allowances
(the price depending, in part, on whether the ceiling or floor is triggered).
     Alongside this policy, for comparison, we present (b) a similar policy that sets the price
each state s and period t in order to achieve the target E        ¯ in expectation without a price
ceiling or floor (equivalent to setting a = 0 and b higher than any expected marginal cost).
That is, policy (b) approximates a pure ETS. For convenience, we call policy (a) a price
collar and (b) an ETS.
     Such forward-looking policies (a-b) are likely too complex to implement as actual tax
policies because they do not involve automatic, transparent rules that can be easily written
into law. Instead, they rely on the regulator to update the price by inputting realized
emissions into a forward-looking emission/cost model to re-solve for the cost-minimizing
price path. However, we have already noted these policies are an approximation to actual
cap-and-trade policies. Policies (a-b) only allow prices to change at fixed intervals and based
on specific information; market prices under cap-and-trade can change at any frequency and
may use additional information.
     Next we consider a policy (c) that fixes the price path (rising at discount rate  ) across
all states to achieve the target E ¯ on average across all states. Note this does not consider the
proposed objective, replacing the first two terms in (1) with an actual quantity constraint


                                                 15
that E[Es T
            ] = E¯ exactly. Separately, we consider a fixed price path policy (d) where the
starting price is chosen to maximize the objective (1). Policies (c) and (d) are equivalent to a
simple tax that rises at the discount rate, with the starting prices chosen slightly differently.
    Policies (a-d) represent a hybrid ETS, an ordinary ETS, and alternative simple tax poli-
cies that rise over time. We now consider dynamic adjustment process for taxes based on
simple rules. In particular, we consider a set of simple rules of the form ts = ft (Ets , ts-1 ),
where ts is the tax in period t and state s and ft () is a simple time-dependent function.
That is, we allow the tax rate in a given period and state to depend on the previous-period
tax rate, cumulative emissions, and a time dependent function.
    The three policies we consider are defined by different functions ft :

 (e) ftPath-level = (0 + ( × 1[Ets > E ^t ]))et . Here the tax rate falls on one of two paths,
     starting at two different points 0 and 0 + with both paths rising at the discount rate
      . Each period the choice of which tax rate depends on whether cumulative emissions
     exceed a threshold E ^t . The parameters {0 , , E  ^1 , ...E
                                                                ^T } are chosen to maximize (1).

  (f) ftPath-growth = 0 e( +(×1[Et >Et ]))t . There are again two paths for the tax rate, but now
                                 s       ^


      they start at the same point 0 and rise at different rates  and  + . The parameters
      {, , E   ^1 , ...E
                       ^T } are chosen to maximize (1).

 (g) ftMetcalf EIM = ts-1 e +(×1[Et >Et ])) . Now the tax rate bifurcates in each period, growing
                                     s       ^


     either by  or  + . The parameters {0 , , , E             ^1 , ...E
                                                                      ^T } are chosen to maximize
     (1). This is called "Metcalf EIM" (Emissions Integrity Mechanism) because it mimics
     Metcalf (2009) and (largely) Metcalf (2020).

    Policies (e-g) include automatic tax adjustment mechanisms in which the adjustment
rules are based on a pre-defined sense of "reasonableness"--we can think of policies in this
class as rules of thumb. But rather than choosing parameters in an ad hoc way, adjustment
parameters are optimally chosen to improve the objective developed in Section 3. Hafstead
and Williams (2019) begin to think about this in noting the importance of using an expected
emissions path compared to an uninformed target path as the basis for E      ^t and making
adjustments. However, that may or may not be optimal and the other adjustment parameters
could also be selected to improve the objective function. We now turn to our results.


4.2    Results
Based on the way we have characterized our objective, we care about both mitigation costs
and emission outcomes, which can be translated into benefits (avoided damages) or responses


                                                 16
                                           Figure 2: Cumulative Emissions and Cost Distributions

                              100
 Cumulative Emissions




                               90
    (billion MtCO2)




                               80


                               70


                               60


                               50
                                    ETS (a-b)     Standard       Standard      Path-Level (e)   Path-Growth (f)   Metcalf
                                                 Tax=73.6 (c)   Tax=76.4 (d)                                      EIM (g)



                              300
 (Annualized NPV $billions)




                              200
           Costs




                              100




                                0
                                    ETS (a-b)     Standard       Standard      Path-Level (e)   Path-Growth (f)   Metcalf
                                                 Tax=73.6 (c)   Tax=76.4 (d)                                      EIM (g)



                              200
 Final Period Price




                              150
    (NPV $/ton)




                              100



                               50



                                0
                                    ETS (a-b)     Standard       Standard      Path-Level (e)   Path-Growth (f)   Metcalf
                                                 Tax=73.6 (c)   Tax=76.4 (d)                                      EIM (g)


Triangles represent the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of the distributions. Boxplots represent the interquartile range and the median.



                                                                       17
to political pressure. With this in mind, we first present the results for all seven policies in
Figure 2 before turning to numerical results in Table 1.
    Figure 2 shows the distribution of cumulative emissions and costs (in billions of dol-
lars, annualized over 2021-2050) for all seven policies (a-g). The boxes indicate the 25-75%
interquartile range across the simulated outcomes, the thicker line in the middle indicates
the median, and the small trianges indicate the 2.5-97.5% range. We first notice that the
ETS policies (a) and (b) are identical (so much so, that we only provide one boxplot for
both). They both exactly achieve the cumulative emission target of 79 billion tons but have
a relatively wide range of cost outcomes. It is notable that policy (a), the ETS with a price
floor and ceiling achieves the emission outcome exactly: It implies that that the price ceiling
($142/ton CO2 ) is sufficiently high to allow the target to met in all scenarios based on our
emission and cost estimates. It also implies that the price floor ($34/ton CO2 ) is not high
enough to encourage any reductions below the target. This is reflected in both the top panel,
showing identical emissions in every scenario, and in the bottom panel, showing prices that
range from about $50 to $100 (e.g., well within the $34 to $142 range)
    The second related outcome that we notice is the similarity between policies (c) and (d),
our two tax policies that rise over time but are otherwise fixed over uncertainty. Recall
that policy (c) was designed to match the cumulative emission target on average. Policy
(d) was chosen to maximize objective (1). Why is policy (d) different at all? If marginal
costs and emission consequences were linear, they would be the same (Weitzman, 1974).
However, we know that benefits (avoided climate damages and/or political constraints) are
very non-linear based on the discontinuity at E    ¯ = 79 billion tons. In particular, under
the tax (c) of $73 (see Table 2), roughly half the emissions will be above the target and
face the higher marginal consequences ($142) and roughly half will be below the target and
face the lower marginal damages ($34). Compared to the average emission consequence of
$88 = ($34 + $142)/2, it suggests a tax optimized using (1) will be higher than the $73 tax
that matches the target on average. On the other hand, as the tax rises above $73, emissions
fall, more scenarios fall below the target, and the expected marginal emission consequence
in (1) falls below $88. The equilibrium ends up being $76.7
    Finally, we turn to the main focus of the paper, policies (e-g). These policies adjust the
carbon tax periodically using relatively simple rules--a binary choice each period determined
by whether observed cumulative emissions up to that period exceed a threshold. The binary
choice is either a high or low growth rate applied to the previous period tax rate (g - "Metcalf
    7
      As the tax rises, we also do not expect the same emission response in all scenarios. In particular, it is
typically harder to reduce emissions in the high-emission scenarios. This will further depress the optimized
tax (d).



                                                      18
EIM"), or a fixed high or low path (e-f). The two paths in policy (e - "Path-level") are both
growing at the discount rate but start at different prices; the two paths in policy (f - "Path-
rate") start at the same price but grow at different rates. In all cases (e-g), the parameters
of the policy and threshold are chosen to maximize the objective.
    We make two observations about policies (e-g). First, they all do relatively well (visually)
in terms of hitting the cumulative emission target and generating broadly similar costs.
Generally, the interquartile range is tightly around the cumulative target, with only the tails
falling below or above. They all look much closer in outcomes to the ETS policies (a-b)
than standard tax policies (c-d). Second, policies (e-f), the policies that jump between two
otherwise fixed price paths, do look slightly closer to the ETS than the Metcalf EIM policy
(g). The Metcalf EIM has slightly lower high-cost tail. Given the style of policy included in
most proposals in the 116th Congress match the Metcalf EIM, this is an interesting result.
    To put these results in more quantiative terms, and see the parameter outcomes, we
turn to Tables 1 and 2. Note that the top panel A of Table 1 treats the above-target
emission penalty b - a as a political constraint, and does not include that in the damage
or net benefit calculation. The bottom panel B takes the revealed preference approach, and
includes the above-target emission penalty in climate damages. Therefore panel B represents
how the objective itself compares policies, while panel A reflects how someone skeptical of
the emission target would interpret the results of necessary political compromise.
    The tax and ETS comparison in Table 1 (policies a-d) add to the visual discussion
above. In particular, we can see more clearly that the two ETS outcomes are identical.
Moreover, we can see that as we raise the tax slightly from policy (c), which matches expected
emissions, to policy (d), which maximizes the objective, we achieve a slight ($1.1 billion/year)
improvement in the objective in Panel B, column (3). However, if we do not view the
reduction in above-target emissions as a real welfare gain, in Panel A, column (3), this
lowers net benefits by $5.38 billion/year. This is the underlying cost of political compromise
to the emission target skeptic.
    We can also see the standard Weitzman result in Panel A: With flat marginal benefits,
the equivalent tax (policy (c)) achieves a $2.02 billion/year gain over an ETS (policy (a-b))
in column (3).
    Focusing on Panel B for a moment, and the revealed benefit interpretation, we can think
about policies (a) and (d) as defining a range from the "first-best" ETS with a price ceiling
and floor to the "worst" simple approach of a fixed tax schedule that rises at the discount
rate. We can then make several important observations. First, comparing other policies as
deviations from the first-best ETS in column (4), the fixed tax schedule (policy (d)) achieves
97.9% of the welfare benefits associated with the ETS. In dollar terms, the best policy


                                              19
             Table 1: Policy Comparisons (all dollar values are $2009)

             A. Traditional Mitigation Benefits and Political Constraint




                                                                                            Net benefits relative to


                                                                                                                       Net benefits relative to


                                                                                                                                                  Net benefits relative to
                                                                                                                                                  tax, ÷ ETS relative to
                                           Mitigation Costs ($B)


                                                                    "Traditional" Climate
                                                                    Damages ($B/yr)



                                                                                            no policy ($B/yr)


                                                                                                                       ETS (%)



                                                                                                                                                  tax (%)
                                          (1)                           (2)                      (3)                        (4)                          (5)
No policy                                0.00                       351.66                    0.00                       -100                            NA
(a-b) ETS & price collar               161.72                       152.16                  37.67                        0.00                           100
(c) Tax to hit target                  159.71                       152.16                  39.69                        5.35                       159.87
(d) Tax to max objective               169.57                       147.68                  34.31                      -8.93                           0.00
(e) Path-level                         164.80                       150.97                  35.79                      -4.99                          44.11
(f) Path-growth                        165.24                       150.76                  35.55                      -5.62                          37.09
(g) Metcalf EIM                        164.72                       149.29                  37.55                      -0.33                          96.35

                         B. Revealed Climate Mitigation Benefits
                                                                                            Net benefits relative to


                                                                                                                       Net benefits relative to


                                                                                                                                                  Net benefits relative to
                                                                                                                                                  tax, ÷ ETS relative to
                                           Mitigation Costs ($B)


                                                                    "Revealed" Climate
                                                                    Damages ($B/yr)



                                                                                            no policy ($B/yr)


                                                                                                                       ETS (%)



                                                                                                                                                  tax (%)




                                          (1)                           (2)                      (3)                        (4)                          (5)
No policy                                0.00                       985.40                    0.00                       -100                            NA
(a-b) ETS & price collar               161.72                       152.21                  671.47                       0.00                           100
(c) Tax to hit target                  159.71                       169.46                  656.24                     -2.27                          -8.06
(d) Tax to max objective               169.57                       158.46                  657.37                     -2.10                           0.00
(e) Path-level                         164.80                       152.70                  667.90                     -0.53                          74.68
(f) Path-growth                        165.24                       152.71                  667.44                     -0.60                          71.45
(g) Metcalf EIM                        164.72                       155.51                  665.17                     -0.94                          55.35
Notes: The letters in parentheses correspond to the policy descriptions in the text.

                                                                   20
achieves $671 billion in annualized net benefits, while the worst $657. This should not be
surprising. With a cumulative emission target of 79 billion tons, emissions are being reduced
by more than 50%. The benefits of these reductions are large compared to the variation in
Figure 2.
    Second, among our optimized dynamic adjustment rules (e-g), they all obtain the major-
ity of the $14 billion in annualized difference between the ETS (a) and tax (d), highlighted
in column (5). The Path-level based policy (e) does the best, at only $3.6 billion worse than
the ETS (75% of the ETS-tax difference). The Path-growth policy (f) is close at only $4
billion worse. The Metcalf EIM policy drops a bit more, at $6.3 billion. The advantage
of both (e) and (f) is that they allow bigger price adjustments to hit the target--jumping
between two distinct price paths--while policy (g) only allows relatively small growth dif-
ferences from the previous period price. Whether $2-3 billion in additional net benefits is
worth pushing for the design changes suggested by Table 1 would be something stakeholders
might consider.
    The discussion changes a bit as we turn back to Panel A, where welfare no longer includes
the additional, $142 per ton above-target penalty that instead becomes a necessary political
constraint. The ETS (a-b) still provides a better way to meet the political constraint and
improve welfare compared to a tax subject to the same constraint (d). This is evidenced
by the $3.4 billion decline in welfare from row (a-b) to row (d) in column (3). This is still
a relatively small difference (8.9%) compared to the overall welfare gain of the ETS, shown
in column (4). But, it is a larger % difference and smaller $ difference compared to Panel
B, because reductions in the immense ($142 per ton) above-target penalty are no longer
considered real benefits.
    Turning to the simple tax rules (e-g) in Panel A, they again obtain benefits compared to
the simple tax (d). But now the Metcalf EIM is the best and almost the same as the ETS.
That is, it obtains 96% of the tax-ETS difference in column (5). Its response to political
pressure leads to similar costs as Path-level and Path-growth, but it is less able to effectively
reduce above-target emissions and, instead, ends up slightly reducing overall emissions. This
leads to lower damages in Panel A (column 2, comparing row g to e/f), and higher damages
in Panel B (column 2, comparing row g to e/f). So, the Metcalf EIM is not as good for
environmental advocates compared to Path-level and Path-growth policies, but better for
stakeholders who view the revealed preferences from recent policy proposals as a political
constraint. But, again, Path-level and Path-growth are both better than the simple tax and
much better than no policy at all.




                                               21
4.3    Discussion and next steps
We can summarize our main simulation results as follows:

  1. With high levels of mitigation, the welfare difference between price and quantity policies
     is small relative to the gain compared to no policy. While the scale varies somewhat
     depending on how we view the above-target penalty, the worst policy still obtains at
     least 90% of the best policy gains.

  2. An ETS is preferred to a fixed tax, regardless of whether we view the high, above-
     target penalty as a constraint or true damages. An ETS with a price floor and ceiling
     offers little improvement over an ordinary ETS. An exogenous tax schedule is not as
     cost-effective.

  3. There can be a difference between our objective-maximizing deterministic tax and
     the deterministic tax that matches expected emissions under an objective-maximizing
     ETS. This difference is driven by the non-linearity in the consequences of marginal
     emissions.

  4. When we turn to taxes with simple dynamic adjustment mechanisms, these policies
     are able to achieve the intended target with relative accuracy, but do so at higher cost
     than an ETS. Altogether, they can achieve a large portion of the welfare difference
     between the deterministic tax policy and an ETS.

  5. Among the dynamic adjustment mechanisms that we consider, one's preferences will
     depend on how one views the above-target emission penalty with a difference of between
     $2 and 3 billion per year. The Path-level and Path-growth are better able to reduce
     that penalty and achieve the target because they tend to allow larger price adjustments.
     Thus they are preferred when the above-target penalty is considered a real benefit.

  6. The Metcalf-EIM has more trouble making those targeted adjustments and instead
     leads to more expected emissions above the target but lower overall expected emissions
     (compared to Path-level and Path-growth). It would be preferred when the above-
     target penalty is considered a political constraint.

   These types of observations demonstrate the value of our proposed approach even as we
readily note many open questions. That is, it is possible that Figure 2 or similarly designed
graphics could be used directly by stakeholders to make normative judgements about policies.
Hafstead and Williams (2020) and others implicitly suggest such an approach as they present
a range of figures and summary statistics on costs and emissions. When we began this

                                             22
exercise, we also constructed a large number of figures that presented different features of
the emission and cost outcomes (ultimately we found Figure 2 to be the most informative).
    However, even the best-designed graphical comparison of emission and cost outcomes
allows, at best, a discrete ranking of proposals. It does not easily point to where improve-
ments exist in terms of parameter choice or further adjustments to policy design. Forcing
stakeholders to contemplate the preferences underlying their proposals, one way or another,
allows us to write out an objective. Ultimately, it should be relatively uncontroversial if we
can achieve better environmental and cost outcomes, which an explicit objective allows us
to do.
    Of course, there are many open questions. At the top of the list is the sensitivity of our
results to different assumptions about how we value and/or constrain emission outcomes.
As discussed in Appendix C, we have taken a particular approach to using policy proposals
in the 116th Congress to inform selection of a, b, and E   ¯ . We also allow a to be informed
by 2016 estimates of the social cost of carbon. How do our results change when those
parameters change? Alternatively, are there different forms of a political constraint that
could be applied?
    For our cost model and target, the required marginal cost to hit the target on average
falls close to the middle of the interval [a, b]. What happens when the required marginal cost
is at or below the lower bound a (e.g., the target is too easy) or above the upper bound b
(the target is too hard)? And what happens when the range [a, b] is smaller compared to
the uncertainty about the price required to hit the target?
    Regarding the price required to hit the target, we have included one source of cost
uncertainty--baseline emissions. A more realistic model would include uncertainty in the
marginal cost equation (4). It might also link costs over time, so that costs in one period
reflect mitigation (and likely capital investment) choices in previous periods.
    Finally, there are a variety of questions about policy design. We have not, for example,
considered how the frequency of adjustment matters. One could also imagine more complex
policies, with more than two choices each period, or rules that depend on more than cumu-
lative emissions. Our view is that this is best informed by (a) examining whether and what
kinds of changes are likely to have a large welfare effect and (b) what kinds of designs are
likely practical from a stakeholder perspective.


5    Conclusion
Recent interest in tax policies that adjust dynamically to achieve an emission target raises a
number of previously unexamined, or barely examined, questions. Such questioning begins

                                             23
with the basics: how such policies might work and how different choices deliver a range
of emission and cost outcomes. These policies are fundamentally different than hybrid ETS
policies studied in the past, in that hybrid tax policies will generally feature a cruder, period-
ically backward-looking adjustment. In contrast, hybrid ETS policies can adjust as quickly
as markets can adjust and will be as forward-looking as market agents' cleverness allows.
    Soon after one examines how they might work, a natural next question is what makes
one policy choice better than another? A fundamental problem for any welfare analysis is
that most economics and climate science suggests that taxes should not adjust in the first
place; such evidence argues that an exogenous tax leads to higher expected welfare than
a tax that adjusts to achieve an emission target. To create a metric for better and worse
tax adjustment policies that does not lead us back towards exogenous taxes, we use recent
proposals to reveal specific preferences for a discontinuity in the marginal value placed on
increasing lower emission levels. These proposals place a higher tax on emissions when
emission targets are being missed versus when they are being met.
    We might view the high willingness to pay for above-target reductions as a political
constraint imposed by the particular stakeholders behind these proposals, or as the true
benefit value. Either way, it defines an objective. Here, we have used recent proposals in the
116th Congress to calibrate such a function: Reductions down to 79 billion tons (cumulative
emissions 2020-2050) are valued at $142 per ton, while further reductions are valued at only
$34 per ton. The lower value also corresponds to recent estimates of the social cost of carbon.
    Combining this damage/political constraint function with a mitigation cost function, we
can define a complete objective function. In turn, we can use this function to compare across
policy designs as well as to adjust parameters within such designs. With our optimized
parameters and policies, we find first that the ETS and simple, exogenous tax both offer
dramatic welfare gains, with a difference of only 10% between the two. This follows from our
target, which represents more than 50% reduction in emissions, and our estimated emission
uncertainty, which is much smaller than this 50% reduction.
    Turning to our taxes with dynamic adjustment mechanisms, they all achieve much of the
tax-ETS difference. The difference among the mechanisms that we consider amounts to $1-3
billion per year. The ranking among these alternative tax rules, however, depends on how one
views the above-target penalty and importance of the target--is it a political constraint or
an indication of real welfare? If the former, the Metcalf EIM responds to the constraint with
better welfare outcomes than the two policies that switch between two otherwise fixed paths
(Path-level and Path growth). If the latter, the more gradual adjustment in the Metcalf
EIM does worse.
    Beyond these specific conclusions, we have sought to make two general points. One is


                                               24
that policy proposals can be a means to reveal preferences useful for policy analysis. Some
might view these as societal preferences and "benefits;" others as a political constraint. Yet
others might prefer to argue against any consideration of these preferences in the first place,
given these preferences are at odds with other evidence from economics and climate science.
Our view is that when a persistent position exists in the policy debate, it makes sense to at
least consider how policymakers might usefully work with that position.
    The second, more important point, is that there is significant value in translating other-
wise abstract or discrete preferences (or constraints) into a continuous numerical objective.
This allows us to identify adjustments to policy parameters and design that have the poten-
tial to make all stakeholders better off. Without such an effort, policymakers (and society)
may miss out on billions of dollars per year in achievable welfare gains.


References
Aldy, Joseph E. 2017. "Designing and Updating a US Carbon Tax in an Uncertain World."
  Harv. Envtl. L. Rev. F., 41: 28­40.
Aldy, Joseph E. 2020. "Carbon Tax Review and Updating: Institutionalizing an Act-
  Learn-Act Approach to U.S. Climate Policy." Review of Environmental Economics and
  Policy, 14(1): 76­94.
Aldy, Joseph E., Marc Hafstead, Gilbert E. Metcalf, Brian C. Murray,
  William A. Pizer, Christina Reichert, and Roberton C. Williams, III. 2017.
  "Resolving the Inherent Uncertainty of Carbon Taxes: Introduction." Harvard Environ-
  mental Law Review Forum, 41: 1­13.
Baker, James A, Martin Feldstein, Ted Halstead, N Gregory Mankiw, Henry M
  Paulson, George P Shultz, Thomas Stephenson, and Rob Walton. 2017. "The
  Conservative Case for Carbon Dividends." 8.
Bledsoe, Paul. 2012. "Carbon tax could be part of eventual tax reform package."
Brooks, Susanne A, and Nathaniel O Keohane. 2020. "The Political Economy of
  Hybrid Approaches to a U.S. Carbon Tax: A Perspective from the Policy World." Review
  of Environmental Economics and Policy, 14(1): 67­75.
Burtraw, Dallas, Karen Palmer, and Danny Kahn. 2010. "A symmetric safety valve."
  Special Section on Carbon Emissions and Carbon Management in Cities with Regular
  Papers, 38(9): 4921­4932.
CAIT Climate Data Explorer. 2015. "CAIT Climate Data Explorer." World Resources
  Institute, Washington, DC.
Climate Home News. 2019. "Guterres asks all countries to plan for carbon neutrality by
  2050."
Debt Reduction Task Force. 2010. "Restoring America's future: reviving the economy,
  cutting spending and debt, and creating a simple, pro-growth tax system." Bipartisan
  Policy Center, Washington, DC. OCLC: 681901007.
Hafstead, Marc A C, and Roberton C. Williams, III. 2020. "Designing and Evaluating
  a U.S. Carbon Tax Adjustment Mechanism to Reduce Emissions Uncertainty." Review of

                                              25
  Environmental Economics and Policy, 14(1): 95­113.
Hafstead, Marc, and Roberton C. Williams, III. 2019. "Mechanisms to Reduce Emis-
  sions Uncertainty under a Carbon Tax." RFF Working Paper, 31.
Hafstead, Marc, Gilbert E. Metcalf, and Roberton C. Williams, III. 2017. "Adding
  Quantity Certainty to a Carbon Tax through a Tax Adjustment Mechanism for Policy Pre-
  Commitment." Harv. Envtl. L. Rev. F., 41: 41­57.
Heutel, Garth. 2020. "Bankability and Information in Pollution Policy." Journal of the
  Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 7(4): 779­799. Publisher: The
  University of Chicago Press.
Hyndman, Rob J., and Yeasmin Khandakar. 2008. "Automatic Time Series Forecast-
  ing: The forecast Package for R." Journal of Statistical Software; Vol 1, Issue 3 (2008).
IWG, Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases and
  United States Government. 2016. "Technical Support Document: Technical Update of
  the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866."
Kwiatkowski, Denis, Peter C.B. Phillips, Peter Schmidt, and Yongcheol Shin.
  1992. "Testing the null hypothesis of stationarity against the alternative of a unit root:
  How sure are we that economic time series have a unit root?" Journal of Econometrics,
  54(1): 159­178.
Lizza, Ryan. 2010. "As the World Burns." The New Yorker.
McKibbin, Warwick J., and Peter J. Wilcoxen. 1997. "A Better Way to Slow Global
  Climate Change." Australian National University, Economics and Environment Network.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2009. "Cost Containment in Climate Change Policy: Alternative
  Approaches to Mitigating Price Volatility." National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
  15125.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2020. "An Emissions Assurance Mechanism: Adding Environmen-
  tal Certainty to a U.S. Carbon Tax." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy,
  14(1): 114­130.
Murray, Brian C., William A. Pizer, and Christina Reichert. 2017. "Increasing
  Emissions Certainty under a Carbon Tax." Harv. Envtl. L. Rev. F., 41: 14­27.
National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform. 2010. "The Moment of
  Truth: Report of the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform | National
  Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform."
Newell, Richard G., and William A. Pizer. 2003. "Regulating stock externalities under
  uncertainty." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 45(2): 416­432.
Pizer, William A. 2002. "Combining price and quantity controls to mitigate global climate
  change." Journal of Public Economics, 85(3): 409­434.
Pizer, William A., and Brian Prest. 2016. "Prices versus Quantities with Policy Up-
  dating." National Bureau of Economic Research w22379, Cambridge, MA.
Pope, C. Arden, Maureen Cropper, Jay Coggins, and Aaron Cohen. 2015. "Health
  benefits of air pollution abatement policy: Role of the shape of the concentrationresponse
  function." Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 65(5): 516­522.
Roberts, Marc J., and Michael Spence. 1976. "Effluent charges and licenses under
  uncertainty." Journal of Public Economics, 5(3): 193­208.
Ross, Martin. 2014. "Structure of the Dynamic Integrated Economy/Energy/Emissions
  Model: Computable General Equilbrium Component, DIEM-CGE." Duke University 14-

                                            26
  12, Durham, NC.
Sanders, Bernard. 2015. "S.2399 - 114th Congress (2015-2016): Climate Protection and
  Justice Act of 2015."
Schennach, Susanne M. 2000. "The Economics of Pollution Permit Banking in the Con-
  text of Title IV of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments." Journal of Environmental
  Economics and Management, 40(3): 189­210.
United Kingdom. 2009. "Carbon valuation in UK policy appraisal: a revised approach."
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2018. "Real Gross Domestic Product."
U.S. EPA. 2015. "Regulatory Impact Analysis for the Clean Power Plan Final Rule." U.S.
  EPA.
van der Ploeg, Frederick. 2018. "The safe carbon budget." Climatic Change, 147(1): 47­
  59.
Weitzman, Martin. 1974. "Prices vs. Quantities." Review of Economic Studies, 41(4): 477­
  491.
Weitzman, Martin. 1978. "Optimal Rewards for Economic Regulation." American Eco-
  nomic Review, September, 68(4): 683­691.
Weyant, John P., and Jennifer N. Hill. 1999. "Introduction and Overview." The Energy
  Journal, 20: vii­xliv.
Whitehouse, Sheldon. 2015. "S.1548 - 114th Congress (2015-2016): American Opportu-
  nity Carbon Fee Act of 2015."
Wintour, Patrick, and Larry Elliott. 2009. "G8 agrees to climate targets despite differ-
  ences with developing nations." The Guardian.
Yates, Andrew J., and Mark B. Cronshaw. 2001. "Pollution Permit Markets with In-
  tertemporal Trading and Asymmetric Information." Journal of Environmental Economics
  and Management, 42(1): 104­118.
Ye, Jason. 2019. "Carbon Pricing Proposals in the 116th Congress."




                                          27
Additional Figures

            Figure 3: Baseline Cumulative Emissions 2020-2050




                                   28
Figure 4: Price Paths




         29
Figure 5: Threshold Paths




           30
                    Table 2: Policy Parameters

                          Policy Parameters

                                          Starting Price 1 ($)


                                                                  Starting Price 2 ($)


                                                                                         Growth Rate 1 (%)

(c) Tax to hit target                 73.56                       --                     4.0                 Growth Rate 2 (%)
                                                                                                             --
(d) Tax to min objective              76.44                       --                     4.0                 --
(e) Path-level                        65.52                      86.77                   4.0                 --
(f) Path-growth                       76.44                       --                     3.1                 4.6
(g) Metcalf EIM                       76.44                       --                     2.9                 4.7
Notes: The letters in parentheses correspond to the policy descriptions in the
text.




                                     31
Appendices

A      Penalizing excess emissions as a political constraint
In our objective function to evaluate alternative carbon tax mechanisms, we argue the emis-
sion target can be interpreted as a political constraint rather than part of the welfare measure
itself. That is, welfare is determined by mitigation costs coupled with emission reductions
valued at estimates of the benefit per ton without regard to any emission target. This "true"
benefit per ton is given by parameter a in Equation (1). However, the need to garner certain
political support requires a policymaker to penalize emissions above a specified target at
per ton rate considerably higher than the benefit estimate. That is, we have to be willing
to spend up to that higher per-ton penalty rate to hit the target before exceeding it. This
penalization rate is given by b     a in (1).
    The optimization involves the same function but we no longer interpret the portion related
to penalizing above-target emissions as welfare. Instead, it is the result of political pressure.
    This is not the same as establishing quantitative limit on expected above-target emissions
and then otherwise maximizing welfare. To see the difference mathematically, note our
optimization (1) can be written as

                                         min f (z ) - g (z )                                      (7)
                                           z


where - = (b - a), f (z ) = E[aET  s
                                     + T       -t s s                       s
                                                                              -E¯ )1(E s > E
                                                                                           ¯ )] - g0 ,
                                          t=1 e   Ct (et )], g (z ) = E[(ET           T
and z includes various policy parameters that determine es          t in each period t and state of
nature s (as well as cumulative Es = t es    t in each state of nature). In (1) we have g0 = 0
but any fixed value of g0 would yield the same optimization result. A typical constrained
optimization would instead (i) pick a fixed quantitative constraint g0 to be met, (ii) treat
, the constraint's shadow price, as endogenous, and (ii) add the complimentary slackness
condition that   0 or g (z )  0 to close the system (note  is non-positive).
                                                                                                 s
     One might ask why not define the political constraint as a constraint on E[(ET                -
E¯ )1(E s > E
            ¯ )]? For example, we could require the expected above-target emissions to be
       T
less than 1% of the target. A similar approach was taken in van der Ploeg (2018) to convert
uncertainty about the emissions limit necessary to achieve 2 in an otherwise determinis-
tic model: He picked an emission limit corresponding to a 2/3 probability of achieving 2 .
This approach implies that increasingly flexible policies would lower costs as the constraint
becomes easier to achieve and  in Equation (7) wold fall.
     We do not believe this is consistent with actual political constraints. There is a certain


                                                 32
necessity associated with choosing a probability of 2 in the van der Ploeg example: There
may well be little to no additional information about the climate sensitivity until after the
cumulative emission limit is reached. The same is not true about the price necessary to
achieve a given cumulative emission target: Each year will bring some new information
about whether a higher or lower price is necessary. Pro-environmental stakeholders may be
unwilling to agree to "acceptable above-target emissions" (e.g., g0 ). In particular, such an
agreement would not allow them to claim further reductions approach fails to further their
goal of reducing above-target emissions (g (z )) as more flexible policies lower costs. Our
view is that efforts to improve flexibility will need to go hand-in-hand with both lowering
costs and reducing above-target emissions. That is, there is pressure to "share the flexibility
savings with the environment" and not just use such policies to lower costs only.


B     Estimation and forecasting
In Section 3.3, we define two autoregressive processes for GDP and CO2 /GDP. While we
have data for the period 1929-2015, we estimate our models using only 1985-2015 data.
After estimating various models using different lengths of the data, we concluded that there
seemed to be state transitions occurring before 1985 that make the model predictions less
informative of future emissions than we would like; thus, we use the data following what
appears to be the final transition.
    We use the `forecast' package in R to conduct our estimation. The `auto.arima' function
chooses the best autoregressive integrated moving average ARIMA(p, d, q ) process for each
time series by following the procedure outlined in Hyndman and Khandakar (2008). First, the
routine chooses the optimal number of differences d by using repeated KPSS (Kwiatkowski
et al., 1992) tests, which test the null hypothesis of stationarity against the alternative of
a unit root. Then the program uses a search algorithm to find the autoregressive order p
and moving average order q by minimizing the small sample Akaike information criterion
(AICc) of the fitted models. We check the procedure's model choices by plotting the auto-
correlation and partial autocorrelation functions (ACF and PACF) of both of the differenced
series, and verify that AR(1) and AR(2) seem appropriate for the differenced data. (Thus,
ARIMA(1,1,0) and ARIMA(2,1,0) seem appropriate for the GDP and CO2 /GDP processes,
respectively.) The parameter estimates come from maximizing the log-likelihood function
and the covariance matrix comes from the Hessian. The procedure uses a Kalman filter to
find the innovations and their variance. After estimating each model, we again check our
model choice, by plotting the ACFs of the residuals and conclude, using portmanteau tests,



                                              33
that they look like white noise.8 Equations 5 and 6 in the text characterize the models.
These equations are rewritten here:

                          log (GDPt ) =  log (GDPt-1 ) + µg (1 - ) + t

and

           CO2                      CO2                           CO2
    log                 = 1  log                   + 2  log                   + µr (1 - (1 + 2 )) + t
           GDP      t               GDP     t-1                   GDP   t-2


where , 1 , and 2 are autoregressive coefficients, t and t are shocks identically and
independently distributed according to the Normal distributions N (0, g ) and N (0, r ), re-
spectively, where g and r are estimated from the data, and µg and µr are drift coefficients.
Parameter estimates are in Table 3.

                                     Table 3: Model Coefficients

                                         Coefficient              Estimate
                                                                    0.44
                                                                   (0.16)
                                              µg                    0.03
                                                                   (0.00)
                                              1                     -0.42
                                                                   (0.15)
                                              2                     -0.63
                                                                   (0.14)
                                              µr                    -0.02
                                                                   (0.00)
                                              g                    0.0002
                                              r                    0.0002
                                Standard errors in parentheses.


    Then we write our own forecasting and simulation procedure using these parameter es-
timates. Our forecast procedure is straightforward. We take the coefficient estimates to
be fixed and, for 10,000 runs, draw 35 years of error terms for each model from Normal
distributions with mean zero and the estimated variances. Using our fitted models and the
error draws, we forecast log(GDP) and log(CO2 /GDP) for the period 2016-2050 and then
calculate GDP and CO2 from these projections.9 We plot our forecasts for CO2 , GDP, and
   8
    Plots of the ACF and PACF are available from the authors by request.
   9
    We realize that forecasting 35 years into the future using only 30 years of historical data may cause
concern about the validity of our forecasts. However, our simulation procedure is for illustrative purposes
and we believe it captures the trend in emissions without becoming intractable.


                                                     34
log(CO2 /GDP) in Figures 1, 6, and 7, respectively.

              Figure 6: Historical (1929-2015) and Projected (2016-2050) GDP




                                                    50000
                                                    40000
                rGDP (Billions of Chained 2009 $)

                                                    30000
                                                    20000
                                                    10000
                                                    0




                                                            1940   1960   1980          2000   2020   2040

                                                                                 Year




         Figure 7: Historical (1929-2015) and Projected (2016-2050) log(CO2/GDP)
                                                    0.5
                                                    0.0
                                                    -0.5
                log(co2/gdp)

                                                    -1.0
                                                    -1.5
                                                    -2.0




                                                            1940   1960   1980          2000   2020   2040

                                                                                 Year




                                                                             35
C        Setting the target and marginal damage function
         parameters
As of the writing of this paper, eight carbon pricing proposals had been introduced in the
116th Congress (2019-2020).10 Seven of these proposals are for a carbon tax while the other
is for a cap-and-trade program. The proposals are generally defined by an initial tax rate
that grows at some interest rate (or by some level) annually or biennially as shown in Figure
8. Additionally, five proposals have emission reduction targets specified by year while two
others define an 80% reduction target not specific to any year. Figure 9 depicts these tar-
gets relative to 2005 emission levels. An important distinction between our work and these
proposals is the set of greenhouse gas emissions covered. Each proposal differs: some apply
to all greenhouse gases while others, for instance, only apply to emissions from fossil fuels
and certain industrial products and processes. Our model, meanwhile, is for economy-wide
carbon dioxide emissions. To accomodate this, we translate each emission reduction target
into a CO2 reduction target using the same percentages drawn from the proposal relative
to 2005 CO2 emissions. Finally, several of the proposals include built-in environmental in-
tegrity mechanisms which aim to provide greater certainty over emissions outcomes (i.e.,
adjustments similar in spirit to those considered in this paper). These adjustment mecha-
nisms would increase the tax at a rate (or level) higher than the standard increase if certain
targets are not met.
    We define our emission reduction targets based on the mean of the annual targets defined
in the proposals containing targets. For proposals with less frequent reduction targets, we
extrapolate to obtain annual targets. Our targets are shown as the "Harris-Pizer" targets in
Figure 9. We then convert these into annual emission targets by multiplying by 2005 CO2
emissions. We obtain the cumulative 2050 target, E   ¯ = 78.5 billion metric tons of CO2 , by
summing these annual targets.
    To obtain a and b, we look at the net present value of the tax rates when the targets from
the proposals are achieved and the NPV of the tax rates when the targets are not achieved,
respectively. (NPV is calculated with a discount rate of  = 0.04.) These are depicted
in Figures 10 and 11. We take a = $34.1 as the average starting tax rate among all the
proposals. For the proposals with integrity mechanisms, we define the maximum tax rate
over time to be the tax if the proposal's targets are never met and the tax always grows at
the adjustment rate. The NPV of this tax rate over time is depicted in Figure 11. We take
b = $142.5 as the average final maximum tax rate (NPV-terms) of this subset of proposals
with built-in adjustments.
  10
       See Ye (2019) for a summary.

                                             36
Figure 8: 116th Congress Proposals: Tax Rates




                     37
                           Figure 9: 116th Congress Proposals: Emission Targets




Emission reduction targets are shown relative to 2005 levels. The Harris-Pizer line represents our emission reduction targets.
Our targets are defined from the regression of emission targets from the enumerated proposals on the year.




                                                             38
  Figure 10: 116th Congress Proposals: NPV Tax Rate




Figure 11: 116th Congress Proposals: NPV Max Tax Rate




                         39
D      Deriving the marginal cost curves
The DIEM-CGE model is a dynamic computable general equilibrium model of the global and
U.S. economies that is multi-regional and multi-sectoral. It allows us to explore how various
policies affect sectors of the U.S. economy, particularly how policies like carbon pricing affect
the economy, the energy and electricity sector, and greenhouse gas emissions. We use the
model to derive estimates of greenhouse gas reductions in response to carbon prices. Figure
12 shows the carbon prices that correspond to a range of percent reductions in the years
2020, 2030, 2040, 2050. From this, we estimate quadratic marginal cost curves for each
decadal year, and then interpolate these coefficients across years to derive curves for every
year in our period of interest (2020-2050). That is,

                                                               2
                                    M Ct (rt ) = 1,t rt + 2,t rt                             (8)

    where M Ct is the economy-wide marginal cost ($/MtCO2 ) for reducing emissions by the
fraction rt below baseline emissions in year t. As an example, the marginal cost curve for
the year 2025 is M C2025 (r) = 215.0r + 289.3r2 .
    Then we calculate the total cost for each year as the integral of the marginal cost curve
from 0 units of reduction up to the amount of reduction relative to business-as-usual emis-
sions. That is simply the total cost function defined in Equation 3. We rewrite it here

                                             1             1
                             Ct (et ) = e
                                        ~t     1,t (rt )2 + 2,t (rt )3                       (9)
                                             2             3

where e                                              et - et )/(~
      ~t is baseline emissions in period t and rt = (~          et ) is the fraction of emissions
reduced.
   The net present value total cost across all periods is then

                                              2050
                                                         Ct
                                  CNP V =                                                   (10)
                                             t=2020
                                                    (1 +  )t-2020

where  = 0.04 is the discount rate. We report annualized NPV costs (in billions $), which
are

                                                        CNP V · 
                              C N P V,annualized =                    .
                                                     1 - 1/ (1 +  )31




                                                 40
Figure 12: Marginal Cost Curves from DIEM-CGE




                     41
