                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            PAID LEAVE PAYS OFF:
           THE EFFECTS OF PAID FAMILY LEAVE ON FIRM PERFORMANCE

                                         Benjamin Bennett
                                             Isil Erel
                                           Léa H. Stern
                                            Zexi Wang

                                        Working Paper 27788
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27788


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                           September 2020, Revised December 2020




We thank participants at the ECWFC WFA 2019, the 2019 Pacific Northwest Finance
Conference, the 2020 AFA annual meeting, the 2020 EFA annual meeting, and the Ohio State
University, as well as Alice Bonaime, Philip Bond, Alex Edmans, Shan Ge, Will Gornall, Sabrina
Howell, Jason Lee, Jack Liebersohn, Claudio Loderer, Hanno Lustig, Alberto Manconi
(discussant), Richard Ogden, George Nurisso, Christopher Parsons, Paola Sapienza, Miriam
Schwartz-Ziv, Neal Stoughton, René Stulz, Clémentine Van Effenterre, Alexander Wagner, Mike
Weisbach, Mark Westerfield, Michael Wittry, and Liu Yang (discussant) for their valuable
comments. A previous version of this paper was distributed with the title "(Forced) Feminist
Firms." The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Benjamin Bennett, Isil Erel, Léa H. Stern, and Zexi Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Paid Leave Pays Off: The Effects of Paid Family Leave on Firm Performance
Benjamin Bennett, Isil Erel, Léa H. Stern, and Zexi Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 27788
September 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. J16,J22,J24,J32,J78,M14,M51

                                          ABSTRACT

We explore how lowering labor market frictions for female workers affects corporate
performance. Using the staggered adoption of state-level Paid Family Leave acts, we provide
causal evidence on the value created by relieving frictions to accessing female talent, for private
and public firms. Reduced turnover and an increase in female leadership are potential
mechanisms that contribute to performance gains. Across specifications, our estimates indicate
that treated establishments' productivity increases by about 5% relative to neighbor control
establishments. The treatment effect is larger when workers are in less religious counties and in
those with more women of childbearing age.

Benjamin Bennett                                 Léa H. Stern
A.B. Freeman School of Business,                 Department of Finance and
Tulane University, McAlister Drive               Business Economics
New Orleans, LA 70118                            Foster School of Business
USA                                              University of Washington
bbennett1@tulane.edu                             Seattle, WA 98195
                                                 leastern@uw.edu
Isil Erel
Fisher College of Business                       Zexi Wang
Ohio State University                            Lancaster University, Management School
2100 Neil Avenue                                 Lancaster
Columbus, OH 43210                               Lancaster LA1 4YX
and NBER                                         United Kingdom
erel@fisher.osu.edu                              z.wang41@lancaster.ac.uk
"I have seen half of the United States' talent basically put off to the side. (...) and now I think
of doubling the talent that is effectively employed or at least has the chance to be it makes me
                               very optimistic about this country."

                                                         - Warren Buffett (2018)



1. Introduction

Shifts in gender identity norms over the past decades have been key drivers of the sharp

increase in female labor force participation (Costa, 2000, Fernandez, 2013, Fortin, 2005,

Goldin, 2006, Bertrand, 2011, Bertrand et al., 2015). This increase, in turn, has had a strong

direct effect on U.S. economic growth over the past fifty years. Hsieh et al. (2019) estimate

that lowering barriers to occupational choice (e.g., gender and racial discrimination) and the

resulting improved allocation of talent account for 20% to 40% of the aggregate growth in

GDP per capita over the 1960-2010 period. Despite women's increased participation in the

workforce (Figure 1, Panels A, B), Akerlof and Kranton (2000) report very low elasticity of

men's share of housework and childcare ­ henceforth unpaid work ­ relative to their share of

work outside the home. Women in the U.S. still assume most unpaid work despite being

employed full time (Figure 1, Panel C). This observation has been illustrated starkly during the

COVID-19 pandemic, which risks forcing a generation of working mothers out of the labor

market. 1 As Goldin put it in her 2020 NBER Annual Feldstein lecture, "working mothers are

on call at home and working fathers are on call at work." In other words, persistent frictions

affect women's labor market decisions.

    In this paper, we investigate at a micro level, the effects on firm performance of weakening

these labor market frictions for women. Possible positive effects on firm profitability and,

therefore, value gains for various stakeholders, have recently been recognized by some


1
 See for example https://www.wsj.com/articles/womens-careers-could-take-long-term-hit-from-coronavirus-
pandemic-11594814403 and https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/02/business/covid-economy-parents-kids-career-
homeschooling.html
                                                    1
institutional investors. 2 Possible benefits include improved access to female talent through

better talent allocation. In our context, talent allocation refers to the allocation of talent between

household and workplace as well as career aspirations within a profession (as opposed to talent

allocation across professions). 3 Alternatively, weakening frictions may have no positive effect

on firm performance if firms are already at their optimum. Lowering frictions might also be

costly, 4 or frictions might be too low to lead to performance gains. Whether the benefits

outweigh the costs for firms is ultimately an empirical question, which we explore in this paper.

    An important complication in this line of research is that access to talent and firm

performance are likely jointly determined. To identify the causal effect of access to talent on

firm performance, we exploit the staggered adoption of state-level Paid Family Leave (PFL)

acts in the U.S. between 2002 and 2018. These state laws mandate that employees receive paid

leave for a family or medical event. Byker (2016) finds that women's labor force participation

increased after the California and New Jersey's laws became effective, and Ruhm (1998)

shows similar results for the female workforce in Europe. Rossin-Slater et al. (2013) show that

the California PFL law more than doubled the overall use of maternity leave but increased the

hours worked as well as the wage income of mothers with one to three-year-old children, who

have the lowest labor force participation rates (Figure 1, Panel A). These laws thus introduce

significant flexibility for women in their labor market decision and therefore provide a

meaningful source of variation in the female talent pool.


2
  "If the treatment of people is diverse, inclusive, empowering -- that's good for the employees and
stakeholders... We also think it is an issue of profitability -- for ourselves and for our portfolio companies" (The
50 Percent Female Portfolio Management Team That's Trouncing Its Benchmark, Institutional Investor, 30 June
2020.)
3
  Social norms governing households' division of labor may create frictions in women's labor market participation
and thus in talent allocation. An agent may face hurdles in career choices that arise from her social category. We
focus on reducing frictions for female workers with young children as having young children effectively increases
identity dissonance costs for women when participating in the labor market (see Akerlof and Kranton, 2000 and
Bursztyn, Fujiwara and Pallais, 2017).
4
  These costs are typically not direct funding costs for employers as most policies are financed through employee
payroll taxes. They would include indirect adjustment costs -- e.g., coordinating the schedules of existing
employees who fund the PFL and hiring replacement workers (Rossin-Slater, 2017) -- and costs due to increased
take-up rates for the leaves.
                                                           2
    We expect paid family leave to reduce frictions in labor market decisions for women

partially through a direct effect on pay during family leave -i.e., a larger effective wage or

longer paid family leave. 5 More importantly, though, it is the investment in a culture and work

environment supportive of women's career ambitions that is presumably the key enabling

factor for the growth of the female talent pool necessary to affect firm performance. By

institutionalizing paid time off for women after having a child, these laws can change norms

and empower women to retain career aspirations and lower job discontinuity at a crucial point

in their life when the gender wage gap has been shown to widen (see Bertrand, Goldin and

Katz, 2010). Importantly, the improvement in talent allocation enabled by PFL does not require

a higher overall level of employment of female workers. If a fraction of women benefits from

PFL in their career development, talent allocation can improve and so can firm performance. 6

Empirical tests based on PFL laws alleviate endogeneity concerns as they are passed by states,

which makes them unlikely to be driven by characteristics of individual firms. 7 We also ensure

that economic conditions within states do not affect our results.

    We assemble a dataset of 3,426 publicly-traded firms from 1996 to 2019 using Compustat

and 178,251 (4,568,184) establishments of publicly-traded (private) firms from 1997 to 2018

using the establishment-level data provided by Infogroup. We first use a difference-in-

differences research design in which treated firms are those headquartered in states that pass a

PFL law and control firms are not. Our key identifying assumption is that the performance of

firms in treated and non-treated states would have had similar trends had the laws not been




5
  Most American families live paycheck to paycheck: See the report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
Households in May 2019 and https://www.forbes.com/sites/zackfriedman/2019/01/11/live-paycheck-to-
paycheck-government-shutdown/#69640b834f10 .
6
  Reduced frictions may on the one hand allow some female workers to pursue their career aspirations and
continue investing in firm-specific human capital to pursue higher-rank positions. PFL may on the other hand
allow some women to choose to stay longer at home post childbirth (e.g., Bailey, Byker, Patel, and Ramnath,
2019).
7
  Firms in California, for example, were generally opposed to the enactment of the PFL law (Appelbaum et al.,
2011), which alleviates the concern that firms applied political pressure in favour of the passage of the law.
                                                        3
adopted. We find that treated firms' performance, as measured by their return on assets,

improves after the implementation of PFL laws relative to that of control firms. Importantly,

our results hold using an almost perfectly balanced sample in terms of covariate balance using

a Coarsened Exact Matching procedure (Iacus, King, and Porro, 2012).

   While the location of a firm's headquarter is a reasonable indicator for whether a firm is

treated, state PFL laws require that firms provide PFL benefits to employees who work in the

state. Consequently, we use establishment-level data to construct an alternative measure of a

firm's exposure to PFL laws by computing the fraction of the firm's employees located in

treated states. Consistent with PFL laws improving performance via increased access to talent,

the effect on performance is larger for firms with a larger fraction of their employees effectively

subject to the law.

   Our establishment-level data allows us to investigate the effect of PFL on establishment

productivity. In our productivity tests, we first focus on establishments in treated counties

contiguous to the state border and on control establishments in adjacent counties on the other

side of the state border. We compare changes in productivity at treated establishments to those

at control establishments in this setting. Productivity increases by about 5% in treated

establishments following the implementation of PFL while we find no effect in control

establishments in neighbor counties. This result suggests that offering paid leave benefits to

employees increases establishment productivity.

   We show that participation required by state-level mandates benefits firms on average. The

key issue raised by this finding is that we would expect firms to voluntarily provide paid leave

if it is value increasing. While a growing number of firms recognize the importance of non-

wage benefits for their workforce, and in particular their female workforce, they still represent

a small fraction. We offer a discussion with possible explanations in the conclusion.




                                                  4
    Despite the importance of private firms in economic growth and the continuous decline in

the number of listed firms in the U.S. (Doidge et al., 2018), much of the existing debate and

research on benefits for female employees focus on public firms, mostly due to data

availability. We fill this gap by providing evidence on private firms. Given that offering paid-

leave benefits could be costly, especially for smaller firms with fewer employees,

understanding the overall value generated for these smaller private firms is important. Using

establishment-level data, we show that treated establishments of private firms also experience

an increase in productivity, albeit to a smaller degree than their public counterparts.

    Our results are consistent with a simple theoretical framework, which we present in

Appendix A, that we use to clarify the contexts in which we expect the effects of PFL benefits

to be stronger or muted. This framework is in the spirit of Akerlof and Kranton (2000), who

introduce identity -- a person's sense of self -- into economic analysis. We model utility

maximizing agents with identity-based payoffs. Utility increases with decisions that conform

to the worker's social category. Decisions that deviate from the norms associated with her

identity introduce identity dissonance costs that decrease her utility. Identity dissonance costs

affect the labor market decisions of female workers with young children. We hypothesize that

high identity dissonance costs could curb the effects of PFL laws as the labor force participation

condition is harder to meet for women with high identity dissonance costs. Accordingly, in our

empirical analysis, we exploit sources of cross-sectional variation in identity dissonance costs

associated with working after having a child. 8

    Finally, we investigate the channels through which improved talent allocation leads to

better firm performance. We find that treated firms experience lower employee turnover and



8
  We note that there could be other reasons than better talent allocation due to reduced identity dissonance costs,
which our framework focuses, to explain why PFL might improve firm performance. One example would be
reduced planning costs due to unexpected absences which would make managers' jobs easier and lead to happier
and more productive workers. Our framework focuses on one important channel that leads to a more female-
friendly culture, but certainly others could be important too.
                                                          5
an increase in female-friendly firm culture through an increase in the number of female top

executives. Compensation consultants estimate that the replacement cost of an employee who

resigns is 50 to 200 percent of her annual wage (e.g., Compensation & Benefits Review, 1997;

Fitz-enz, 1997). Fedyk and Hodson (2019) find that firms with high employee turnover perform

significantly worse than those with low turnover. Moreover, the evidence in Tate and Yang

(2015) shows that women in leadership positions cultivate more female-friendly cultures,

which promotes the attractiveness of the firm for women. Our results suggest that the

availability of PFL, through its impact on reduced employee turnover and increased presence

of female top executives (conducive to attracting a broader pool of female workers), increases

firm performance.

   By showing that firms benefit from alleviating frictions that distort talent allocation, our

paper contributes to the misallocation literature in labor economics (Hsieh et al., 2019). It adds

to the growing literature on the transformation of women's role in the workplace (see, for

example, Goldin, 2006, for a historical perspective and Bertrand, 2011, for a review), on the

impact of family leave on women's labor market outcomes (see Waldfogel, 1998 and Fortin,

2005 among others) and on gender inequality (see Altonji and Blank, 1999, Olivetto and

Petrongolo, 2016 for reviews of this literature, Bordalo, Coffman, Gennaioli, and Shleifer,

2019, and Getmansky Sherman and Tookes, 2019 for evidence in academia).

   Our paper contributes to filling the gap in the literature by studying the role of PFL laws

from a corporate vantage point. The literature on the effects of PFL on employer outcomes is

limited. Although a few papers study employee morale, productivity, turnover or wage costs

for employers using survey evidence (Appelbaum and Milkman, 2011) or small samples from

a given state or sector (Bedard and Rossin-Slater, 2016), this is the first paper that

systematically studies how profitability changed for employers before and after the




                                                  6
implementation of the laws in the U.S. We therefore show that the effects previously

documented for individual female workers have meaningful implications at the firm level.

    Liu et al. (2019) find that firms offer non-wage benefits to attract workers. The authors use

Glassdoor data to show that firms offer higher maternity benefits when female talent is scarce.

Our study complements theirs by showing that, following the adoption of state PFL laws,

treated public and private firms experience improved productivity and operating performance,

reduced turnover and an increase in female leadership, compared with control firms and

establishments. Our paper is the first paper to study systematically the effect of PFL on the

profitability of a typical private or public firm.

    Our study also contributes to the literature on identity economics, pioneered by Akerlof

and Kranton (2000). Our framework puts front and center the importance of identity dissonance

costs and share of unpaid work in labor market decisions. Our analysis shows that

heterogeneity across populations may have important policy implications.

    Although we do not focus on women in top management or board positions, our results

also speak to the effect of female directors and top executives on firm performance (see Adams

et al., 2012, Sila et al., 2016, Adams et al., 2009 and Ahern et al., 2012, Erel et al., 2019 and

Stern, 2019). Improved talent allocation resulting from reduced frictions in labor market

decisions implies that the average quality of workers weakly increases, including in the C-

suite. The access to a broader talent pool allows firms to shift their marginal hire to the right

tail of the talent distribution, increasing firm performance.


2. Data and Empirical Design

Our empirical tests use the staggered passage of PFL laws in the U.S. to examine the effect of

facilitating women's participation in the workforce on firm performance. For these tests, we

obtain firm-level financial and accounting variables from Compustat and stock returns from


                                                     7
CRSP over the 1996-2019 period. We drop penny stocks (i.e., those whose price is less than

$5) as these stocks tend to be outliers. 9

     Our main dependent variable to study the effect of PFL laws is firms' return on assets

(ROA). Specifically, in a difference-in-differences setting, we contrast the performance of

firms that were subject to the PFL laws to those that were not. Our first proxy for a firm's

exposure to the passage of a state law is the location of the firm's headquarters, which is

collected from SEC 10-K filings. We collect employee location data from Infogroup from

1997-2018 to construct our second measure of corporate exposure to the state laws. Infogroup

provides establishment-level data (see, e.g., Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016) that include revenue

and number of employees for both private and public firms and therefore allows us to study

not only public firms, which some prior papers had to focus on, but also private firms. 10

     Following Guiso et al. (2003) religious intensity is measured by religious adherence, which

is the fraction of the local population that adheres to religious practices of any denomination.

We gather this data at the county level using the Association of Religion Data Archives

(ARDA) data.

      One potential mechanism that underlies the observed improved performance is employee

turnover. Ideally, for our research design we would use the actual employee turnover data at

the firm level. Unfortunately, such firm-level employee turnover data are not publicly

available. We follow the literature and use a firm's forfeited options as a proxy for employee

turnover (Carter and Lynch, 2004; Babenko, 2009; Rouen, 2017). Stock options are a prevalent

and important compensation component for employees, including both top executives and non-

executive employees. 11 Accordingly, Carter and Lynch (2004) propose to measure employee


9
  We provide robustness of our main results including these stocks in Internet Appendix Table IA3.
10
   The sample for firm-level tests is from 1996 to 2019. The sample for the establishment-level tests is from 1997
to 2018 because Infogroup data is not available before 1997 and has not yet been updated for 2019.
11
   The existing literature on compensation has shown that the corporate use of stock option plans for non-executive
employees is widespread. For example, Core and Guay (2001) document that between 1994 and 1997, on average
non-executive employees held 67% of options granted to all employees. On a per-employee basis, the value of
                                                          8
turnover by a firm's options forfeited in a year scaled by the total options outstanding in the

previous year, and show a strong correlation between this measure and industry-level employee

turnover. We calculate this measure using employee options data from Compustat for 2004-

2018.

    We collect the gender of top executives from Execucomp, local income data from the U.S.

Bureau of Economic Analysis, and demographics data from the Census. Finally, we manually

collect the list of "The Working Mother 100 Best Companies" published by Working Mother

Magazine since 1986.

  The United States is the only industrialized country with no national paid maternity leave.

The 1993 Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) requires firms to provide employees with

unpaid job-protected leave for up to twelve weeks for qualified medical or family reasons.

Most Americans, however, live paycheck to paycheck, which may explain the findings in Blau

et al. (2017) that the federal FMLA has had no effect on women's labor force participation.

Since 2002, seven states have passed PFL laws that guarantee four to twelve weeks of paid

leave. Potential reasons for this leave include: i) pregnancy, ii) bonding/caring for a new child,

iii) care for family member with serious health condition or own disability. 12 The leave pay

amount to approximately 60-70% of employees' wages on average.

    Table 1 shows the timing of state-level PFL laws. Enactment dates differ from effective

dates. Our main analysis uses effective dates. Table 2 presents summary statistics for firm,

establishment, and state (county)-level variables. Variables (except dummies) are winsorized

at the 1st and 99th percentile values. One of our main explanatory variables is PFL_HQ, which




options is over $17,000. Oyer and Schaefer (2005) report that non-executives with annual salaries over $75,000
receive 61.1% of the value of option granted. In their sample, 48.9% of the firms had broad-based stock option
plans in 1998 and employees at these firms received average grants worth in excess of $36,000. Hochberg and
Lindsey (2010) show that firms covering 44.1% of their sample grant options broadly to employees. Murphy
(2003) documents that new economy companies grant over 80% of options to employees below the top five
executives.
12
   For a specific example, see California Unemployment Insurance Code §§ 2626, 3302(e).
                                                        9
equals one if a firm is headquartered in a state with a PFL act in place and zero otherwise.

Seven states -- California, Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island

and Washington -- have passed PFL laws, 13 which are currently in effect in four states as of

this study. On average, 7.2% of firms in a given year in our sample are headquartered in a state

that implemented a PFL law and the median is zero, as expected. However, this percentage

ranges from 0% to 31% across years. Because treated states include California and New York,

where a large number of firms are headquartered, there are 3,426 unique public treated firms

in our sample. Since being headquartered in a state does not require that a significant fraction

of employees is concentrated in that state, we also use an alternative measure, PFL_PctEmp,

which identifies the fraction of a firm's employees in states adopting PFL acts. While the

median fraction of workforce subject to PFL laws is zero, the mean is 9.4%. The sample mean

return on assets (ROA) is -0.2%, with a median of 2.8%. On average, our sample firms have

$570 million in assets, with 16.2% of these assets as cash and 25.1% as debt. On average, 2.2%

of top executive officers are female aged 51 (sample median) or younger in our sample.


3. PFL Laws and Performance: HQ-based Evidence

Our empirical strategy exploits plausibly exogenous state-level shocks -- the implementation

of state-level PFL laws. The economics literature provides evidence that PFL laws have a

positive impact on women's labor participation and therefore introduces meaningful variation

in the female talent pool (e.g., Ruhm, 1998, Byker 2016, and Rossin-Slater et al., 2013). This

suggests that PFL laws mitigate frictions that distort career aspirations. We hypothesize that

the improved talent allocation that ensues increases the quality of the average worker and leads

to performance gains.

3.1. Operating Performance: HQ-based Evidence



13
     Oregon recently passed a PFL law, which will be effective in 2023.
                                                          10
We examine the effect of PFL laws on firm performance using a difference-in-differences

(DiD) design. We first carry out a graphical analysis to test the parallel trend condition (e.g.

Acharya et al., 2014, and Serfling, 2016). Specifically, we regress ROA, our main measure of

firm performance, on dummy variables indicating treated firms in the year relative to the

adoption years and on firm size, including firm and year fixed effects. The coefficients for

these yearly dummy variables are shown in Figure 2. The figure confirms that ROA is not

statistically different between treated and control firms prior to the event year, which shows

that the parallel trend condition for the DiD analysis is satisfied. The ROA of treated firms is

significantly higher than that of control firms starting in the second year following the adoption

of PFL laws.

     We then run regressions for our DiD analysis using the following specification.

                  ,+1 = 0 + 1   + 2  _ +    +  +  +                                                        (1)

where i indexes firms, t indexes time, s indexes the state of corporate headquarters,  is firm

performance (ROA),  is a dummy variable equal to one in each of the three years

preceding the implementation of a PFL law and zero otherwise, 14 _ is the treatment

dummy that switches to one once a state has a PFL law effective by year t and zero otherwise,

 is a vector of firm-level control variables,  and  are firm and year fixed effects,

respectively. We drop the event year for treated observations. Firm-level control variables

include the natural logarithm of total book assets, Tobin's Q, cash over assets, and debt over

assets. Firm fixed effects control for within-firm time-invariant omitted variables and year

fixed effects for time-varying macro factors. In some specifications, we also include firm and

industry-year fixed effects to account for unobserved heterogeneity across firms as well as

time-varying heterogeneity across industries. 15 Standard errors are clustered at the state level



14
   Our results are robust to setting the PrePFL variable equal to one for the two years preceding the passage of
the law.
15
   We use 1-digit SIC codes for industry definition.
                                                        11
to account for serial correlation in the data (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan, 2004). 16 The

coefficient on  , 1, tests for the parallel trend condition. An insignificant 1 indicates

that the parallel trend condition is satisfied. The coefficient on _ , 2, captures the

treatment effect. Results are reported in Table 3.

     All specifications include firm fixed effects. We also include year fixed effects in

specifications 1 through 3 and specification 5, and industry-year fixed effects in specification

4. The coefficients on PFL_HQ are positive and statistically as well as economically significant

across specifications. For example, specification 4 shows that the passage of a PFL law is

associated with a 1.5 percentage point increase in ROA, which corresponds to 8.6% of the

standard deviation of ROA (0.174) in our sample. Importantly, the coefficients on PrePFL are

not statistically significant, which confirms that the parallel trend condition is satisfied,

consistent with Figure 2. Since different states passed the law at different times, we carry out

the Goodman-Bacon (2018) decomposition in order to test for timing-varying effects that may

lead to estimation bias. Our findings hold with the Goodman-Bacon decomposition. 17

     In specification 5, we use Coarsened Exact Matching (Iacus, King, and Porro 2012) to

create a balanced sample in terms of covariates and repeat specification 3 in this matched

sample. In this matching exercise, which puts some of the available data into various "stratas",

we use firms' assets and Tobin's Q in addition to industry and year. We end up having 775

stratas with 2,230 treated and 9,743 control (matched) firms in these bins. The estimates are

then obtained using a regression analysis on the matched sample. We include strata fixed




16
   In Internet Appendix Table IA1, we report the same qualitative patterns when we change how we correct for
clustering of observations. Even though we have more than forty state clusters, we bootstrapped standard errors
nonetheless to ensure cluster-robust standard errors were not downward biased.
17
   Using specification 3 in Table 3, we carry out a Goodman-Bacon (2018) decomposition, which requires a
balanced panel, and find that 86% of the treatment effect comes from the treated-untreated treatment effect ( =
0.015), 14% comes from the timing variation ( = -0.003), and the within component is negligible with weight
2.25e-24 and  0.007. So the overall treatment effect is reflected by a weighted average of  's as 0.012. If we
drop the potentially-biased time-varying component as Goodman-Bacon (2018) suggests, the overall treatment
effect increases slightly to 0.015.
                                                        12
effects in this column although they are largely unnecessary as this specification already

includes firm fixed effects. The estimated effect of PFL laws on performance is very stable

using the Coarsened Exact Matching procedure. 18

     We provide cross-sectional evidence using state-level variation in Internet Appendix. In

the identity-based framework of talent allocation described in Appendix A, the labor force

participation condition for mothers requires that their income net of childcare costs exceeds

their identity dissonance costs arising from participating in the labor market and pursuing a

career. Therefore, we expect the channel for improved firm performance and value creation to

be (at least partially) shut down when gender identity levels are high and when the wage

replacement benefits are low. We use the state-level sexism measure of Charles et al. (2018)

to proxy for local gender identity norms that affect women's career aspirations and find that

the effect of PFL laws concentrates in firms located in low-sexism states. These results are

reported in Internet Appendix Table IA2 and suggest that talent allocation improves when the

social environment of women is characterized by lower levels of gender identity that

encourages them to remain in the labor force.

     By increasing the probability that a woman returns to the same employer following the

birth of her child, maternity leave policies may help raise women's pay and narrow the well-

documented and significant wage gap between female workers with children and those without

children (Klerman and Leibowitz, 1997 and Waldfogel, 1998, Bertrand, Goldin and Katz,

2010). This observation leads us to exploit the heterogeneity in PFL laws in terms of wage

replacement terms. We find that the effect of PFL laws on ROA concentrates in firms with

more generous PFL benefits (see Internet Appendix Table IA2). One caveat with these tests is

the strong overlap between high benefit and low sexism states as California firms both operate


18
  In unreported results, we ensure that the documented improved operating performance is not the result of firms
decreasing in size following the passage of the laws. We calculate ROA using lagged assets and our results are
unchanged. Moreover, we also check and find no reduction in total firm-level wage expense post PFL, ruling out
the possibility that improved performance is due to reductions in wage bill after the law.
                                                        13
in a low sexism environment and provide more generous wage replacement terms. We

circumvent this caveat and provide evidence on heterogeneous effects using establishment-

level data in section 4.2.

     We test for the robustness of our main results in three ways and report the results in Internet

Appendix Table IA3. First, one potential concern is the possibility that the state of California

drives our findings. As being the largest and the first treated state in our sample, California is

important; we show in column 1 that our main findings on profitability effects of PFL hold

when we drop California from the sample. The coefficient on the PFL dummy drops by about

half, as expected; but it is still economically and statistically significant. Second, we show the

robustness of our main results to adding back penny stocks in Column 2. The PrePFL dummy

remains statistically not different from zero. Finally, empirical tests based on PFL laws

alleviate endogeneity concerns as they are passed by states. However, to support our main

findings on PFL-treated firms, we run placebo tests in which we artificially replace firms

headquartered in California, New Jersey, Rhode Island, and New York with firms

headquartered in states of similar sizes and population ­ i.e., in Texas, Pennsylvania, New

Hampshire, and Florida, respectively. Results are reported in Column 3 of Internet Appendix

Table IA3. We do not observe any significant treatment effect in the placebo test.

3.2. Long-Run Abnormal Returns

We next investigate whether PFL laws have created value for treated firms' shareholders by

estimating long-run stock returns of treated firms headquartered in states that enacted a PFL

act. These tests are based on enactment dates of PFL laws and use data from all seven states

(i.e., California, Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island and

Washington). 19 We focus on enactment dates rather than effective dates as stock prices should


19
  We do not run an event-study test using announcement returns because the exact day of the announcement is
uncertain as there are generally indications earlier that the law would be enacted, which makes the calculation of
announcement returns challenging. Moreover, since there is no consensus on public opinion and research on the
effect of PFL for firms, markets may need some time to observe the effect on employees and firms.
                                                         14
incorporate any positive or negative effects anticipated starting on enactment dates at the latest.

A side benefit of this approach is to be able to include a larger number of states in these

analyses. Buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) for six- and twelve-month windows

following the passage of the state-level laws are calculated for treated firms, following Barber

and Lyon (1997). Specifically, the BHARs are the sum of the differences between the firm's

monthly stock return and the return for its matching size, book-to-market, and momentum

portfolio across a six-month or twelve-month forward-looking window. We then run t-tests for

the statistical significance of the mean in the sample of all treated firms. Table 4 shows that the

BHARs for the six and twelve-month event windows are 2.36%, and 5.62%, respectively, and

are both statistically significant. 20 These results reinforce our findings as they show that paid-

leave benefits are associated with larger firm value and are thus beneficial to shareholders.

     In Internet Appendix Table IA4 we provide additional market-based evidence on the

benefits of paid family leave using the lists of best companies for working mothers and conduct

an exercise à la Edmans (2011). Specifically, we first manually collect the lists of the Best

Companies for Working Mothers in America. These lists are created by Working Mother (WM)

magazine based on the quality of firms' work environment and the extent to which it is

conducive to alleviating frictions in labor market decisions for women. We then study the stock

performance of these firms. In particular, we follow the same methodology as Edmans (2011)

to construct portfolios based on the lists and hold them for twelve months. Using the four-

factor model (Fama-French three factors plus momentum), we find equal and value-weighted

monthly alphas of 20 to 34 bps above the risk-free rate and 21 to 23 bps above industry returns.

Using the five-factor model (which further includes the liquidity factor), we find equal and

value-weighted monthly alphas of 24 to 38 bps above the risk-free rate and 21 to 23 bps above


20
  In an unreported robustness test, we also calculate monthly average abnormal returns (AAR) using the same
matching benchmark (Fama 1998). The monthly AARs for the six-month and twelve-month windows are 0.62%
and 0.75%, respectively, which are both statistically significant at the 1% level and comparable to the
corresponding BHARs.
                                                      15
industry returns. Overall, these findings support the conjecture that firms attenuating frictions

for working mothers are rewarded by the market. Moreover, while firms are rewarded for

promoting the success of women in the workplace, they are penalized for impeding it. In

Internet Appendix Table IA5 we report negative abnormal returns for firms subject to

discrimination lawsuits.

3.3. Exploring the Levers of Improved Performance

Having established that PFL laws help treated firms improve their operating performance, we

now explore potential mechanisms. Thus far, we have drawn our arguments from the literature

for the reasons why such a benefit might arise. In particular, the literature has found that PFL

increases workers' likelihood of returning to the same employer (Waldfogel, 1998) and

increases the hours worked and wages of female employees (Rossin-Slater et al., 2013).

Duchini and Van Effenterre (2017) show that women's career aspirations increased following

the lifting of constraints that artificially inflated their demand for flexible work. In this section,

we directly test for evidence that these outcomes at the individual level map into tangible

corresponding firm-level measures.

3.3.1. PFL and Employee Turnover

Figure 3 uses job-to-job Census data to plot the fraction of women (aged 22 to 44) who leave

their employers in California and its three neighboring states (Arizona, Nevada, and Oregon)

in years around the adoption of the California PFL law in 2004. California is the first state to

have enacted a PFL law and focusing on California also allows us to compare a few years

before and after the enactment of the law. While this fraction was about 3.2% in California in

2001 (slightly higher than in neighboring states), in 2007 it had declined by 14% to 2.8%. In

contrast, neighboring states had not experienced such a decline. The job-to-job Census data

thus shows preliminary evidence at the state level that is consistent with the passage of a PFL

law reducing the turnover of female workers.


                                                   16
   We formally test whether treated firms experienced a reduction in employee turnover

following the implementation of PFL laws. Our proxy for employee turnover follows Carter

and Lynch (2004). It is the percent of options forfeited (at the firm level) scaled by the total

options outstanding, which is strongly correlated with actual industry-level employee turnover

(see Section 2 for more detailed evidence motivating the use of this proxy). We define a dummy

variable High Turnover, which equals one for firms with above-median employee turnover in

a given year and zero otherwise. Because the data needed from Compustat starts in 2004, this

test does not capture the effect for California firms. DiD analysis results are reported in Table

5 and show that the implementation of PFL laws reduces by 5.8% the likelihood that treated

firms experience high employee turnover. These results confirm the findings by Bedard and

Rossin-Slater (2016) who use administrative data from the California Employment

Development Department and document a decrease in employee turnover and wage bill per

worker for firms following the adoption of California PFL. Our results support the idea that

the documented treatment effect of PFL laws on firm performance arises at least in part through

a reduction of costly employee turnover.

3.3.2. PFL and Female Executive Officers

We next turn to studying how PFL affects female executive careers. Bertrand, Goldin and Katz

(2010) study the careers of MBAs who graduated between 1990 and 2006 from the Graduate

School of Business of the University of Chicago and show that the presence of children is the

main contributor to the lesser job experience, greater career discontinuity and shorter work

hours for female MBAs. Appelbaum et al. (2011) show that women with higher levels of

education and income file for PFL benefits at a higher rate. In addition, Waldfogel (1997b)

reports that controlling for cohorts, education, and other factors, female labor market outcomes

improve for those taking PFL vis-à-vis those who do not. We are interested in shedding light

on the implications of these individual level findings for firms. Yavorsky et al. (2015) use time


                                                 17
diaries and survey data for highly educated, dual-earning U.S. couples. They show that gender

differences in unpaid work is at its peak for couples with young children and that survey data

underestimates the actual gap. Using American Time Use Survey data, Bertrand et al. (2015)

find that the gap in home production is largest for couples in which the wife earns more than

the husband. What these studies suggest is that the set of working mothers whose contribution

to home production and identity dissonance costs are sufficiently low to not interrupt their

career, is a small set.

      We conjecture that the small size of this set contributes to the gender gap in C-suites.

We argue that PFL laws may have the potential to expand this set by lowering labor market

frictions for women. More specifically, PFL can signal a shift in culture and work environment

for working mothers and allows them to maintain their career aspirations by providing a path

back to work at a time when their identity dissonance costs (see theoretical framework in

Appendix A) are sufficiently low. Therefore, PFL can fundamentally alter the types of jobs

women pursue and facilitate the convergence of occupational distribution between men and

women. Importantly, paid leave can contribute to feeding the female executive talent pipeline,

not only because it is paid leave, but because it de jure institutionalizes taking time off, and

thus changes norms (Pareto, 1920). We study the effect of PFL laws on the fraction of female

named executive officers (NEOs) who are below the median age for female executives (51).

    Table 6 shows the DiD analysis of the treatment effect of PFL law implementation on the

fraction of female NEOs. Our estimates in specification 2 indicate that the implementation of

PFL laws is associated with a significant increase in the fraction of female top executives who

are 51 years old (sample median) or younger, which corresponds to 14% of the standard

deviation. Our findings are especially important in a context in which firms are pressured to

hire more women on their executive teams and boards. Indeed, such pressure raises an

equilibrium question related to the female talent pipeline. By reducing labor market frictions


                                                18
and facilitating women's path to C-suite careers, paid leave policies have the potential of

augmenting the pool of highly skilled talent needed to fill top executive positions. From firms'

vantage point, this represents an important opportunity.

   In addition, the literature has shown that women in leadership positions cultivate female-

friendly culture (Tate and Yang, 2015). To the extent that a female-friendly culture is

conducive to attracting a broader pool of female talent, this represents an externality that can

contribute to the performance gains we document.



4. PFL and Performance: Employee Location and Establishment-level Evidence

In this section, we continue to explore the effects of PFL using establishment-level data. The

state of corporate headquarters provides a good indication for whether firms are subject to PFL

laws. However, a firm could potentially be headquartered in a non-treated state and still have

the bulk of its employees in treated states, or vice-versa. We therefore use an alternative

estimation strategy by constructing a measure of effective exposure to PFL laws using

employee location data. We first repeat our main tests with this measure. Then we exploit the

establishment-level data further by documenting the effect of PFL on establishment

productivity, which helps us understand and interpret better the findings documented in the

previous section. Moreover, the establishment-level data also allow us to study the productivity

of private firms.

4.1. Operating Performance: Evidence from Employee Location Data

We construct our measure of effective exposure using detailed establishment-level data, and

include it in our tests for the public firms in our sample first. Specifically, for each firm we

define our main independent variable, PFL_PctEmp, as the fraction of its employees working

in states where a PFL law will be effective in the following year (i.e. we use the number of

employees one year prior to the implementation of a PFL law). It equals zero for all firms prior


                                                19
to PFL laws and switches to this continuous exposure measure for firms operating a treated

state once PFL laws are in place. We use employees' locations prior to the implementation of

the law to avoid picking up the potential effect of labor migration in response to the law. We

replace our headquarter-based treatment dummy by PFL_PctEmp in our baseline regressions.

There are 2,625 treated firms in these tests. Results are reported in Table 7 and confirm that

operating performance increases with the fraction of employees working in states with a PFL

law. Using estimates in specification 3, a one standard deviation increase in PFL_PctEmp is

associated with an increase in ROA that represents 4% of the standard deviation

((23.2%×0.030)/17.4%).

4.2. The Heterogeneous Impact of PFL Laws: Evidence from Employee Location Data

and Workforce Demographics

If firms have a broader access to female talent due to the enactment of a PFL law and this

increases their performance, this suggests that we should observe a stronger effect for firms

operating in areas with more women of childbearing age. In this section, we provide evidence

on the heterogeneous impact of PFL laws arising from workforce demographics heterogeneity

and identity dissonance costs heterogeneity. We use establishment-level employee location

data rather than the firm HQ-level data that we used in Section 3. In this way, we can utilize

county-level differences in conjunction with the fraction of employees in a given county or

state. We hypothesize that the effect of PFL laws on firm performance should be muted where

and when the channel for improved performance is (partially) shut down.

4.2.1. Fraction of Women of Childbearing Age

We match county-level demographics data with the establishment data to construct a firm-year

level proxy for the fraction of female employees aged twenty to forty. 21 For each firm-year,



21
  We obtain similar results with different age cutoffs (for example, 20-45 years old). Unfortunately, the data does
not allow us to have exactly the same cutoff as the one the Figure 3 uses from Job-to-Job census data set (i.e.,
ages of 22-44).
                                                          20
we multiply each county's fraction of women of childbearing age by the firm's fraction of

employees in that county, and then sum them up across all counties where the firm has

employees. This captures the potentiality to hire women of childbearing age at the firm-year

level. We define a dummy variable "High women 20-40" ("Low women 20-40") that equals

one if a firm has above-median (below-median) potentiality to hire women of childbearing age

in a year and zero otherwise. We then multiply High women 20-40 (Low women 20-40) by the

firm's exposure to PFL laws (PFL_PctEmp) to construct PFL_PctEmp(High women 20-40)

and PFL_PctEmp(Low women 20-40).

   We conjecture that the channels through which PFL affects firm performance are most

effective for firms with high exposure to the law combined with high potentiality to hire women

of childbearing age. We perform this analysis in specification 1 in Table 8. Our results indicate

that this is indeed the case. The coefficient on PFL_PctEmp(High women 20-40) is positive

and statistically significant at the 1% level, while the coefficient on PFL_PctEmp(Low women

20-40)is not statistically different from zero.

4.2.2. Identity Dissonance Costs

In this section, we use county-level religiosity -- the rate of adherence to any religion per 1,000

people as of 2010 -- as a proxy for the local level of gender identity. Religiosity is associated

with less favorable institutions and attitudes towards working women (see Guiso et al. 2003,

Algan et al, 2004 and Fortin, 2005). For this reason, we conjecture that women in high

religiosity areas on average will be less likely to go back to work and retain career aspirations

after having children, as they face higher identity dissonance costs. Alternatively, PFL could

help women in religious areas to overcome the biases and dissonance costs to a larger extent.

This is less likely to be the case when religiosity is very high though, as high religiosity

arguably has fundamental effects on individuals' decisions which make pecuniary factors

second-order. In our analyses we focus on the top quartile of religiosity so that identity


                                                  21
dissonance costs are sufficiently high to shut this potential channel down. Therefore, we expect

firms with employees located in high religiosity areas to benefit less from PFL as the channel

for performance gains is partially muted. 22

     The way in which we test for this hypothesis mirrors the one we use for the fraction of

women of childbearing age. For each firm-year, we multiply each county's religiosity measure

by the firm's fraction of employees in that county, and then sum them up across all counties

where the firm has employees. We define a dummy variable "High religiosity" ("Low

religiosity") that equals one if a firm's religiosity measure is above (below) the median in a

year. We interact each of these two dummy variables by the firm's exposure to PFL laws in

order to construct PFL_PctEmp(High religiosity) and PFL_PctEmp(Low religiosity).

Specification 2 in Table 8 shows that the effect of PFL on firm performance is driven by firms

with employees in counties with low religiosity, which is consistent with the hypothesis

derived from our identity-based framework of talent allocation.

4.3. Productivity: Evidence from Establishment-level Data

4.3.1. Evidence from Neighbor Counties

Our establishment-level data from 1997-2018 allows us to test whether the productivity of

establishments was affected following the implementation of PFL programs in California, New

Jersey and Rhode Island. Our proxy for establishment-level productivity is the log of

establishment revenues scaled by the number of employees at that location. 23 Because we

know where each establishment is located, we can control for locality conditions via locality

fixed effects.




22
   An alternative explanation for the effect to be muted in those more religious areas could be that in regions with
greater religiosity there is a lower level of female education in certain subjects (e.g., in STEM). This may lead to
a limited supply of "qualified" women for relevant jobs in the first place. This alternative supply-side explanation
speaks to a slightly different channel but is consistent with higher identity dissonance costs in those areas.
23
   The Infogroup data provides sales (revenues) and number of employees, but not other financial or operational
data, at the establishment level.
                                                          22
   In Table 9, specifications 1 and 2 are designed to test whether the average change in

productivity following the implementation of PFL in treated establishments is different from

that in neighbor non-treated establishments. For each treated state, we select neighbor counties

in two non-treated states (see Panel A, Figure 4). There are 13,016 establishments in these

treated counties. Note that these establishments are located in treated counties that border two

counties from two different untreated states. Establishments in contiguous neighbor counties

on the other side of the state border are our control group in this test. We use locality fixed

effects to control for local economic and demographic conditions; In this way, we compare

treated establishments with control establishments in the adjacent counties. For example, all

counties on both sides of the California border represent one locality cluster. We also include

industry-year fixed effects. We find that the productivity of establishments in treated counties

significantly increases by 4.6% to 5.7% relative to those in neighbor control establishments.

   In specifications 3 and 4, we expand our definition of localities and consider all

establishments in counties that share a border with a treated state as control establishments

(Panel B, Figure 4). The 49,431 treated establishments are those in counties along the treated

state's border. As previously, we use locality cluster fixed effects and industry-year fixed

effects. In specification 4, where we control for county-level median wage and urbanization,

our estimated average local treatment effect implies that treated establishments experience a

significant 5.5% increase in productivity, compared with non-treated establishments in the

cluster. Our estimates of the average treatment effect are stable across specifications.

4.3.2. Private and Publicly-traded Firms

We continue our investigation of establishments' productivity following PFL acts and examine

whether there exist differential effects for private and public firms. Participation rates in PFL

programs are lower in smaller firms (see Appelbaum et al. 2011 among others), potentially

because of lower levels of awareness of the availability of PFL programs. It is plausible that


                                                 23
employees of publicly-traded companies have better knowledge of PFL availability than those

in private firms. We study the effect of PFL on productivity for establishments of all public

and private firms that are available in our sample, and we report the results in Table 10. The

first column presents the productivity result for the entire sample of establishments, including

that of both private and public firms. The coefficient on the PFL dummy is both statistically

and economically significant and the coefficient on the PrePFL dummy is not statistically

different from zero. In the second column, we add an interaction term between the PFL dummy

and an indicator variable for public firms to examine whether the post-PFL improvement is

limited to public firms, as the costs of providing PFL benefits are more likely to affect private

firms disproportionately. All specifications include establishment and year fixed effects. We

find that both types of establishments experience productivity gains following the adoption of

PFL acts. The productivity for private firms increases by 4.6%. However, the effect is stronger

for establishments of publicly-traded companies, with an incremental effect of 5.3% as

identified by the interaction term. Overall, we find that establishments of public firms

experience larger productivity gains. Note that, in unreported tests, we get similar results when

we constrain the public sample to the establishments of public firms headquartered in non-PFL

states.

    Finally, we run robustness tests that mirror our analysis in Section 3 using HQ-based

evidence. We report results in Internet Appendix Table IA6. First, we run our productivity tests

at the establishment level excluding establishments in California, which is the largest and the

first treated state in our sample. Column 1, shows that our main findings on productivity effects

of PFL hold when we drop California from the sample. Second, we run a placebo test in which

we artificially replace establishments in California, New Jersey, Rhode Island, and New York

with establishments in Texas, Pennsylvania, New Hampshire, and Florida, respectively.




                                                 24
Results are reported in Column 2. We confirm that we do not observe any significant treatment

effect in these placebo tests.



5. Concluding Remarks

Improved talent allocation facilitated by lowered frictions to female's labor force participation

has been essential to U.S. GDP growth over the past fifty years (Hsieh et al., 2019). Yet

significant frictions remain for women that distort their labor market decisions. Using a micro

lens, we examine the extent to which alleviating these frictions affects how firms perform. We

do so by studying how providing PFL benefits changes firm-level outcomes using a large

sample of private and publicly-traded firms. On the one hand, providing paid leave to

employees may be costly for firms, in part because they have to accommodate and be flexible

during the employees' absence. 24 On the other hand, employee benefits help recruit and retain

highly qualified employees, which may be especially crucial for firms in competitive labor

markets. Using the staggered adoption of PFL laws by states in the U.S., we find evidence

consistent with PFL having a net positive effect on firm outcomes. Our difference-in-

differences methodology supports a causal interpretation of our findings. 25 Multiple pieces of

evidence reveal that the effect is stronger for firms more exposed to the laws and firms whose

workforce is more likely to utilize and benefit from PFL. We find that providing paid leave

benefits allows firms to reduce costly employee turnover, increase productivity, and facilitate

the nomination of women to executive positions.




24
   Most state PFL laws are exclusively funded by employees. Using surveys, Appelbaum and Milkman (2011)
find that firms incurred almost no additional costs following the implementation of California's PFL program as
most firms simply temporarily passed the work on to other employees. To the extent that employees who do not
intend to benefit from PFL subsidize those who do, our results can be interpreted as the net effect of attracting
and retaining workers who intend to benefit from PFL and potentially driving away those who refuse to subsidize
them.
25
   Our approach based on DiD is naturally subject to applicability limitations, as highlighted in Welch (2015) and
Khan and Whited (2018). As such, extrapolating to predictions about future interventions can only be made under
certain assumptions, although the staggered state-level laws in our setting partly mitigate this concern.
                                                         25
     Our findings on the favorable firm-level outcomes following the implementation of state

laws may inform the debate on the introduction of national paid leave benefits. 26 One important

concern associated with mandated PFL benefits is that they would hurt those who belong to

the targeted group, women of childbearing age. The concern is that employers would screen

them out during the hiring process to look for workers with lower benefit costs, or be less likely

to promote them. Anti-discrimination laws somewhat mitigate this concern by increasing the

cost to firms that discriminate during either the hiring or promotion process. More importantly,

however, empirical studies confirm that female labor outcomes improve following the

implementation of maternity leave programs (Waldfogel et al., 1998, Ruhm, 1998, Rossin-

Slater et al., 2013, Appelbaum et al., 2009, Byker, 2016, and Rossin-Slater, 2017). Offering

paternity leave benefits could further help mitigate discrimination concerns and under certain

conditions could help reduce the gender gap in unpaid work. 27

     Our findings raise the question why firms do not provide paid benefits themselves if it is

value increasing. Although the number of firms providing paid leave has significantly

increased over the past decade, there are several potential explanations why most firms still do

not. The first draws on the observation that the benefits of paid leave may not be part of

managers' information set. It is plausible that firms are largely unaware of the benefits PFL

engender. Specifically, they may have concerns about female employees' use of paid leave

benefits and may not fully understand ex ante the association between paid leave benefits and

firm outcomes. While the costs of paid leave are relatively straightforward to estimate, the

benefits are particularly hard to quantify. This observation raises a key issue: if managers

cannot estimate the net present value (NPV) of paid leave, they cannot justify implementing it

as a policy (see Edmans, 2020). Therefore, only the set of firms that do not solely rely on an


26
   Related literature discussing the pros and cons of mandated benefits relative to government tax collections
includes Summers (1979) and Gruber (1994).
27
   It is important to note however that in academic settings, gender parity in paid leave policies at universities has
notoriously had negative consequences for women (Antecol, Bedard and Stearns, 2018).
                                                           26
NPV rule for their investment decisions would consider implementing paid leave. 28 Second,

female employees may have concerns about the expected payoffs to their efforts, such as the

potential for promotions. The lack of coordination between firms and female employees can

lead to a prisoner's dilemma that obstructs the voluntary adoption by firms of supportive

policies for female employees. Using employers survey data, Appelbaum et al. (2011) show

that prior to the implementation of the law, employers in California were concerned about

adverse selection and the possibility that PFL benefits take-up rates would be very high. They

find, however, that PFL had not negatively affected their operations. Instead, 89% of employers

reported a "positive effect" or "no noticeable effect" on productivity. Therefore, it appears that

for California firms, adverse selection has not been a first-order issue and the net effect of

California's PFL law has been positive.

     Whether privately offered benefits will be maintained when the labor market shifts and

unemployment rises is an open question. As Summers (1989) writes, externality arguments can

be used to justify mandated benefits. Hsieh et al. (2019) shows that the reallocation of talent

that arose from the lowering of occupational frictions over the past fifty years was instrumental

for economic growth. Our findings suggest that PFL promotes economic growth via improved

operating efficiency. 29 It may thus be pertinent not to leave PFL benefits up to firms entirely,

given that their incentives to offer these benefits may shift with the competitiveness of the labor

market. The severity of adverse selection concerns may fluctuate with unemployment rates.

     As firms face mounting pressure to improve female representation on their executive teams,

the increase in female executives following the implementation of PFL laws may be regarded

as a positive externality. Importantly, instead of increasing female representation by creating

frictions, as quotas would do, which can have negative unintended consequences, it would do


28
    See Edmans' blog post about our paper's relevance for his book (Edmans, 2020):
"https://www.growthepie.net/paid-family-leave-improves-firm-productivity/"
29
   Blau and Kahn (2013) argue that the absence of PFL is a fundamental reason why the U.S. has fallen behind in
terms of female labor-force participation relative to other OECD countries.
                                                        27
so by reducing labor market frictions. 30 Therefore, we would like to call attention to the

following point. Given the importance of employment continuity for career outcomes, we

regard the issues surrounding PFL and the fraction of female executives as inherently related.

Overall, although a careful policy analysis ought to consider a range of factors, including costs

to employees (through payroll deductions) and heterogenous effects, our study contributes to

the debate by showing that corporate feminism can be good for business.




30
     See https://www.growthepie.net/paid-family-leave-improves-firm-productivity
                                                         28
References
Adams, Renée, and Daniel Ferreira, 2009. "Women in the boardroom and their impact on governance
and performance." Journal of Financial Economics 94: 291-309.

Adams, Renée, and Patricia Funk, 2012. "Beyond the glass ceiling: Does gender matter?" Management
Science 58/2: 219-235.

Ahern, Kenneth R., and Amy K. Dittmar, 2012. "The changing of the boards: The impact on firm
valuation of mandated female board representation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, no. 1: 137-
197.

Akerlof, George, and Rachel Kranton, 2000. "Economics and Identity," The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 115/3: 715-753

Akerlof, George, and Rachel Kranton, 2005. "Identity and the Economics of Organizations," Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 19(1): 9-32.

Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc, 2006. "Job Protection: The Macho Hypothesis," Oxford Review of
Economics Policy, Vol. 22(3): 390-410.

Altonji, Joseph and Rebec Blank, 1999. "Race and gender in the labor market," in Handbook of Labor
Economics, Ed.1, Vol. 3: 3143-3259.

Antecol, Heather, Kelly Bedard, and Jenna Stearns, 2018 "Equal but Inequitable: Who Benefits from
Gender-Neutral Tenure Clock Stopping Policies?", American Economic Review 108 (9): 2420-41.

Applebaum, Eileen and Ruth Milkman, 2011. "Leaves that Pay: Employer and Worker Experiences
with Paid Family Leave in California," Center for Economic and Policy Research.

Babenko, Ilona, 2009. "Share Repurchases and PayPerformance Sensitivity of Employee
Compensation Contracts," The Journal of Finance, 64: 117-150.

Bailey, Martha J., Tanya S. Byker, Elena Patel, and Shanthi Ramnath, 2019. "The long-term effects of
California's 2004 paid family leave act on women's careers: evidence from U.S. tax data," NBER
Working Paper 26416.

Barber, Brad M., and John D. Lyon, 1997. "Detecting Long-run Abnormal Stock Returns: the Empirical
Power and Specification of Test Statistics," Journal of Financial Economics 43, 341-372.

Barrot, Jean-Noël, and Julien Sauvagnat. "Input Specificity and the Propagation of Idiosyncratic Shocks
in Production Networks." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(3): 1543­1592.

Becker, Gary. 1971. "The Economics of Discrimination," University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Becker, Gary. 1985. "Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division of Labor," Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol. 3, No. 1: 33-58.


                                                    29
Bedard, Kelly and Maya Rossin-Slater, 2016. "The Economic and Social Impacts of Paid Family Leave
in California: Report for the California Employment Development," UC Santa Barbara Working Paper.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004, "How much should we trust
differences-in-differences estimates?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249­275.

Bertrand, Marianne, 2011. "New Perspectives on Gender," in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4B:
1543-1590.

Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Golding and Lawrence Katz, 2010. "Dynamics of the Gender Gap for
Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors," American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 2: 228­255.

Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan, 2015. "Gender Identity and Relative Income
Within Households," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2): 57-614.

Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence Kahn, 2013. "Female Labor Supply: Why Is the United States Falling
Behind?" American Economic Review, 103: 251-56.

Blau, Francine, and Lawrance Kahn, 2017. "The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Explanations,"
Journal of Economic Literature, 55(3): 789-865.

Bordalo, Pedro, Katherine Coffman, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, 2019. "Beliefs about
Gender", American Economic Review, 109/3: 739-773.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Thomas Fujiwara, and Amanda Pallais, 2017. "'Acting Wife': Marriage Market
Incentives and Labor Market Investments." American Economic Review 107/11: 3288-3319.

Byker, Tanya S. 2016. "Paid Parental Leave Laws in the United States: Does Short-Duration Leave
Affect Women's Labor-Force Attachment?" American Economic Review, 106/5: 242-46.

Carter, Mary, and Luann J. Lynch, 2004. "The effect of stock option repricing on employee turnover."
Journal of Accounting and Economics 37: 91-112.

Charles, Kerwin K., Jonathan Guryan, and Jessica Pan, 2018. "The Effects of Sexism on American
Women: The Role of Norms vs. Discrimination." NBER working paper No. 24904.

Compensation & Benefits Review, 1997. What is the cost of employee turnover? Sept/Oct. 1997, p. 17.

Core, John E., and Wayne R. Guay, 2001. "Stock option plans for non-executive employees." Journal
of Financial Economics 61: 253-287.

Costa, D. L., 2000. "From Mill Town to Board Room: The Rise of Women's Paid Labor." Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 14(4), 101-122.

Dagher, Rada, Patricia McGovern and Bryan Dowd, 2014. "Maternity Leave Duration and Postpartum
Mental and Physical Health: Implications for Leave Policies." Journal of Health Politics, Policy and
Law 39 (2): 369-416.
                                                  30
Doidge, Craig, Kathleen Kahle, Andrew Karolyi, and Rene Stulz, 2018. "Eclipse of the Public
Corporation or Eclipse of the Public Markets" Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 30: 8-16.

Duchini, E. and C. VanEffenterre, 2017. "Do women want to work more or more regularly? Evidence
from a natural experiment." Working Paper.

Edmans, Alex, 2011. "Does the stock market fully value intangibles? Employee satisfaction and equity
prices." Journal of Financial Economics 101/3: 621-640.

Edmans, Alex, 2020, "Grow the Pie: How Great Companies Deliver Both Purpose and Profit"
Cambridge University Press.

Egan, Mark, Matvos, Gregor, and Amit Seru, 2017. "When Harry Fired Sally: The Double Standard in
Punishing Misconduct," NBER Working Paper.

Erel, Isil, Léa Stern, Chenhao Tan and Michael Weisbach, 2019. "Selecting Directors Using Machine
Learning." NBER Working Paper 24435.

Ewens, Michael and Richard Townsend, 2019. "Are Early Stage Investors Biased Against Women?"
Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Fama, Eugene F., 1998. "Market Efficiency, Long-term Returns, and Behavioral Finance," Journal of
Financial Economics 49, 283­306.

Fedyk Anastassia and James Hodson, 2019. "Trading on Talent: Human Capital and Firm
Performance", UC Berkeley Working Paper.

Fernandez, Raquel, 2013. "Culture as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force Participation
over a Century." American Economic Review, 103:472-500.

Fitz-enz, J., 1997. It's costly to lose good employees, Workforce, August 1997, pp. 50­51.

Fortin, Nicole, 2005. "Gender Role Attitudes and the Labour-market Outcomes of Women across
OECD Countries." Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Volume 21/ 3: 416­438.

Gates, Melinda, 2019. "The Moment of Lift." Flatiron Books, New York.

Giannetti, Mariassunta and Tracie Y. Wang, 2019. "Public Attention to Gender Equality and the
Demand for Female Directors" Working Paper.

Goldin, C., 2006. "The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and
Family," American Economic Review 96: 1­21.

Gompers, Paul A. and Sophie S. Wang, 2017. "Diversity in innovation," Harvard University Working
Paper.



                                                   31
Goodman-Bacon, A., 2018. "Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Timing." National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 25018.

Gruber, Jonathan, 1994. "The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits," The American Economic
Review 84(3): 622-641.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2003. "People's opium? Religion and economic attitudes."
Journal of Monetary Economics 50: 225-282.

Gul, Ferdinand A., Bin Srinidhi, and Anthony C. Ng, 2011. "Does board gender diversity improve the
informativeness of stock prices?" Journal of Accounting and Economics 51(3): 314-338.

Han, Wen-Jui, Christopher Ruhm and Jane Waldfogel, 2009. "Parental Leave Policies and Parents'
Employment and Leave-Taking," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 28(1): 29­54.

Hebert, Camille, 2019. "Mind the Gap: Gender Stereotypes and Entrepreneur Financing" University of
Tilburg Working Paper.

Hochberg, Yael V., Laura Lindsey, 2010. "Incentives, Targeting, and Firm Performance: An Analysis
of Non-executive Stock Options." Review of Financial Studies 23(11): 4148-4186.

Hsieh, C.-T., E. Hurst, C. Jones, and P. Klenow, 2019. "The Allocation of Talent and U.S. Economic
Growth," Econometrica 87: 1439-1474.

Huang, Jiekun and Darren J. Kisgen, 2013. "Gender and corporate finance: Are male executives
overconfident relative to female executives?" Journal of Financial Economics 108/3: 822-839.

Iacus S., G. King, and G. Porro, 2012. "Causal Inference Without Balance Checking: Coarsened Exact
Matching." Political Analysis, 20(1): 1-24.

Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, 1977. "Some effects of proportions on group life: Skewed sex ratios and
responses to token women." American Journal of Sociology 82/5: 965-990.

Klanter, Jacob, and Arleen Leibowitz, 1997. "Labor Supply Effects of State Maternity Leave
Legistlation", in Blau and Ehrenberg, eds., Gender and Family Issues in the Workplace (NewYork:
Russell Sage Foundation Press).

Murphy, Kevin J., 2003 "Stock-based pay in new economy firms." Journal of Financial Economics 34:
129-147.

Liu, Tim, Christos Makridis, Paige Ouimet, and Elena Simintzi, 2019. "The Distribution of Non-Wage
Benefits: Maternity Benefits and Gender Diversity" University of North Carolina Working Paper.

Olivetti, C. and B. Petrongolo, 2016. "The Evolution of Gender Gaps in Industrialized Economies,"
Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 8: 405-434.

Oyer, Paul, Scott Schaefer, 2005. "Why do some firms give stock options to all

                                                  32
employees?: An empirical examination of alternative theories". Journal of Financial Economics 76:
99-133.

Rossin-Slater Maya, 2017. "Maternity and Family Leave Policy," NBER Working Paper 23069.

Rossin-Slater, Maya, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel, 2013, "The Effects of California's Paid
Family Leave Program on Mothers' Leave-Taking and Subsequent Labor Market Outcomes". Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 32/2:224-245.

Rouen, Ethan, 2020. "Rethinking Measurement of Pay Disparity and its Relation to Firm Performance,"
The Accounting Review 95(1): 343-378.

Serfling, Matthew, 2016. "Firing Costs and Capital Structure Decisions," The Journal of Finance 71(5):
2239-2286.

Sila, Vathunyoo, Angelica Gonzalez, and Jens Hagendorff, 2016. "Women on board: Does boardroom
gender diversity affect firm risk?" Journal of Corporate Finance 36: 26-53.

Stern, Léa, 2019. "Learning About Directors". U. of Washington Working Paper

Summers, Lawrence, 1989. "Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits," The American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings of the 101st Annual Meeting of the AEA 79(2): 177-183.

Tate, Geoffrey and Liu Yang, 2015. "Female leadership and gender equity: Evidence from plant
closure," Journal of Financial Economics 117/1: 77-97.

Timpe, Brenden, 2019, The Long-Run Effects of America's First Paid Maternity Leave Policy,
University of Michigan Working Paper.

Waldfogel, Jane, 1996. "The Impact of the Family and Medical Leave Act on Coverage, Leave-Taking,
Employment, and Earnings," Mimeo, Columbia University.

Waldfogel, Jane, 1997a. "The Wage Effect of Children," American Sociological Review, 62: 209-217.

Waldfogel, Jane, 1997b. "Working Mothers Then and Now: A Cross-Cohort Analysis of the Effects of
Maternity Leave on Women's Pay," in Francine Blau and Ronald Ehrenberg (eds), Gender and Family
Issues in the Workplace, New York: Russell Sage.

Waldfogel, Jane, 1998. "The Family Gap for Young Women in the United States, Britain, and Japan:
Can Maternity Leave Make a Difference?" Journal of Labor Economics 16(3):505-545.

Waldfogel, Jane, 1998. "Understanding the "Family Gap" in Pay for Women with Children," Journal
of Economic Perspectives 12(1):137-156.

Yavorsky, Jill E., Claire M. Kamp Dush and Sarah J. Schoppe-Sullivan, 2015. "The Production of
Inequality: The Gender Division of Labor Across the Transition to Parenthood," J. Marriage Fam.
77(3): 662-679.

                                                   33
Appendix A: An Identity-Based Framework of Talent Allocation

We illustrate distortions in female talent allocation through a theoretical framework. In this framework,
when frictions in the labor market are reduced, talent allocation improves. Lower frictions allow female
workers to have higher aspirations and exert more effort in their future career development, which can
improve firm performance and efficiency. Fewer frictions also allow some women to stay longer at
home after childbirth, which can increase their utility. Both cases improve talent allocation within the
firm.
    Our framework to study the labor force participation and talent allocation for women is inspired by
Akerlof and Kranton (2000 and 2005), who augment the neoclassical utility maximizing framework
with the concept of identity. In their identity utility model, identity describes an agent's social category,
which influences her preferences. Therefore, an agent's decisions depend on her social category. As
her behavior conforms to the ideals of her social category, her utility increases; and, conversely, her
utility decreases as her behavior departs from the ideals ascribed to her social category. Utility functions
and behaviors evolve over time as norms (Pareto, 1920) associated with certain social categories
change. Our framework is also motivated by the findings in Bertrand, Kamenica and Pan (2015). Using
American Time Use Survey data, they report evidence consistent with the view that gender identity
norms help explain economic outcomes, including the distribution of relative income within U.S.
households as well as women's labor force participation.
    The proposed framework highlights the tradeoffs faced by female employees. In our setup, the
talent and abilities are equally distributed across gender. A female worker faces two decisions: whether
to participate in the labor force in a way that utilizes her talent well (i.e., exerting effort [high aspiration]
into her career) and whether to contribute a high or low share of her household's unpaid work. Both
decisions' payoffs are a function of the (dis)utility associated with her social category (i.e., gender).
    In the set of identity-based payoffs specified below, we introduce identity dissonance costs (IDCs)
from participating in the labor force. If the decision to exert extra efforts to advance in her career results
in her moving away from the norms associated with her gender, IDCs will reduce her utility. Similarly,
IDCs may arise if the decision to contribute a low share of her household's unpaid work contradicts the
norms associated with her gender.
    To illustrate the general idea in our framework, we show the identity-based payoff of a female
worker in the following diagram.




                                                         34
where  is labor income and  is the net disutility cost associated with a high share of unpaid work.
  and   are IDCs arising from outside work and from selecting a low share of unpaid work,
respectively.
    This simple setup is useful to illustrate and understand the evolution of the tradeoffs faced by female
workers over the past decades. Several factors have contributed to the increased female labor supply
including educational gains, the contraceptive pill, shifts in labor demands towards industries that favor
female skills, and reduced labor market discrimination (see Bertrand et al., 2015 and Hsieh et al., 2019).
The shift in gender identity norms, as exemplified by the women's liberation movement, has been a key
factor. Moreover, women not only started participating more in the labor market but also shifted their
careers more towards jobs that matched their talent rather than the flexible hours that they offer. Prior
to the 1960s',   was sufficiently high to keep most women from entering the workforce. In addition,
high IDCs associated with a low share of unpaid work -   - meant that most women did not work
outside their home and shouldered a high share of unpaid work, with payoff -:
                                         <     <  
The evolution in gender identity norms decreased   for women. Although   may be low and close
to zero for most women in industrial economies today, there remain significant frictions that prevent
the disappearance of   . Despite women's increased participation in the workforce (Figure 1, Panels
A and B), households' division of labor remains sticky. Akerlof and Kranton (2000) illustrate this by
reporting very low elasticity of men's share of home production relative to their share of outside work.
Women in the United States still assume most unpaid work despite being employed full time (Figure 1,
Panel C). Women in the U.S. still spend on average an extra 90 minutes per day on unpaid work
compared to men. In other words, gender-based social norms with respect to the household division of
labor (Becker, 1965) are slow to evolve. Therefore, resulting identity dissonance costs incurred by
women who choose to contribute a low share of household work are also very persistent. Using
American Time Use Survey data, Bertrand et al. (2015) find that this is especially true for wives who
earn more than their husband. The gap in home production is largest for those couples.



                                                     35
    While the suppression of identity dissonance costs   has coincided with a massive entry of female
workers in the labor market, the persistence of identity dissonance costs associated with a low share of
unpaid work,   , implies that it is still the case that for the majority of women,  <   . Therefore,
most women select the "high share of unpaid work" branch and this is inelastic to any high aspirations
in career development. For these reasons, our discussions of female workers' career ambitions and
talent allocation focus on the high share of unpaid work branch in the above graph.
The main focus of our framework is on female workers with young children. We conjecture that having
a child effectively reintroduces identity dissonance   for women which affect their aspirations in the
labor market. A working mother's identity-based payoffs are as follows:




where  + is the cost of contributing a high share to her household's unpaid work (housework is
augmented with child rearing activities), CC represent childcare costs (we assume that participating in
                                                                                  +
the labor market generates childcare costs while not participating does not), and   captures identity
dissonance costs for working mothers. The labor force participation condition can be expressed as:
                                                +
                                           -  > 
i.e. net income must exceed their IDCs arising from pursuing a career.
        When frictions are reduced, the labor force participation condition above is more likely to be
satisfied. Women are more likely to exert more effort, show higher career inspirations, and hence
contribute more to improve firm performance. Because the labor force participation condition above
will not be satisfied for women with high IDCs, we expect the heterogeneity in IDCs to lead to
variations in the effect on firm performance.




                                                    36
Appendix B: Variable Definitions

% Young Female NEOs      the fraction of women listed as top executive officer under
                         the age of 51 (Execucomp) in the next year

% Urban                  the percentage of the county population living in urban areas
                         as of the 2010 census

Benefit Dollars          the maximum weekly benefit amount (in dollars) offered by
                         a state PFL Law

Cash/Assets              cash and short-term investments scaled by the book value of
                         total assets

Debt/Assets              short-term and long-term debt scaled by the book value of
                         total assets

High Turnover            dummy variable equal to one if a firm's employee turnover
                         in the next year is above the annual median and zero
                         otherwise, where the employee turnover is measured by the
                         percent of options forfeited (at the firm level) scaled by the
                         total options outstanding, à la Carter and Lynch (2004)
                         (Compustat)

Income/Capita            personal income of a given county divided by the resident
                         population of the area; the variable varies across time

Log(Assets)              the natural log of (total) book assets


Log(Revenue/Employees)   the natural log of establishment revenues scaled by
                         establishment number of employees (Infogroup) in the next
                         year

Mean(%Women20-40)        the firm-level weighted average fraction of women aged 20
                         to 40 for firms with employees located in treated states,
                         where the weights are based on the fraction of the firm's
                         employees in each county (Census Bureau)

PFL_Establishment        dummy variable equal to one if an establishment is located
                         in a state that has a Paid Family Leave Law in place and zero
                         otherwise

PFL_HQ                   dummy variable equal to one if a firm is headquartered in a
                         state that has a Paid Family Leave Law in place and zero
                         otherwise

PFL_PctEmp               equals zero for all firms prior to PFL laws and switches to a
                         continuous measure of exposure once the PFL laws become
                         effective: the percentage of employees (as of the year prior
                         to the law) located in states in which PFL laws are in place
PFL_PctEmp(High women 20-40)
                        equal to PFL_PctEmp if the firm's weighted average county-
                        level percent of females aged 20-40 is above the annual
                        median, zero otherwise. It is equal to zero for firms without
                        employees in treated states. Weights are based on where the
                        firm's employees are located.

PFL_PctEmp(Low women 20-40)
                       equal to PFL_PctEmp if the firm's weighted average county-
                       level percent of females aged 20-40 is below the annual
                       median, zero otherwise. It is equal to zero for firms without
                       employees in treated states. Weights are based on where the
                       firm's employees are located.

PFL_PctEmp(High religiosity) equal to PFL_PctEmp if the firm's weighted average
                           county-level percent of religious adherents is above the
                           annual median, zero otherwise. It is equal to zero for firms
                           without employees in treated states. Weights are based on
                           where the firm's employees are located. (ARDA)

PFL_PctEmp(Low religiosity)   equal to PFL_PctEmp if the firm's weighted average
                          county-level percent of religious adherents is below the
                          annual median, zero otherwise. It is equal to zero for firms
                          without employees in treated states. Weights are based on
                          where the firm's employees are located. (ARDA)

PrePFL                       dummy variable equal to one if a firm is headquartered in a
                             state that will pass a PFL law in the following three years and
                             zero otherwise

Public                       dummy variable equal to one if a firm is publicly traded and
                             zero otherwise

Religion                     portion of a county's residents that are congregational
                             adherents of any religion who regularly attend religious
                             services

ROA                          net income scaled by total book assets in the following year

Sexism                       an integer value based on states' level of sexism using data
                             from Charles et al. (2018) which relies on General Social
                             Survey (GSS)

Tobin's Q                    the sum of total assets plus market value of equity minus
                             book value of equity divided by the book value of total assets




                                             38
Figure 1. Women in the Workplace and Unpaid Work
This figure contains three panels on time series statistics of women's labor force participation
and share of housework (unpaid work) in the United States. In Panel A, women's labor force
participation is plotted across time (1975-2016) by the age of their youngest child. Panel B plots
the annual average of the labor force participation rate for women of ages 25-64 across time
(1948-2016). The data for both panels are from Current Population Survey of the U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics. In Panel C, the World Bank data is used to present the share of housework
(Unpaid Work), as measured by the number of hours per day, for men and women between
2003 and 2016.

Panel A: Labor Force Participation Rate of Mothers by Age of Youngest Child
           90

           80

           70

           60

           50                                  Youngest child under 18 years
                                               Youngest child between 6 and 17 years
           40                                  Youngest child under 6 years
                                               Youngest child under 3 years
           30
                 1975
                 1977
                 1979
                 1981
                 1983
                 1985
                 1987
                 1989
                 1991
                 1993
                 1995
                 1997
                 1999
                 2001
                 2003
                 2005
                 2007
                 2009
                 2011
                 2013
                 2015
Panel B: Labor Force Participation Rate of Women Age 25-64
            80
            70
            60
            50
            40
            30
            20
            10
             0
                 1948
                 1951
                 1954
                 1957
                 1960
                 1963
                 1966
                 1969
                 1972
                 1975
                 1978
                 1981
                 1984
                 1987
                 1990
                 1993
                 1996
                 1999
                 2002
                 2005
                 2008
                 2011
                 2014




Panel C: Unpaid Work (Number of Hours per day) by Gender in the United
States
                 4.5
                   4
                 3.5
                   3
                 2.5
                   2                                                                   Women
                 1.5                                                                   Men
                   1
                 0.5
                   0




                                                 39
Figure 2: The Effect of PFL Acts on Operating Performance
This figure reports the effect of the adoption of PFL laws on operating performance. ROA is
regressed on firm size and dummy variables for each year relative to the adoption year, with
firm and year fixed effects. The y-axis plots the coefficient estimates on each year dummy
variable. The last dummy variable is set to one if it has been three or more years since the
adoption of the law and zero otherwise. The x-axis shows the time relative to the adoption of
PFL. The dashed lines correspond to 90% confidence intervals of the coefficient estimates. The
confidence intervals are based on standard errors clustered at the state level.

                       0.03

                       0.02

                       0.01

                         0

                      -0.01

                      -0.02

                      -0.03
                               -3     -2     -1        1   2      3




                                                  40
Figure 3: PFL Acts and Women of Childbearing Age Leaving their Job:
Evidence from Job-to-Job Census Data
This figure reports the fraction of women aged 22 to 44 who were employed at the beginning
of a year but separated from their employer sometime during the year (scaled by the total
number of jobs in the state that year). The treatment state is California and the PFL act was
effective in 2004. The control group includes firms in the three neighbour states, i.e. Arizona,
Nevada, and Oregon. The data is from the Job-to-Job Census database.

                                      CA         AZ/NV/OR
                   0.033

                   0.032

                   0.031

                    0.03

                   0.029

                   0.028

                   0.027
                       2001    2002    2003    2004    2005    2006    2007




                                                41
Figure 4: Treated and Control Establishments in Neighbor Counties

This figure illustrates the adjacent counties used for the establishment-level productivity tests
in Section 4.3.1. Panel A (B) is for Specifications 1 and 2 (3 and 4) in Table 9.

Panel A




Panel B




                                                 42
Table 1: States with Paid Family Leave (PFL) Acts

This table reports enactment and effective years of PFL laws in relevant U.S. states.



 State                                  Year Enacted                   Year Effective
 California                                   2002                           2004
 New Jersey                                   2008                           2009
 Rhode Island                                 2013                           2014
 New York                                     2016                           2018
 DC                                           2017                           2020
 Washington                                   2017                           2020
 Massachusetts                                2018                           2021




                                                43
Table 2: Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for state, country, firm and establishment-level variables.
The sample for variables at the firm-year level consists of firms in Compustat for the years
1996­2019, except for Turnover, which is available only starting in 2004. The sample for
variables at the establishment-year level consists of firms in Infogroup from 1997-2018.
Variables (except dummies) are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile values. PFL_HQ is a
dummy variable equal to one if a firm is headquartered in a state with a paid family leave act
in place and zero otherwise. PFL_PctEmp is the fraction of a firm's employees in states
adopting PFL acts the year prior to the PFL law adoption. PFL_Establishment is a dummy
variable equal to one if an establishment is in a state with a PFL act in place and zero otherwise.
Variable definitions and sources are in Appendix B.
 Variable                        Mean        SD         p25       p50        p75               N

 Firm-Year

 PFL_HQ                          0.072      0.258         0        0          0          138,486
 PFL_PctEmp                      0.094      0.232         0        0        0.043         42,438
 ROA                             -0.002     0.174      -0.001    0.028      0.068        154,210
 Log(Assets)                     6.346      2.213      4.821     6.284      7.824        154,210
 Tobin's Q                       2.109      2.959      1.076     1.409      2.188        126,302
 Cash/Assets                     0.162      0.216      0.021     0.069      0.211        154,069
 Debt/Assets                     0.251      0.265      0.039     0.201      0.375        154,210
 High Turnover                   0.398      0.490         0        0          1           51,425
 % Young Female NEOs             0.022      0.064         0        0          0           46,128
 Sexism                          3.897      1.729         3        4          5          119,756
 Mean (% Women 20-40)            0.140      0.012      0.135     0.141      0.147         18,429
 Religion                        0.461      0.057      0.436     0.458      0.491         18,429

 Establishment Year

 PFL_Establishment               0.091      0.288        0         0          0      10,138,554
 Log(Revenue/Employee)           4.719      1.296      3.832     5.014      5.525    10,138,554




                                                  44
Table 3: PFL Acts and Firm Performance: HQ-based Evidence
This table presents the effect of state paid family leave (PFL) acts on firm performance.
PFL_HQ is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm is headquartered in a state with a PFL act
in place and zero otherwise. PrePFL is a dummy variable equal to one in each of the three years
preceding the implementation of a PFL law and zero otherwise. The sample is from 1996-2019.
All specifications include firm and year fixed effects except specification (4), which includes
industry-year and firm fixed effects. Specification (5) uses a matched sample using Coarsened
Exact Matching. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Variable definitions are in
Appendix B. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                            (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)
 VARIABLES                 ROA           ROA            ROA           ROA            ROA

 PFL_HQ                  0.015***      0.019***      0.018***       0.015***      0.016***
                           [5.38]         [5.20]       [4.69]          [3.69]        [3.69]
 PrePFL                    0.003          0.004         0.002          0.002         0.001
                           [0.93]         [1.30]       [0.47]          [0.49]        [0.14]
 Log(Assets)                           -0.015***     -0.015***      -0.013***     -0.014***
                                         [-5.79]       [-7.57]        [-6.58]       [-8.10]
 Tobin's Q                                           0.006***       0.007***      0.007***
                                                       [4.63]          [4.93]        [5.63]
 Cash/Assets                            -0.016**       -0.002         -0.001        -0.002
                                         [-2.40]       [-0.29]        [-0.11]       [-0.19]
 Debt/Assets                           -0.024***     -0.022***      -0.021***     -0.018***
                                         [-2.83]       [-3.10]        [-3.18]       [-2.73]

 Observations            105,170        105,148        87,976        87,976         69,876
 R-squared                0.589          0.591          0.587         0.596          0.556
 Firm FE                    Y              Y              Y             Y              Y
 Year FE                    Y              Y              Y             N              Y
 Industry-Year FE           N              N              N             Y              N
 Match Strata FE            N              N              N             N              Y




                                                45
Table 4: PFL and Long-Run BHARs: HQ-based Evidence

This table presents buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) following state PFL law passage
dates. Long-term BHARs are calculated following Barber and Lyon (1997): BHARs are
calculated as the sum of the differences between the firm's monthly stock return and the return
for its matching size, book-to-market, and momentum portfolio across a six-month and one-
year forward-looking time window. The abnormal returns presented in the table are the means
of firms' BHARs. The sample includes firms headquartered in a state adopting a PFL act, which
belong to the interaction between Compustat and CRSP. ***, **, * denote significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

 Window                                     6 Months                        12 Months
 CAR                                         2.36%                            5.62%
 t-statistic                                  1.71*                           2.92***
 # Observations                               1,748                            1,748




                                                46
Table 5: Channels: Employee Turnover
This table presents relations between state paid family leave acts and employee turnover. High
Turnover is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm has employee turnover above the annual
median and zero otherwise, where employee turnover is calculated following Carter and Lynch
(2004) as the percent of options forfeited (at the firm-year level) scaled by the total options
outstanding. PFL_HQ is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm is headquartered in a state
with a paid family leave law in place and zero otherwise. PrePFL is a dummy variable equal to
one in each of the three years preceding the implementation of a PFL law and zero otherwise.
The sample is from Compustat for the years 2004-2019. Firm-level employee option data in
Compustat is only available from 2004. Both specifications include firm and year fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Variable definitions are in Appendix B. ***, **,
* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                         (1)                                 (2)
 VARIABLES                          High Turnover                       High Turnover

 PFL_HQ                                 -0.049**                          -0.058***
                                         [-2.56]                            [-2.99]
 PrePFL                                  -0.011                             -0.026
                                         [-0.69]                            [-1.65]
 Log(Assets)                                                               -0.030**
                                                                            [-2.51]
 Tobin's Q                                                                -0.054***
                                                                            [-8.45]
 Cash/Assets                                                               -0.095**
                                                                            [-2.01]
 Debt/Assets                                                              0.108***
                                                                             [2.85]

 Observations                            37,903                             34,795
 R-squared                                0.394                              0.405
 Firm FE                                    Y                                  Y
 Year FE                                    Y                                  Y




                                                   47
Table 6: Firm culture: Fraction of Female Executives and Firm
Performance
This table shows the effect of PFL acts on the percentage of young female top executives. The
dependent variable, % Young Female NEOs, is the percent of female named executive officers
below the age of 51, which is the sample median. PFL_HQ is a dummy variable equal to one if
a firm is headquartered in a state with a paid family leave law in place and zero otherwise.
PrePFL is a dummy variable equal to one in each of the three years preceding the
implementation of a PFL law and zero otherwise. The sample is from Execucomp for the years
1996-2019. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level. Variable definitions are in Appendix B. ***, **, * denote significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                      (1)                                 (2)
 VARIABLES                    % Young Female NEOs                 % Young Female NEOs

 PFL_HQ                              0.008***                             0.009***
                                       [2.67]                                [2.84]
 PrePFL                                0.003                                 0.004
                                       [1.61]                                [1.65]
 Log(Assets)                                                                -0.002
                                                                            [-1.41]
 Tobin's Q                                                                  -0.000
                                                                            [-1.26]
 Cash/Assets                                                               0.011**
                                                                             [2.14]
 Debt/Assets                                                                 0.008
                                                                             [1.45]

 Observations                          37,081                              35,775
 R-squared                             0.450                               0.447
 Firm FE                                 Y                                   Y
 Year FE                                 Y                                   Y




                                                 48
Table 7: PFL and Operating Performance: Employee Location Evidence
This table presents the effects of state paid family leave (PFL) acts on firm performance, using
establishment level employee location data to capture the firms' exposure to the laws. The
distribution of firms' employees across states is from Infogroup, and the sample is from 1997-
2018. PFL_PctEmp is the fraction of a firm's employees in states with PFL acts in effect,
measured one year prior to the state's PFL Law becoming effective. The odd (even)
specifications include firm and year (firm and industry-year) fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. Variable definitions are in Appendix B. ***, **, * denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)
 VARIABLES                     ROA               ROA              ROA               ROA

 PFL_PctEmp                  0.022***          0.018***         0.030***          0.027***
                               [4.86]            [4.25]            [6.23]            [5.57]
 Log(Assets)                                                    -0.015***         -0.015***
                                                                  [-6.40]           [-6.04]
 Tobin's Q                                                      0.007***          0.007***
                                                                   [3.91]            [4.01]
 Cash/Assets                                                      -0.000             0.001
                                                                  [-0.01]            [0.09]
 Debt/Assets                                                     -0.024**          -0.023**
                                                                  [-2.55]           [-2.58]

 Observations                  42,208           42,208            41,567           41,567
 R-squared                      0.580            0.589             0.593            0.602
 Firm FE                          Y                Y                 Y                Y
 Year FE                          Y                N                 Y                N
 Industry-Year FE                 N                Y                 N                Y




                                                49
Table 8: The Heterogeneous Impact of PFL laws: Employee Location
Evidence
This table presents the heterogeneous effects of state paid family leave (PFL) acts on firm
performance. In specification 1, we combine employee location data from Infogroup with
county-level demographics data from the BEA to construct firm level workforce demographics
variables. Specifically, for each firm-year we multiply each county's fraction of women of
childbearing age (20 to 40 years old) by the firm's fraction of employees in that county, and
then sum them up across all counties where the firm has employees. This captures the
potentiality to hire women of childbearing age at the firm-year level. We define a dummy
variable "High women 20-40" ("Low women 20-40") that equals one if a firm has above-
median (below-median) potentiality to hire women of childbearing age in a year and zero
otherwise. We then multiply High women 20-40 (Low women 20-40) by the firm's exposure
to PFL laws (PFL_PctEmp) to construct PFL_PctEmp(High women 20-40) and
PFL_PctEmp(Low women 20-40). In specification 2, we combine data from the Association of
Religion Data Archives (ARDA) with employee location data. For each firm-year, we multiply
each county's religiosity measure by the firm's fraction of employees in that county, and then
sum them up across all counties where the firm has employees. We define a dummy variable
"High religiosity" ("Low religiosity") that equals one if a firm's religiosity measure is above
(below) the median in a year and zero otherwise. We interact each of these two dummy variables
by the firm's exposure to PFL laws in order to construct PFL_PctEmp(High religiosity) and
PFL_PctEmp(Low religiosity). Both specifications include firm and year fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level. The sample is from 1997-2018. Variable definitions are in
Appendix B. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                            (1)                     (2)
 VARIABLES                                                 ROA                     ROA

 PFL_PctEmp (High women 20-40)                           0.016***
                                                           [4.39]
 PFL_PctEmp (Low women 20-40)                              0.006
                                                           [1.22]
 PFL_PctEmp (High religiosity)                                                     0.002
                                                                                   [0.65]
 PFL_PctEmp (Low religiosity)                                                   0.027***
                                                                                   [3.10]
 Log(Assets)                                            -0.015***               -0.015***
                                                          [-6.32]                 [-6.29]
 Tobin's Q                                              0.007***                0.007***
                                                           [3.90]                  [3.86]
 Cash/Assets                                               0.001                   0.002
                                                           [0.10]                  [0.16]
 Debt/Assets                                             -0.025**                -0.025**
                                                          [-2.61]                 [-2.58]

 Observations                                             41,293                  41,293
 R-squared                                                 0.588                   0.588
 Firm FE                                                     Y                       Y
 Year FE                                                     Y                       Y




                                                 50
Table 9: PFL and Productivity: Establishment-level Evidence
This table uses establishment level data to show the differential effects of PFL on the
productivity of establishments in treated counties relative to that of those in adjacent non-treated
counties. PFL_Establishment is a dummy variable equal to one if an establishment is located in
a state with a PFL act in place and zero otherwise. PrePFL is a dummy variable equal to one in
each of the three years preceding the implementation of a PFL law and zero otherwise. The
sample contains public firm establishments from 1997-2018. All specifications include location
cluster and industry-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Location
cluster fixed effects are based on one of the seven localities in specifications 1 and 2 and on the
treated state borders in specifications 3 and 4 (for example, all counties on both sides of the
California border are one location cluster). See Figure 4, Panels A and B for an illustration of
the counties included in these tests. County level controls include median county-level wage
and the fraction of the county's population that lives in an urban area (from the 2010 Census
Bureau data). Variable definitions are in Appendix B. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                              (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
 VARIABLES               Log(Rev/Emp)       Log(Rev/Emp)       Log(Rev/Emp)       Log(Rev/Emp)
 Location                 7 locations        7 locations        All Borders        All Borders

 PFL_Establishment            0.046*             0.057**           0.056**            0.055***
                               [1.89]             [2.90]             [2.91]             [3.18]
 PrePFL                       -0.038              -0.003            -0.026             -0.024
                              [-1.20]             [-0.16]           [-1.51]            [-1.43]
 % Urban                                       -0.004***                             -0.003***
                                                  [-5.74]                              [-6.21]
 Income/Capita                                  0.300***                                0.004
                                                  [6.79]                                [0.18]

 Observations                358,393            358,393            787,217            787,217
 R-squared                    0.535              0.537              0.526              0.527
 Location Cluster FE            Y                  Y                  Y                  Y
 Industry-Year FE               Y                  Y                  Y                  Y




                                                  51
Table 10: PFL and Productivity in Public and Private Firms:
Establishment-level Evidence
This table uses establishment level data to show the effects of state paid family leave (PFL) acts
on private and public firm efficiency. PFL_Establishment is a dummy variable equal to one if
an establishment is located in a state with a paid family leave act in place and zero otherwise.
PrePFL is a dummy variable equal to one in each of the three years preceding the
implementation of a PFL law and zero otherwise. Public is a dummy variable equal to one if a
firm is publicly traded and zero otherwise. The sample is from 1997-2018. All specifications
include establishment and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
Variable definitions are in Appendix B. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.

                                                       (1)                        (2)
                                                  Log(Rev/Emp)               Log(Rev/Emp)

 PFL_Establishment                                    0.048***                  0.046***
                                                        [4.01]                    [4.03]
 Public × PFL_Establishment                                                     0.047***
                                                                                  [3.00]
 PrePFL                                                0.015                      0.015
                                                       [0.79]                     [0.83]
 Public × PrePFL                                                                  0.012
                                                                                  [0.33]
 Public                                                                          0.009**
                                                                                  [2.05]

 Observations                                      189,315,377                 189,315,377
 # Treated Establishments                           4,746,435                   4,746,435
 R-squared                                            0.944                       0.944
 Establishment FE                                       Y                           Y
 Year FE                                                Y                           Y




                                                 52
                              Internet Appendix

Figure IA1: Dissonance Costs over Time




Note: + is the highest level of identity dissonance costs such that the labor force participation
condition is satisfied. t is the number of weeks after childbirth. The shaded area represents the
fractions of mothers for whom the labor force participation condition is satisfied.




                                                 53
Table IA1: PFL Acts and Firm Performance: Robustness around the
Clustering of Standard Errors
This table presents the effect of state paid family leave (PFL) acts on firm performance. PFL
HQ is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm is headquartered in a state with a PFL act in place
and zero otherwise. PrePFL is a dummy variable equal to one in each of the three years
preceding the implementation of a PFL law and zero otherwise. The sample is from 1996-2019.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level in specifications 1 and 2, at the firm-state level in
specifications 3 and 4 and bootstrapped in specifications 5 and 6. Odd specifications include
firm and year fixed effects while even numbered specifications include firm and industry-year
fixed effects. Variable definitions are in Appendix B. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                      (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)
 VARIABLES           ROA           ROA            ROA             ROA            ROA           ROA

 PFL_HQ            0.018***      0.015***       0.018***        0.015***       0.017***      0.015***
                     [3.14]        [2.73]          [4.75]         [3.78]          [4.82]        [4.21]
 Pre PFL              0.002         0.002          0.002           0.002          0.001         0.001
                     [0.47]        [0.48]          [0.48]         [0.51]          [0.42]        [0.43]
 Log(Assets)       -0.015***     -0.013***      -0.015***       -0.013***      -0.014***     -0.012***
                     [-8.53]       [-7.52]        [-7.85]         [-6.82]       [-11.65]       [-9.73]
 Tobin's Q         0.006***      0.007***       0.006***        0.007***       0.005***      0.006***
                     [6.76]        [6.96]          [4.87]         [5.18]          [6.64]        [6.55]
 Cash/Assets         -0.002        -0.001         -0.002          -0.001         -0.003        -0.002
                     [-0.21]       [-0.07]        [-0.30]         [-0.11]        [-0.49]       [-0.36]
 Debt/Assets       -0.022***     -0.021***      -0.022***       -0.021***      -0.028***     -0.027***
                     [-2.82]       [-2.69]        [-3.09]         [-3.15]        [-5.28]       [-5.00]

 Observations        87,976       87,976         87,976           87,976        90,538        90,538
 R-squared            0.587        0.596          0.587            0.596         0.651         0.659
 Firm FE                Y            Y              Y                Y             Y             Y
 Year FE                Y            N              Y                N             Y             N
 Ind-Year FE            N            Y              N                Y             N             Y
 Cluster              Firm         Firm       Firm + State     Firm + State    Bootstrap     Bootstrap




                                                   54
Table IA2: Heterogeneous Effects of PFL laws: HQ-based Evidence
This table presents the cross-sectional heterogeneity in effects of state paid family leave (PFL)
acts on firm performance. In Column 1 (2), we split the PLF_HQ into two separate high/low
dummy variables that equal to one if a particular state PFL law became effective in a state with
above/below median sexism (wage benefit) and zero otherwise. We use the state-level sexism
measure of Charles et al. (2018). Authors construct these state-level sexism scales based on
questions that elicit beliefs about gender identity from the General Social Survey and find that
higher prevailing sexism lowers women's wages and labor force participation. We define a
dummy variable PFL_HQ(High Sexism) [PFL_HQ(Low Sexism)] equal to one if a firm's
headquarter state has adopted a paid family leave law and sexism is above (below) the median
level and zero otherwise. Given these definitions, firms headquartered in California and Rhode
Island operate in a low sexism environment relative to firms in New York and New Jersey.
Similarly, in Column 2, we define a dummy variable PFL_HQ(High Benefit Dollars)
[PFL_HQ(Low Benefit Dollars)] that equals one if the maximum wage replacement is above
[below] the median in our sample ($700/week) and zero otherwise. California is identified as a
high-benefit state. The sample is from 1996-2019. All specifications include firm and year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Variable definitions are in Appendix B.
***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                             (1)                    (2)
 VARIABLES                                                  ROA                    ROA

 PFL_HQ(High Sexism)                                        0.003
                                                            [0.54]
 PFL_HQ(Low Sexism)                                       0.022***
                                                            [5.86]
 PFL_HQ(High Benefit Dollars)                                                     0.022***
                                                                                    [5.81]
 PFL_HQ(Low Benefit Dollars)                                                        0.004
                                                                                    [0.77]
 Pre PFL                                                    0.002                   0.002
                                                            [0.53]                  [0.54]
 Log(Assets)                                             -0.015***               -0.015***
                                                           [-7.60]                 [-7.60]
 Tobin's Q                                               0.006***                 0.006***
                                                            [4.64]                  [4.64]
 Cash/Assets                                               -0.002                  -0.002
                                                           [-0.28]                 [-0.28]
 Debt/Assets                                             -0.022***               -0.022***
                                                           [-3.12]                 [-3.12]

 Observations                                              87,976                 87,976
 R-squared                                                 0.587                  0.587
 Firm FE                                                     Y                      Y
 Year FE                                                     Y                      Y




                                                 55
Table IA3: Robustness Tests: Firm-level Evidence
This table tests for the robustness of the effect of state paid family leave (PFL) acts on firm
performance using firm-level data. In Column 1, we present our main results excluding
establishments in California from our sample. In Colum 2, we present our main results including
penny stocks. In Column 3, we provide placebo test results in which actual PFL law states
(treated) are randomly replaced with non-PFL law (control) states with similar size and
population. Specifically, firms headquartered in California, New Jersey, Rhode Island, and New
York are replaced with firms headquartered in Texas, Pennsylvania, New Hampshire, and
Florida, respectively. PFL_HQ is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm is headquartered in
a state with a PFL act in place and zero otherwise. PrePFL is a dummy variable equal to one in
each of the three years preceding the implementation of a PFL law and zero otherwise. The
sample is from 1996-2019. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level. Variable definitions are in Appendix B. ***, **, * denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                       (1)                    (2)                   (3)
 VARIABLES                            ROA                    ROA                   ROA

 PFL_HQ                              0.008*               0.019***                 0.002
                                     [1.94]                 [3.17]                 [0.31]
 PrePFL                              0.005                  0.004                  0.006
                                     [1.22]                  [1.33]                 [1.52]
 Log(Assets)                       -0.014***              -0.008***              -0.015***
                                     [-6.89]                [-3.30]                [-7.37]
 Tobin's Q                         0.006***               0.004***                0.006***
                                     [5.46]                  [5.50]                 [4.52]
 Cash/Assets                          0.001               -0.027***                -0.002
                                     [0.12]                 [-3.34]                [-0.39]
 Debt/Assets                       -0.032***                -0.004               -0.021***
                                     [-5.44]                [-0.49]                [-2.99]

 Observations                        76,734                136,588                 87,976
 R-squared                            0.576                 0.555                  0.587
 Firm FE                                Y                     Y                      Y
 Year FE                                Y                     Y                      Y




                                                 56
Table IA4: Abnormal Returns: Working Mother Magazine Portfolio

This table presents coefficient estimates from Newey-West monthly portfolio regressions of "Top 100 Firms for Working Mothers" from 1986 ­ 2016. We
access the list of these firms from the Working Mother (WM) magazine, which publishes an annual list of the best firms for working mothers every October.
We compute excess returns generated by investing in firms that make the' list. On average, 60% of firms on the list are public. To negate announcement
returns, we wait until November to form portfolios of WM firms. Each November, we form a portfolio of WM firms and hold it for twelve months. We follow
Edmans (2011) in calculating alphas. We first subtract either the risk-free rate or the industry average return from the stock returns within the portfolio. We
then regress the portfolio monthly equal and value-weighted returns on the Fama-French 4-factor (FF 3-factor plus momentum) using Newey-West
regressions. Below we present the equal (odd columns) or value (even columns) weighted portfolio return less the risk-free rate (columns 1 ­ 4) or the
industry-matched portfolio return (columns 5 ­ 8). Independent variables include either: the Fama-French 3 factors plus Momentum (columns 1, 2, 5, 6) or
the Fama-French 3 factors plus Momentum and Liquidity (columns 3, 4, 7, 8).

                                     (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)           (7)              (8)
                                 Return EW       Return VW      Return EW         Return VW       Return EW       Return VW     Return EW        Return VW
Excess Return Over                                     Risk Free Rate                                                     Industry

Alpha                             0.0020**        0.0034***        0.0024***          0.0038***    0.0023***       0.0021**       0.0023***       0.0021**
                                     [2.18]          [3.80]           [2.74]             [4.24]       [2.72]         [2.47]          [2.69]          [2.50]
Excess Return on the Market      1.0519***        0.9442***        1.0468***          0.9401***    0.0554***        -0.0095       0.0548***        -0.0099
                                   [45.00]          [40.96]          [50.40]            [42.33]       [2.65]        [-0.42]          [2.66]         [-0.43]
Small-Minus-Big Return            -0.0726**      -0.2525***        -0.0744**         -0.2538***      -0.0172      -0.1885***        -0.0174      -0.1887***
                                    [-2.23]         [-6.84]          [-2.43]            [-7.02]      [-0.72]        [-5.41]         [-0.72]         [-5.42]
High-Minus-Low Return            0.2709***        0.1022**         0.2568***           0.0909**     0.1017**        0.0318         0.1000**         0.0307
                                     [5.56]          [2.31]           [5.50]             [2.04]       [2.26]         [0.91]          [2.32]          [0.86]
Momentum Factor                  -0.1690***       -0.0498**       -0.1689***          -0.0497**   -0.0582***        0.0276        -0.0582***        0.0276
                                    [-6.29]         [-2.21]          [-6.66]            [-2.22]      [-2.63]         [1.29]         [-2.63]          [1.28]
Liquidity                                                         -0.1090***         -0.0866***                                     -0.0133        -0.0086
                                                                     [-4.02]            [-3.43]                                     [-0.43]         [-0.34]

Observations                         350             350              350               350           350             350            350             350




                                                                                57
Table IA5: CARs following Discrimination Lawsuit Announcements

This table presents cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) around firm discrimination lawsuit
announcements. Data is from firms' SEC filings. For Part A, we parse firms' 8-K filings on
lawsuits, between 1996 and 2017, for evidence of gender discrimination, by searching for the
following phrases: sex(ual) discrimination, gender discrimination, pregnancy discrimination,
and pregnant discrimination. To claim our findings are related to litigation, we also ensure one
of the following phrases are included in the filing: lawsuit, litigation, arbitration, legal, judicial,
negotiation, and suit. For Part B, we searched firms' 8-K filings separately for mentions of
"Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" (EEOC) and identified 163 such mentions. The
EEOC has the mission of enforcing civil right laws in support of employees and against
employers. Sexual discrimination charges are one of the leading charges at the EEOC as the
commission has received more than 23,000 sexual discrimination cases per year since 1997.
Long term CARs are calculated following Fama (1998). A firm's CAR is calculated as the sum
of the differences between the firm's monthly stock return and the return for its matching size
and book-to-market portfolio across a six-month and one-year forward-looking time window.
The abnormal returns presented in the table are the means of firms' CARs. ***, **, * denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


Panel A: Sexual/Gender Discrimination Cases

 Window                                      6 months                            1 year
 CAR                                          -1.72%                            -12.80%
 t-stat                                         1.01                             2.41**
 N                                               52                                47

Panel B: EEOC Discrimination Cases

 Window                                      6 months                            1 year
 CAR                                          -3.34%                             -6.01%
 t-stat                                        1.66*                              1.560
 N                                              163                                153




                                                    58
Table IA6: Robustness Tests: Establishment-level Evidence
This table presents some robustness tests on the differential effects of PFL on the productivity
of establishments (using establishment level data for both public and private firms). In Column
1, we present our establishment-level evidence excluding establishments in California from our
sample. In Column 2, we provide placebo test results in which actual PFL law states are replaced
with non-PFL law states. Specifically, firms headquartered in California, New Jersey, Rhode
Island, and New York are replaced with firms headquartered in Texas, Pennsylvania, New
Hampshire, and Florida, respectively. PFL_Establishment is a dummy variable equal to one if
an establishment is in a state with a paid family leave act in place and zero otherwise. PrePFL
is a dummy variable equal to one in each of the three years preceding the implementation of a
PFL law and zero otherwise. Both specifications include establishment and year fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Variable definitions are in Appendix B. ***, **,
* denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                            (1)                              (2)
                                   Log(Revenue/Employees)           Log(Revenue/Employees)

 PFL_Establishment                          0.063***                          0.005
                                              [4.94]                          [0.30]
 Pre PFL                                      0.035                           0.002
                                              [1.42]                          [0.14]

 Observations                             166,737,104                      189,315,377
 R-squared                                   0.942                            0.944
 Establishment FE                              Y                                Y
 Year FE                                       Y                                Y




                                                 59
