                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE COSTS OF EMPLOYMENT SEGREGATION:
           EVIDENCE FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT UNDER WILSON

                                          Abhay Aneja
                                            Guo Xu

                                      Working Paper 27798
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27798


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We thank Junxi Liu and John Friedman for excellent research assistance. We also thank the UC
Berkeley Institute for Research on Labor and Employment (IRLE) and the Hellman Foundation
for generously providing financial assistance needed for data collection. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Abhay Aneja and Guo Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Costs of Employment Segregation: Evidence from the Federal Government under Wilson
Abhay Aneja and Guo Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 27798
September 2020
JEL No. J15,J45,M5,N4

                                         ABSTRACT

We link personnel records of the federal civil service to census data for 1907-1921 to study the
segregation of the civil service by race under President Woodrow Wilson. Using a difference-in-
differences design to compare the black-white wage gap around Wilson's presidential transition,
we find that the introduction of employment segregation increased the black wage penalty by 7
percentage points. This gap increases over time and is driven by a reallocation of already-serving
black civil servants to lower paid positions. Our results thus document significant costs borne by
minorities during a unique episode of state-sanctioned discrimination.


Abhay Aneja
University of California at Berkeley
School of Law
225 Bancroft Way
Berkeley, CA 94720
aneja@berkeley.edu

Guo Xu
Haas School of Business
University of California at Berkeley
2220 Piedmont Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
guoxu@haas.berkeley.edu
1     Introduction
Discrimination against racial minorities persists across the globe in virtually every domain of social
and economic life ­ including employment, housing, and protection from crime and abuse. Unequal
treatment in labor, consumer, and other marketplaces is not only harmful to the minority outgroup,
though. Discrimination is also thought to be detrimental to aggregate economic growth and social
cohesion, potentially hampering development (Hsieh et al., 2019).

Nations of both the developed and developing world have in turn implemented an array of policies
to respond to the persistence of ethnic disparities in socioeconomic status. Countries have expanded
constitutional protections of civil rights and strengthened antidiscrimination laws to limit the perni-
cious effects of disparate treatment (Chilton and Vesteeg, 2016; Donohue and Heckman, 1991; Collins,
2003; Minkler and Prakash, 2017). Many have also gone a step further by enacting group-based enti-
tlements to remedy the persistent, deleterious effects of historical discrimination. For example, quota-
based remedies provide set-asides for minorities within schools, political office, employment, and
other public institutions. Similarly, affirmative action programs provide for the preferential treatment
of minorities within hiring and school enrollment (Miller, 2017).1 A large body of literature has in
turn documented the impacts of policies aimed at reducing inequality and remedying the effect of
historical discrimination (Pande, 2003; Chattopadhyay and Duflo, 2004).

Much less is known, though, about how state action exacerbates racial and ethnic inequality.2 The
dearth of evidence on the government's role in perpetuating racial disparities is surprising, since the
path to equality is often non-linear. The nature of liberal democracy, for example, leaves open the
possibility that once in power, an ethnic majority will pursue policies that preserve majority domi-
nance ­ and minorities may not have the political power to prevent adverse effects. To the extent that
such policies - even if implemented temporarily - have lasting effects, documenting the impacts of
discriminatory policies is crucial for understanding the roots of economic disparities that persist even
today. For example, quantifying the precise effect of state discrimination may help when it comes to
designing measures to alleviate or compensate for past minority abuse.

In this study, we assess the impact of one of the modern era's most far-reaching episodes of deliberate
racial separation policy ­ the impact of Woodrow Wilson's decision to segregate the US government on
racial earnings inequality. In 1913, US President Wilson issued a policy directive to segregate black and
white civil servants across the federal bureaucracy. The order was carried out by Cabinet departments
   1 India and the United States are perhaps most famous for various race-conscious remedies to economic inequality, although

many other countries also continue to pursue policy regimes that promote the advancement of social minorities.
   2 There are a few exceptions. Naidu (2012) studies the impact of Jim Crow disenfranchisement on the distribution of wealth

across landowning white and landless black Americans. Huber et al. (2020) study how the removal of Jewish managers in Nazi
Germany affected large firms.



                                                             2
­ most aggressively by the federal Post Office and the Treasury Department where the vast majority
of black civil servants worked. Unlike many policies of the "Jim Crow" era ­ which were facially
race-neutral but discriminatory in effect ­ the policy of federal segregation was race-conscious and
discriminatory on its face. Wilson's segregation directive was designed to limit the access of black civil
servants to white-collar positions via both demotions and the failure to hire qualified black candidates.
The policy of Jim Crow segregation within the federal government may have had negative effects on
black civil servants' economic well-being (Yellin, 2013). Whether the segregation policy was costly for
black civil servants ­ as well as how much and for how long ­ remains unknown to this day.

To quantify the effect of the segregation policy, we use coarse exact matching to identify for each
black civil servant a white counterpart who ­ at the onset of Wilson's presidency ­ (i) worked in
the same Cabinet department and bureau, (ii) worked at the same level of seniority and (iii) earned
the same salary. We then compare these matched pairs of black and white civil servants using a
difference-in-differences design. Using this approach, we assess how the black-white earnings gap
among comparable civil servants evolved before and after Wilson's 1913 mandate.

Underpinning our study is a large-scale data digitization effort. Overall, we leverage three data sources
that ­ to the best of our knowledge ­ have to date not been collectively marshalled for prior study.
First, we digitize each volume of the United States Official Register series for the time period 1907-
1921. Issued every two years during the time period we study, the Official Register ("Register") is
an official government publication that provides a detailed list of every person who worked for the
federal government. We complement this data with newly digitized annual data from the Record of
Appointment of Postmasters and the United States Official Postal Guide to construct a panel of all
postmasters and their remuneration over the same time period. This allows us to study a government
agency that has been a major source of stable employment for black Americans since Reconstruction
(Boustan and Margo, 2009). Since senior postmasters served at the pleasure of the President, the focus
on the Post Office also allows us to assess high-level appointments as a mechanism akin to promotions
through which Wilson's segregation policy operated.

A major challenge for the study of racial differences in the US federal civil service is the absence of race
in the personnel records we digitize. We overcome this barrier by linking our newly digitized person-
nel records to the complete count Decennial Census of 1910. Given the absence of detailed information
(in particular age) to allow for conventional matching procures (Abramitzky et al., 2019), we propose
a new probabilistic method that allows us to predict the race of civil servants based on name and birth
location alone. We validate this approach by comparing our predictions with a benchmark sample
that we obtained by time-intensive hand matching.




                                                     3
Our main finding is that President Wilson's segregation policy had persistently negative consequences
for black civil servants. For civil servants who worked in the same department, had the same seniority
and earned the same salary prior to the segregation order, blacks earned approximately 7 percentage
points (p.p.) less over the duration of Wilson's term. This holds with individual fixed effects, sug-
gesting that the negative effect is driven (at least partially) by differences in career progression. The
negative effect is largest for the Post Office, Government Printing Office (GPO), Navy and Treasury
­ departments known for having stringently implemented the segregation order. By contrast, the
penalty faced by black civil servants was smallest within the Agriculture Department, a department
known for initially resisting segregation (King, 1996).

In terms of channels, we find that President Wilson harmed black civil servants at both the intensive
and extensive margins. One of the main ways through which segregation reduced the earnings of
black civil servants was by shutting down opportunities for economic advancement within govern-
ment ­ i.e., promotions. The Registers are an imperfect source for probing this channel because they
have little information about the hierarchy of jobs within the Cabinet departments other than salary.
Thus, to examine the effect of Wilson's segregation policy on promotions, we use the combined Post
Office data described above, which provide information on who occupied high-ranking government
positions within a major Cabinet department. We focus on appointments of first, second, and third-
class postmasters, as these were the highest-ranking postmasters who were appointed at the discretion
of the President. After Wilson's segregation mandate came into effect, we find that black civil servants
were 1.2 p.p. less likely to become presidential postmasters. Given that the share of black presidential
postmasters was 13.1%, this is a sizeable effect. We also provide evidence that black entrants to the
civil service entered at systematically lower salary levels after Wilson takes office ­ suggesting that the
segregation regime had effects on the extensive margin, as well.

Our study contributes to research at the intersection of two main literatures. First, we contribute to
the literature on discrimination in American economic history. In the United States, outcome gaps
between black and white civil servants have been a persistent feature of the American labor market
since the end of the Civil War. Much of this literature centers on the period of time from mid-century
to the present day, spanning the second Great Migration (Boustan, 2009; Hornbeck and Naidu, 2014;
Derenoncourt, 2019), massive school desegregation efforts (Card and Krueger, 1992; Johnson, 2011),
changes to labor market institutions (Farber et al., 2018; Bailey et al., 2020; Derenoncourt and Mon-
tialoux, 2020) and the passage of major antidiscrimination efforts (Smith and Welch, 1989; Donohue
and Heckman, 1991; Collins, 2003; Cascio and Washington, 2013; Aneja and Avancios-Leon, 2020).

We understand relatively less, though, about the sources of earnings disparities for the time period
between the Civil War and World War II. The dearth of evidence on labor market inequality in the late


                                                    4
19th century and early 20th century is striking, given that this period of American history witnessed
the emergence of (often state-sanctioned) racial subjugation in much of the country, particularly the
South (Collins and Wanamaker, 2017). Some economic constraints faced by blacks were formal ­
including residential segregation, bans on labor mobility, and political disenfranchisement (Naidu,
2012). Others were informal, such as norms about racial inferiority (Woodward, 1955). We show that
segregationist government personnel policy was a relevant causal determinant of racial inequality. We
make progress by providing unique evidence from a specific set of policies - thus documenting the
active role of a public organization to implement policies to discriminate among its personnel.

Second, we contribute to the growing literature on the organization of the state. This literature has
documented the role of politicians in controlling civil servants through appointments and transfers
(Iyer and Mani, 2012; Xu, 2018; Akthari et al., 2019; Colonnelli et al., 2020). While there is a large
literature that studies the role of political alignment or social ties between politician and bureaucrats in
shaping career progression, there is little work that studies the effect of discriminatory policies within
public organizations. Understanding discrimination in the public sector is potentially important, given
that public sector organizations today are often a major employer of marginalized groups, such as
women and racial minorities (Krislov, 1967).



2     Context: The US Federal Government
The United States federal civil service is the civilian workforce (i.e., non-elected and non-military pub-
lic sector employees) comprising primarily the executive branch departments and agencies. Nearly
three-quarters of federal civil servants today are paid under the federal General Schedule (which sets
pay and promotion schedules). Moreover, most are hired through a competitive process.


2.1   1912: Woodrow Wilson and the Onset of Federal Segregation

At the beginning of the 20th century, the federal government was relatively unsegregated. It employed
black men and women at all levels of the federal bureaucracy, including high-ranking, white-collar po-
sitions (Yellin, 2013). Opportunities for blacks in the federal government dried up, though, with the
election of Woodrow Wilson as President. During his first year in office, Wilson introduced a pol-
icy of segregation into the bureaucracy. Historical sources suggest that segregation came swiftly and
suddenly, taking black Americans by surprise. During Wilson's presidential campaign of 1912, for ex-
ample, black voters had abandoned their Republican allegiances in part due to his campaign promise
of equal treatment: "[s]hould I become President of the United States [black voters] may count on me
for absolute fair dealing and for everything by which I could assist in advancing the interests of their


                                                     5
race in the United States." Booker T. Washington in turn declared his support for Wilson, expressing
his faith that Wilson would provide "improvement and advancement of my people."3 While Wilson's
policy of racial separation was premised on bureaucratic efficiency, anecdotal accounts suggest it was
motivated by the racial animus of Wilson and his supporters and advisors ­ many of whom hailed
from the Jim Crow South (Lunardini, 1979).

Racial segregation was implemented at the Cabinet department-level. Wilson appointed southern
Democrats ­ who presumably shared his segregationist sympathies ­ to lead several of these depart-
ments, making the task of segregating government workplaces and discriminating against black civil
servants feasible. Racial separation was first imposed in the Post Office, where his choice for Postmas-
ter General was the conservative Democratic Congressman, Albert S. Burleson, of Texas.4 The next
department to segregate was the Treasury Department ­ which employed more black civil servants
than any other federal department apart from the Post Office. Like Burleson, Secretary William Gibbs
McAdoo was in many ways a southern Segregationist. To McAdoo, segregation by race was no differ-
ent than any other organizational hierarchy, comparing the racial segregation of Treasury facilities to
"the provision of separate toilets for the higher officials of the department."5 Other departments soon
followed suit, segregating in rapid succession.


2.2    The Potential Effects of Federal Segregation

The main effect of Wilson's policy vis-a-vis the federal bureaucracy was to prevent the economic ad-
vancement of black civil servants. Historical accounts suggest that by the end of Wilson's first term,
black government civil servants faced demotion or lack of promotion at the Departments of State,
Agriculture, Navy, and many others. Moreover, Wilson's regime of federal government segregation
prevented qualified black applicants from entering the federal civil service at levels that they were
able to in the early 1900s. While there was no de jure change in the government's merit-based hiring
policies, the federal government adopted measures to prevent the hiring of new black civil servants.
For example, in May 1914 it began requiring that photographs be attached to all job applications, mak-
ing it easier to discriminate against black candidates. Moreover in some cases, black civil servants
were terminated outright (MacLaury, 2014). Given historical evidence that President Wilson's segre-
gation policy affected black civil servants at both the intensive and extensive margins, it is reasonable
    3 Similarly, the NAACP delivered the support of over 100,000 black votes to the Democratic ticket because of Wilson's "will-

ingness to deal fairly with the Negroes" (Scheiber and Scheiber, 1969).
    4 Burleson was eager to segregate employees within his department, having complained to President Wilson about white

civil servants being forced to work alongside minorities: "it is very unpleasant for them to work in a car with negroes where it
is almost impossible to have different drinking vessels and different towels, or places to wash" (Weiss, 1969).
    5 Under McAdoo's command, the Treasury's Assistant Secretary wrote to a senior clerk, "I think it would be best for this

Department if you should make arrangements by which white and colored employees of this Department shall use different
toilet rooms. Please arrange accordingly."




                                                               6
to hypothesize that their earnings would suffer. We thus turn to testing this hypothesis now.



3     Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1    Data Source: US Federal Registers & Postal Guides

Our main goal is to identify the impact of Wilson's segregation order on black civil servants' earn-
ings, and how they evolve relative to those of whites. Data from the Decennial Censuses are poorly
suited to our question because it is available only at the decadal level ­ further complicated by the
unavailability of the 1890 Census records. We thus undertook a large-scale data digitization exercise
to construct an individual-level personnel dataset of the entire US federal government covering the
first two decades of the 20th century. Our analysis combines newly digitized data from three main
sources of US government personnel information: the Official Registers, the Record of Appointment
of Postmasters, and the US Postal Guide.

The main data source for our study is the United States Official Register series. The Registers were
initially compiled by the Department of the Interior, and later by the Census Bureau, to provide a
complete enumeration of the federal government workforce prior to 1921, and a substantially complete
enumeration afterward.6 Issued biennially, the Registers listed every employee and contractor of the
US Government. For each civil servant, the Register includes information on a federal employee's
place of birth, state from which he or she is appointed, and salary. Also included is a civil servant's
assigned department, the bureau within that department, and his or her job title. The cut-off date
for inclusion in a given year's volume is July 1.7 Appendix Figure A1 shows a sample of the Register
records. The time period for our analysis is 1907-1921, comprising the entire period from several years
prior to Woodrow Wilson's election through the early 1920s, when Wilson left office.

One limitation of the Register data is that it does not contain the complete records of the Postal Office
due to page restrictions.8 The Postal Office was and remains the largest department, with 292,049 civil
servants employed in 1913 ­ making up 62% of the total federal employment. At the same time, the US
Postal Office has long been a unique occupational "niche" for black Americans (Boustan and Margo,
2009). To ensure we also cover this important department, we further construct a comparable panel of
federal Post Office employees by digitizing and combining two sources. The first source is the federal
   6 In 1923, the Register was not published due to federal pressure to reduce costs. The Register resumed in annual form in 1925,

but in a much more reduced form, owing to the size of government and the cost of describing the entire federal government.
   7 Temporary employees who have served for less than six months are not included.
   8 Complete Post Office listings were contained until 1911. However, because the Postal Service was by far the largest gov-

ernment agency by the turn of the century, its length finally overwhelmed the production of the Register, leading the federal
government to exclude lower-level postal civil servants. In 1913, Congress passed the Urgent Deficiency Act, which authorized
the elimination of many nonessential government publications for budget reasons. As part of that legislation, all information
relating to the Postal Service (with exception of the senior-level administration in DC) was removed.



                                                                7
Record of Appointment of Postmasters, which provides information for the terms of postmasters by
post office. We combine this personnel data with data from the United States Postal Guides, which
provides salary information for post offices of first, second, and third-class. We digitize this data for
all years between 1907 and 1922. These sources of information allow us to study a primary mechanism
underpinning the effects on the salary gap: political appointments.

Our final dataset provides a few unique advantages over data used in previous analyses of racial in-
equality in the pre-1940 period, which typically rely on Decennial Census data. First, we observe the
salary of each civil servant, so do not need to use coarser measures of earnings that are imputed from
occupational data. This is an important advantage, given the potential for racial discrimination within
occupation. Second, the Registers and Post Office data are available at a greater frequency ­ issued
on biennial and annual bases, respectively. This higher-frequency data allows us to more carefully
consider time-varying confounders than does data on a decadal level. Finally, the data that we con-
struct spans a large subset of federal government employees. As such, they provide an unprecedented
opportunity to examine discrimination over the scale of the full federal government.


3.2   Measuring black civil servants

To measure earnings inequality, we need to know the race of each civil servant in our dataset. A data
challenge in our context, though, is that the Register and Post Office data do not include information
on a person's race. To overcome this issue, we link our sample of civil servants to the 1910 complete
count Decennial Census, which does record each respondent's race.

We do so in the following way. Because we do not observe biographical information other than name
and place of birth (in particular age), we compute the likelihood that a person is black based on the
share of all black Decennial Census respondents who share the same full name and birth state. For
each first name × last name × birth state combination, we compute:


                    Blacki   = 1[Pr(Black|First name, Last name, Birth state) > c]                   (1)


where an individual i is predicted to be black if the conditional probability based on the name and
birth state combination is larger than a threshold value c  [0, 1].

To implement our approach for inferring civil servant race, we first match name × birth state to the
census. We match exact based on first name (including initial), last name and birth state. This yields a
match rate of 29%. We then relax the match criterion by matching only exact on first name (excluding
initial), last name and birth state. This increases our overall match rate to 41%. Figure A2 shows the
share of civil servants who can be matched in each year. Since civil servants who cannot be matched


                                                   8
often appear only in a single year (e.g. due to typos), the weighted share of matched civil servants is
higher. Reassuringly, the match rate remains relatively stable over time.

To transform the probabilistic measure into a dummy, we impose a cut-off value of c = 0.5, which
provides a simple interpretation. An individual is thus predicted to be black if individuals sharing
the same name and from the same state are more likely to be black than not.9 With this cut-off, the
share of black civil servants is 11.5% between 1907-1921, consistent with estimates from the literature.
Figure 1 shows the share of black civil servants based on our measure over time.

To assess the validity of our estimates, we drew a random sample of 1,000 civil servants from the
Treasury ­ the largest department in the Register data ­ in 1911 and hand-matched them to the census.
The results are shown in Table A1. To start with, out of the 1,000 we were able to match 626 individuals.
As expected, the match rate is slightly higher than using our automated approach. Importantly, our
measure of black civil servants strongly predicts the measure obtained through time-intensive hand-
coding. A civil servant whose name and birth state matches with 100% of black individuals in the
census is 69% points more likely to also be identified as black in the hand-coded measure (column
1). The magnitude remains large when using the transformed dummy measure (column 2). We thus
conclude that our measure to predict black civil servants has sufficient predictive power.10


3.3      Sample: Descriptive Statistics and Matching

For our period of analysis 1907-1921, we have a total of 321,470 unique federal civil servants ­ 40,020
blacks and 281,450 are white. Overall, we cover 692,877 individual-years. In columns (1) - (2) of
Table 1, we provide raw summary statistics for our full sample of government civil servants. Column
(3) tells us how black civil servants in the full sample compared to white civil servants in terms of pay
and tenure of service. Blacks earn significantly less and tend to have joined the service later (i.e. they
are of lower seniority). They are less likely to hold per annum or per month contracts. In the context
of our data, this means that they are more likely to be employed as part-time civil servants. In short,
black civil servants held on average worse jobs than whites during our study period.

                                                   [Table 1 about here]

It is readily apparent that black civil servants held very different positions from white civil servants.
This observation is not surprising, given that black Americans were only a generation from the Civil
War, and still trailed white Americans in access to schooling and other key dimensions of human
capital (Collins and Wanamaker, 2017). We must therefore first identify a suitable control group of
  9 We   use the IPUMS definition of "black", which also includes mulattos.
 10 Our   measure also correlates with distinctively black names as computed by Cook et al. (2016).




                                                               9
white civil servants within our sample who hold similar jobs to measure the impact of segregation.
We do this by finding counterfactual white civil servants who ­ prior to the Wilson administration ­
worked in the same bureau, entered at the same time (i.e., have similar levels of experience), and hold
the same type of payment contract with the same compensation level. We do this using the coarsened
exact matching method proposed by Iacus et al. (2012), and implemented in papers such as Sarsons
(2020) or Azoulay et al. (2019). We match civil servants in 1911 based on salary (exact),11 entry year
(exact) and bureau (exact), and the mode of pay12 (exact).

Column (4) of Table 1 shows the mean differences for our final (matched) sample. Blacks and non-
blacks are now more comparable in their tenure and type of employment. The remaining difference is
the salary gap in the full sample, which we will demonstrate is entirely driven by the post-1913 sample
and capturing the impact of Wilson's segregation measure.


3.3.1     Example: John A Davis and Willard A Pollard

To provide intuition for the matching strategy, consider the following example. John A Davis was born
in 1863 in DC to a white Washington lawyer and black housekeeper. He graduated top of his class from
Washington's M Street High School and passed the civil service exam aged 19 to join the Government
Printing Office (GPO), where he continued to work for the next decades.13 From his biography, we
know that John worked as a laborer, then progressed to clerical and finally mid-level management
positions. His relative wealth was reflected in the fact that he owned a farm in Virginia in addition
to a home in DC. Our data matches this narrative well.14 We find that John A Davis was serving as a
clerk in the GPO from the beginning of our sample in 1907. Our probabilistic estimate for race puts
him as 40% black when computed using full name and birth state, and 66% when computed using full
name (excluding the initial) and birth state. In 1911, the last round of our data before Wilson's term,
John was making $1400 per annum ­ a good salary that puts him at the 75% percentile of the full-time
annual salaries paid in the 1911 federal civil service.

His fortunes changed with segregation. After Wilson assumed office in March 1913, the July 1913
round of the register data records John's salary at $1300, reflecting a demotion. In 1915, John was
further demoted to the position of a "skilled laborer", now earning a part-time salary of 25 cents
per hour, or $520 per annum when converted to annual salary.15 In 1919, we find him in the War
department working as a messenger for $720 ­ half of what he earned a decade earlier. He would
  11 We  convert all salaries into annual salaries. We assume an 8-hour workday, 5 days per week, and 12 months per year.
  12 These  different categories are: per annum, per month, per day, per hour.
  13 This account is drawn from the NY Times op-ed "What Woodrow Wilson Cost My Grandfather", by Gordon J. Davis, Nov.

24, 2015, from https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/24/opinion/what-woodrow-wilson-cost-my-grandfather.html.
  14 See Appendix Figure A1 for the actual data entry in 1913.
  15 As discussed in subsection 3.3, this assumes an 8-hour workday, 5 days per week and 12 months in a year.




                                                           10
remain at that salary until 1921, our last round of data. From his biographical record we know that he
was forced to auction off the family farm in 1914 and died in 1928 aged 65.

Using our matching criteria, we find an exact match for John A Davis. Willard A Pollard was also
born in DC at around the same time ­ two years after John. In 1911, the year in which we perform
our matching, Willard likewise worked in the GPO, held the same job title (clerk) and earned the
exact same salary $1400, suggesting that both must have been colleagues of equal rank. Unlike John,
Willard's career continued to progress after Wilson assumed office. Willard received a raise in 1917,
earning $1600 ­ more than three times as much as his former colleague John. In 1921, the last data
point, we see Willard receiving another raise, earning $1800. This puts Willard at the 75% percentile
of the full-time salary distribution in 1921. John, in contrast, fell to the 10% percentile. Willard dies in
1950, aged 85. Figure 2 summarizes the comparison of both colleagues.



4     Results
Figure 3 motivates our empirical hypothesis with descriptive evidence. The figure presents the average
salaries of black and white civil servants over time. Prior to Wilson taking office, black and white civil
servants earn comparable incomes in our matched sample. After Wilson assumes office and issued
the segregation order in 1913, however, we observe an immediate divergence in average salary by race.
White civil servants quickly receive systematically higher salaries than their black counterparts.


4.1    Empirical Specification

We now turn to a more rigorous analysis of how Wilson's segregation policy affected racial earnings
inequality within the civil service. Specifically, we study how Wilson's segregation policy impacted the
black-white earnings gap using a standard difference-in-differences (DD) framework. For individual
i and year t, we relate wages to this policy by estimating:


                        log (wit )   =  × Blacki +  × Blacki × W ilsont + t + it                                     (2)


Here, wit is individual i's earnings for year t. Blacki is a dummy variable that is 1 if the race of
the individual is black (see subsection 3.2). W ilsont is a dummy variable indicating exposure to the
segregated federal government. This variable equals 1 beginning in 1913 onwards, when Woodrow
Wilson was inaugurated as President.16 t are time fixed effects (and thus absorb the first-order Wilson
  16 Wilson was inaugurated March 4, 1913. Our data for 1913 are based on the cut-off July 1st, 1913 and thus capture the

post-transition period.




                                                           11
term). Standard errors are clustered at the individual level, since treatment varies by an individual
civil servant's race (black vs. non-black).

There are a few potential threats to identifying the effect of President Wilson's segregation policy on
the within-government racial earnings gap. One concern is that the racial earnings gap was already
increasing prior to Wilson's official policy of segregated government. While the absence of pre-trends
in the raw Figure 3 already helps assuage these concerns, we further rule out this possibility by esti-
mating flexible versions of our main specification, allowing the wage gap to vary by each time period.
We can then statistically test whether there exists a pre-existing trend in earnings inequality.

Further evidence in favor of the exogeneity of civil service segregation is the unexpected nature of
Wilson's order. While black voters had historically supported the Republican party in prior decades,
Wilson's base of electoral support included a substantial number of black voters ­ including WEB
Dubois and Monroe Trotter. As discussed in subsection 2.1, the implementation of the segregation
measures struck many by surprise, and it is this unexpected nature of the policy that helps to further
allay concerns over the endogeneity of the timing.

In the main specification above, we do not include individual fixed effects as we are also interested
in the selection margin. Historical research suggests that segregation may have had large impacts on
the entry or exit of black civil servants from government work. Many blacks may have left due to the
disappearance of promotion opportunities, and segregation likewise may have discouraged the entry
of new black civil servants. We do introduce the individual FEs when we seek to understand drivers
of the changing wage gap.


4.2   Main effects: Effect of employment segregation on earnings

Moving beyond the raw data, we now turn to our main findings, presented in Table 2. Regressions are
based on our matched sample of black and white civil servants. We are thus comparing the earnings
gap of black vs. white civil servants who were working in the same department and bureau, entered
in the same year, and earn the exact same salary pre-segregation (1911), before and after the Wilson
transition. In column (1) we observe that as expected, black civil servants on average earn 5 percent
less than white civil servants within the same Cabinet department. Salaries increased under Wilson,
although this could simply reflect increasing pay over time, as indicated by the coefficient estimate for
W ilsont presented in column (2).

In column (3) of Table 2, we show our main finding by estimating the baseline DD specification from
Equation 3. The coefficient of interest,  on Blacki × W ilsont , suggests that Wilson's policy of racial
segregation increased the earnings gap by around 7.3 p.p. Reassuringly, the point estimate and preci-


                                                   12
sion is almost identical when including year fixed effects, as seen in column (4). The Wilson adminis-
tration thus seems to have had a demonstrably negative impact on the earnings of black civil servants
who were equivalently situated prior to his presidency. To put our estimate in more context, the raw
black-white civil servant salary gap in 1911 was around 37%. Roughly speaking, this means that the
segregation policy increased the wage gap by around 20% ­ a sizeable effect.

As we noted above, our estimate of Wilson's impact would be potentially confounded by preexisting
trends in the earnings gap between black and white civil servants. We thus present our main find-
ings using an event study design in Figure 4, where we look at leads and lags of the black earnings
penalty within the federal bureaucracy. Reassuringly, there appear to be no statistically significant
level or trend differences between black and white civil servants' salaries prior to Wilson's segrega-
tion order, but an immediate drop in black relative earnings afterward. The gap continues to grow
during Wilson's second term.

Finally, in our most demanding specification, we control for individual-level fixed effects, thus only
comparing salary changes within the same civil servant before and after the Wilson transition. Even
when controlling for unobservable differences across individual civil servants, we still observe a 5.2
p.p. increase in the black earnings penalty within the bureaucracy (significant at the 1% level). Since
this specification partials out any unobserved heterogeneity across individual civil servants, we are
implicitly controlling for any differences in human capital. Moreover, this regression suggests that
Wilson's policy of racial discrimination is likely operating at both the extensive and intensive margin.
That the effect remains detectable even when looking "within civil servant" suggests that a substantial
part of the effect is coming from discrimination against existing civil servants.

To understand the drivers of the salary decrease, we now examine how the salary distribution for black
civil servants changed during Wilson's presidency. To that end, we estimate the propensity of being
black for each decile, broken down by pre- and post-Wilson transition. In Figure 5, Panel A, we do
this for the matched sample of comparable black and white civil servants in 1911. As Panel A shows,
while black civil servants are almost equally likely to be found across the entire salary distribution
before 1913, this is no longer the case after the segregation order. Post-1913, we observe a reallocation
of black civil servants to lower paid positions. Black civil servants are now significantly more likely to
be found in the lower salary deciles, and less likely to be found in the higher ones.

The analysis in Figure 5, Panel A is based on the reshuffling of civil servants already serving in the gov-
ernment prior to Wilson's arrival. To shed light on the extensive margin, Panel B repeats the exercise
for the subsample of new entrants into the civil service. Prior to Wilson's presidency, black entrants
were already more likely to enter in the lower parts of the salary distribution. After 1913, however, the



                                                    13
likelihood increased further, indicating that the overall effect of Wilson's segregation order impacted
both the intensive and extensive margin: segregation both led to demotions of already serving civil
servants and a disproportionate entry of black civil servants in lower paid positions.17 .


4.3    Department-level heterogeneity

Figure 6 summarizes department-specific estimates of the segregation effect. We focus on departments
that are observed throughout the entire study period 1907-1921 and include a sufficient number of
black civil servants to estimate the salary gap (more than 50 in any year). Figure 6 documents substan-
tial heterogeneity: the increase in the wage gap between black and white civil servants was largest in
the Post Office Department, followed by the Government Printing Office, the Navy and the Treasury.
In contrast, the increase in the wage gap was much smaller and even statistically indistinguishable
from zero in departments such as Agriculture, Commerce and the Labor department.18

The observed heterogeneity is consistent with the historical literature (subsection 2.1): the Post Office,
Navy and Treasury were the first departments to implement segregation (Sosna, 1970). In contrast,
historical evidence suggests that the Department of Agriculture was initially resisting segregation
King (1996). As the figure also shows, the largest increases in the salary gap are evident in depart-
ments headed by Cabinet secretaries hailing from the South. This observation is consistent with effects
being strongest in those departments where top bureaucrats were most likely to share Wilson's segre-
gationist preferences ­ also consistent with the historical literature.


4.4    Mechanisms: Understanding the Role of Promotions

As we previewed in section 2, one of the main ways through which the segregation of the federal
bureaucracy likely reduced the earnings of black civil servants was by shutting down opportunities
for career advancement. While we provide evidence for this channel using salaries, the Registers are
an imperfect source for probing this channel because they do not tell us about the hierarchy of jobs
within the various Cabinet departments. To examine the effect of Wilson's segregation policy on the
stunting of black civil servants' career advancement, we now turn to Post Office data as a novel source
of information on promotions. As we described in section 3, this untapped source of government em-
ployment information tells us who occupied the high-ranking positions within the US Postal Service
­ the first, second, and third-class Postmasters. We can thus test whether Wilson's segregation order
decreased the likelihood that black civil servants would occupy these positions.
  17 Theslight level increase in the share of blacks reflects the secular trends as shown in Figure 1.
  18 TheDepartment of Commerce and Labor splits in 1913. To ensure comparability over time, we keep the department com-
bined throughout. Since our matching occurs within bureaus, however, this does not affect the main results.




                                                          14
Focusing on the Post Office to understand promotions makes sense for a few key reasons. First, the
Post Office Department was the largest federal employer of black Americans at the time Wilson be-
came president. Moreover, as shown in previous section (Figure 6), it experienced one of the starkest
increase in wage inequality between black and white civil servants. Second, the top appointments ­
first, second and third-class postmasters ­ were positions directly subject to presidential appointment
(and thus were called the "Presidential Postmasters"). To estimate the impact of Wilson's segregation
regime on racial differences in Presidential Postmaster appointment, we estimate:


                SeniorApptit        =  × P r(Blacki ) +  × P r(Blacki ) × W ilsont + t + it                               (3)


where SeniorApptit is an indicator variable that is 1 if the postmaster position was a senior position,
defined as a first to third class postmaster position. The resulting estimate  thus tells us how Wilson's
policy of federal segregation affected the probability that black civil servants would be appointed to
high-level Post Office positions, relative to white postal civil servants. As before t are year fixed effects.
The error term is clustered at the position level i, coinciding with the unit of assignment.

One limitation of this setting is that information about the postmasters is limited. While we were
able to use name and birth location for matching in the Register, we now only have the full name of
the postmaster and the location of the appointment. This makes it even more difficult to match the
postmasters to the census data in order to identify black postmasters. We thus follow a probabilistic
approach by constructing P r(Blacki ) as the share of Black respondents in the 1910 census sharing the
same full name and residing in the same state.19

The regression results are presented in Table 3. On average, blacks are 2.1% points less likely to be
appointed to a first to third class postmaster position (Column 1). The presidential appointment gap
opened significantly, though, after Woodrow Wilson assumed office (Column 3). The results remain
robust when we include year fixed effects (Column 4).

Figure 7 shows a flexible version of the regression where the racial appointment gap varies by year.
Reassuringly for our ability to infer the effect of federal segregation, we observe no trend in the post-
master appointment gap prior to 1913. We observe an immediate slope change, however, once Wilson
takes office ­ an effect that persists and grows over Wilson's presidency. By the end of Wilson's term
of office, black postal employees are nearly 3.3.p.p. less likely to hold a first, second or third class post-
master appointment. The results presented in Table 3 and Figure 7 thus demonstrate that Wilson's
segregation order had a causal impact on the appointment process within the branch of the federal
  19 In contrast to the main analysis, we no longer discretize the measure as the mean share of black civil servants using only

a name match is very low. We also have no benchmark estimate of the number of black postmasters, thus making it hard to
define a specific cut-off for discretization.



                                                              15
government where black civil servants were most populous. The fact that the black-white appointment
gap opens up for the senior-most positions at the pleasure of the President is particularly compelling:
it strongly suggests that a key channel through which segregation increased racial earnings inequality
was by limiting the ability of black civil servants to be promoted to better jobs.



5    Conclusion
According to Madison's Federalist No. 10, a key goal of the state in any liberal democracy should be
to protect minorities from majority tyranny and abuse. What happens, though, when the state plays
a central role in perpetuating discrimination against marginalized groups?

In this paper, we document a unique episode of state-sanctioned discrimination: President Woodrow
Wilson's segregation of the federal civil service by race. Using a difference-in-differences design to
compare the earnings gap between black and white civil servants before and after Wilson assuming
office, we uncover significant costs of employment segregation. Comparing among black and white
colleagues working in the same department, bureau, with the same seniority and salary prior to Wil-
son's presidency, we find that white civil servants outearn their black counterpart by 7 p.p. during
Wilson's term. The earning gap increases over the course of Wilson's time in office, indicating diver-
gence in the career trajectories that likely persisted beyond his presidency.




                                                   16
References
A               , R., L. P. B                 , K. E         , J. J. F          ,    S. P´   (2019): "Automated Linking
    of Historical Data," Working Paper 25825, National Bureau of Economic Research.
A          , M., D. M                 ,         L. T         (2019): "Political Turnover, Bureaucratic Turnover, and the
    Quality of Public Services," mimeo.
A       , A.         C. A                 -L       (2020): "The Effect of Political Power on Labor Market Inequality:
    Evidence from the 1965 Voting Rights Act," mimeo.
A          , P., C. F        -R           ,        J. S. G       Z        (2019): "Does Science Advance One Funeral at a
    Time?" American Economic Review, 109, 2889­2920.
B       , M. J., J. D N           ,           B. A. S        (2020): "The Economic Impact of a High National Minimum
    Wage: Evidence from the 1966 Fair Labor Standards Act," Working Paper 26926, National Bureau of
    Economic Research.
B          , L. P. (2009): "Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migration and Racial Wage Conver-
    gence in the North , 1940-1970," Journal of Economic History, 69, 755­782.
B          , L. P.          R. A. M               (2009): "Race, Segregation, and Postal Employment: New Evidence
    on Spatial Mismatch," Journal of Urban Economics, 65, 1­10.
C      , D.          A. K                 (1992): "School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A Direct As-
    sessment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 151­200.
C        , E. U.            E. W                       (2013): " Valuing the Vote: The Redistribution of Voting Rights
    and State Funds following the Voting Rights Act of 1965 ," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129,
    379­433.
C                    , R.             E. D          (2004): "Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a Randomized
    Policy Experiment in India," Econometrica, 72, 1409­1443.
C         , A. S.       M. V                   (2016): "Do Constitutional Rights Make a Difference?" American Journal
    of Political Science, 60, 575­589.
C         , W. J. (2003): "The Labor Market Impact of State-Level Anti-Discrimination Laws," Industrial
    and Labor Relations Review, 56, 244­272.
C         , W. J.       M. H. W                         (2017): "African American Intergenerational Economic Mobility
    Since 1880," Working Paper 23395, National Bureau of Economic Research.
C               , E., E. T        ,            M. P        (2020): "Patronage and Selection in Public Sector Organiza-
    tions," .
C      , L., T. D. L          ,           J. M. P            (2016): "The Mortality Consequences of Distinctively Black
    Names," Explorations in Economic History2, 59, 114­125.
D                    , E. (2019): "Can you move to opportunity? Evidence from the Great Migration," .



                                                                         17
D                       , E.          C. M                        (2020): "Minimum Wages and Racial Inequality," .
D             , J. J.           J. H                     (1991): "Continuous Versus Episodic Change: The Impact of Civil
    Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks," Journal of Economic Literature, 29, 1603­1643.
F         , H., D. H                 , I. K               ,         S. N     (2018): "Unions and Inequality over the Twentieth
    Century: New Evidence from Survey Data," .
H              , R.            S. N            (2014): "When the Levee Breaks: Black Migration and Economic Devel-
    opment in the American South," American Economic Review, 104, 963­90.
H      , C.-T., E. H             , C. I. J           ,          P. J. K      (2019): "The Allocation of Talent and U.S. Economic
    Growth," Econometrica, 87, 1439­1474.
H         , K., V. L                      ,              F. W              (2020): "Discrimination, Managers, and Firm Perfor-
    mance: Evidence from "Aryanizations" in Nazi Germany," .
I      , S. M., G. K             ,            G. P            (2012): "Causal inference without balance checking: Coarsened
    exact matching," Political analysis, 1­24.
I    , L.           A. M         (2012): "Traveling Agents: Political Change and Bureaucratic Turnover in India,"
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 94, 723­739.
J           , R. (2011): "Long-run Impacts of School Desegregation School Quality on Adult Attain-
    ments," Working Paper 16664, National Bureau of Economic Research.
K     , D. (1996): "The Segregated State? Black Americans and the Federal Government," Governance,
    3, 65­92.
K           , S. (1967): Negro in Federal Employment: The Quest for Equal Opportunity, Minneapolis: Univer-
    sity of Minnesota Press.
L              , C. A. . (1979): "Standing Firm: William Monroe Trotter's Meetings With Woodrow Wil-
    son," Journal of Negro History, 64, 244­264.
M     L        , J. (2014): To Advance Their Opportunities: Federal Policies Toward African American Workers
    from World War I to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Knoxville.
M         , C. (2017): "The Persistent Effect of Temporary Affirmative Action," American Economic Journal:
    Applied Economics, 9, 152­90.
M            , L.          N. P                 (2017): "The Role of Constitutions on Poverty : A Cross-national Inves-
    tigation," Journal of Comparative Economics, 45, 563­581.
N         , S. (2012): "Suffrage, Schooling, and Sorting in the Post-Bellum U.S. South," .
P         , R. (2003): "Can Mandated Political Representation Increase Policy Influence for Disadvan-
    taged Minorities? Theory and Evidence from India," American Economic Review, 93, 1132­1151.
S           , H. (2020): "Interpreting Signals in the Labor Market: Evidence from Medical Referrals,"
    mimeo.
S            , J. L.           H. N. S                    (1969): "The Wilson Administration and the Wartime Mobilization


                                                                             18
    of Black Americans, 1917 ­ 18," Labor History, 10.
S      , J.      F. W       (1989): "Black Progress After Myrdal," Journal of Economic Literature, 27, 519­
    564.
S       , M. (1970): "The South in the Saddle: Racial Politics during the Wilson Years," Wisconsin Mag-
    azine of History, 54, 30­49.
W      , N. (1969): "The Negro and the New Freedom: Fighting Wilsonian Segregation," Political Science
    Quarterly, 84, 61­79.
W              , C. V. (1955): The Strange Career of Jim Crow, New York: Oxford University Press.
X , G. (2018): "The Costs of Patronage: Evidence from the British Empire," American Economic Review,
    108, 3170­3198.
Y          , E. (2013): Racism in the Nation's Service: Government Workers and the Color Line in Woodrow
    Wilson's America, University of North Carolina Press.




                                                      19
Figures and Tables

                                                    Figure 1: Share of Black civil servants over time
                         .5             .4
          Share of black civil servants
                 .2      .1
                         0   .3




                                             1907   1909     1911       1913          1915   1917       1919   1921
                                                                               Year

  Notes: Figure shows the share of black civil servants over time across all departments included in the federal
  Register. Black civil servants are measured as described in subsection 3.2.




                                                                           20
             Figure 2: Example of matching strategy ­ John A Davis vs. Willard A Pollard



                2000

                                           Clerk
                     1500
         Per annum salary



                                           Clerk




                             Clerk
        1000




                             Stock Clerk


                                                                                                Messenger

                                                                           Skilled laborer
                500




                            1907       1909        1911      1913          1915        1917      1919       1921
                                                                    Year

                                                    Willard A Pollard                  John A Davis


Notes: Figure illustrates the matching strategy for the case of John A Davis (black civil servant) and Willardjy
A Pollard (white civil servant). The career progression shown for both civil servants is based on actual data
on salary and occupational position from the federal Register. The solid line marks the year of Wilson's
inauguration and implementation of the segregation order.




                                                                21
                    Figure 3: Raw mean wages by Black vs. Non-Black civil servant




                     7
                     6.8
              Log wage
                     6.6
                     6.4




                           1907   1909   1911    1913          1915       1917    1919   1921
                                                        Year

                                                Black                 Non Black


Notes: Figure shows the black vs. non-black earnings gap for the matched sample of civil servants from the
federal Register (matching based on 1911 department, bureau, seniority, and salary). The solid line marks
the year of Wilson's inauguration and implementation of the segregation order.




                                                    22
                           Figure 4: Racial earnings gap around Woodrow Wilson election




                             0
              Log wage gap black vs. non-black
               -.15       -.1-.2      -.05




                                                 1907   1909   1911   1913          1915   1917   1919   1921
                                                                             Year

Notes: Figure shows the estimated black vs. white wage gap for the matched sample of civil servants from the
federal Register (matching based on 1911 department, bureau, seniority, and salary), conditional on year FEs
(Table 2, column 3). Solid line marks the year of Wilson's inauguration and implementation of the segregation
order. Showing 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the individual-level.




                                                                        23
                                     Figure 5: Distribution of black civil servants by wage decile before and after Woodrow Wilson election
                        .3




                                                                                                         .3
                                                                                                         .25
                        .25
                   Prob(Black)




                                                                                                    Prob(Black)
                                                                                                             .2
                           .2




                                                                                                     .15
                   .15
24




                                                                                                         .1
                        .1




                                                                                                         .05
                        .05




                                 1     2      3      4      5            6   7       8     9   10                 1   2     3      4      5            6   7       8     9   10
                                                                Decile                                                                        Decile

                                                     Pre-Wilson              Post-Wilson                                           Pre-Wilson              Post-Wilson



                                           (a) Intensive margin ­ already serving                                         (b) Extensive margin ­ new entrants
     Notes: Left panel: Share of black civil servants by each salary decile, before and after Wilson's inauguration in 1913. Estimates are based on regressing a dummy for a black civil
     servant on each salary decile, separately for pre-1913 and post-1913 for the matched sample of civil servants already serving in 1911. Right panel: Estimates are based on the full
     sample of entrants (as defined by a civil servant first time observed in the data). The solid line marks the year of Wilson's inauguration and implementation of the segregation
     order. Showing 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the individual-level.
       Figure 6: Heterogeneity in effect of segregation on earnings gap, by department




                           .05




                                                                                                   GovtDC
                                         0




                                                                                                                  Agr
                                                                                                            C&L
                 Log salary: Black x Post




                                                                      Treas




                                                                                         Int
                                                                                   War
                                                             Navy
                                -.05




                                                  GPO
                       -.1

                                             PO
              -.15         -.2




                                             1    2          3       4       5          6         7         8     9
                                                                    Ordered by effect size

                                                      Southern Cabinet Secy                  Non-Southern



Notes: Figure illustrates the heterogeneity of Blacki × P ostt (Table 2, column 5), by department. We exclude
departments with less than 50 black civil servants in any given year, as well as those not observed throughout
the entire sample period (1907-1921). Estimates illustrated in black font are for departments with Cabinet
secretaries from southern states, while those in gray font are for departments headed by Cabinet secretaries
from northern states. Horizontal dashed line indicates the aggregate (pooled) effect size.




                                                                              25
Figure 7: Impact of Wilson's segregation regime on racial gap in presidential Postmaster appointment




                     Prob(Class 1-3 Postmaster) black vs. non-black
                 -.05     -.04     -.03    -.02       -.01       0




                                                                      1907   1909   1911   1913      1915   1917   1919   1921
                                                                                                   Year

   Notes: Figure shows the estimated black vs. non-black gap in the probability of a first, second or third class
   postmaster appointment (Table 3, column 4). First, second and third class are the highest-ranking postmaster
   positions and are appointed at the discretion of the President. The solid line marks the year of Wilson's
   inauguration and the implementation of the segregation order. Showing 95% confidence intervals based on
   standard errors clustered at the post office-level.




                                                                                                  26
                  Table 1: Descriptive Statistics - full sample vs. matched sample
                                         (1)         (2)      (3)           (4)
                                          Non-black         Diff Non-black - Black
                                        Mean         SD      Raw        Matched
                    Log(salary)         6.887       0.611 -0.331***     -0.050***
                                                            (0.003)      (0.008)
                    Earliest year      1911.82 5.077 0.927***             0.023
                                                            (0.035)      (0.028)
                    Paid per annum      0.533       0.498 -0.057***       -0.007
                                                            (0.003)      (0.008)
                    Paid per month      0.103       0.304 -0.005***       -0.004
                                                            (0.001)      (0.003)
                    Observations       612,436              692,879      212,710
Notes: Table provides descriptive statistics for the Register civil servant sample. The unit of observation is an
individual-year, and the time period is 1907-1921. The matched sample (column 4) is based on matching on
department, bureau, salary, seniority (earliest year of service) and type of pay (e.g. per annum, per month
etc.) in in 1911. When computing black-white differences, standard errors are clustered at the individual-
level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                     27
   Table 2: Impact of Wilson's segregation regime on racial earnings gap - Register sample
                                       (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)          (5)
                                                         Log annual wage
               Mean of dep. var       6.785        6.785        6.785     6.785        6.800
               Black                -0.050***    -0.052***     -0.013    -0.013
                                     (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)   (0.009)
               Wilson                             0.277***    0.287***
                                                  (0.005)     (0.006)
               Black × Wilson                                -0.073*** -0.078***     -0.052***
                                                              (0.008)   (0.008)       (0.005)
               Year FEs                                                     Y            Y
               Individual FEs                                                            Y
               Observations          212,710     212,710     212,710     212,710      204,565
Notes: Table presents OLS regression estimates of the impact of Wilson's segregation policy on the racial
earnings gap within the federal government. Regressions are based on the full Register dataset. The unit of
observation is the individual-year. Sample covers all matched civil servants between 1907-1921. Black is a
dummy that is 1 if the civil servant is predicted to be black. Wilson is a dummy that is 1 for 1913 and after. All
wages are annualized. Standard errors clustered at the individual-level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                     28
 Table 3: Impact of Wilson's segregation regime on racial earnings gap ­ Postmaster sample
                                         (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)
                                           Appointed Class 1-3 Postmaster
               Mean of dep. var         0.131     0.131      0.131     0.131
               Pr(Black)              -0.021*** -0.021*** -0.013** -0.013**
                                       (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.006) (0.006)
               Wilson                            0.023*** 0.024***
                                                 (0.001)    (0.002)
               Pr(Black) × Wilson                           -0.012*   -0.012*
                                                            (0.007) (0.007)
               County × State FEs         Y          Y         Y         Y
               Year FEs                                                  Y
               Sample                             All postmasters
               Observations            917,622   917,622    917,622 917,622
Notes: Table presents OLS regression estimates of the impact of Wilson's segregation policy on the racial
earnings gap within the Post Office. Regressions are based on the postmaster dataset. The unit of observation
is the individual-year. Sample covers all post offices between 1907-1921. Pr(Black) is the share of census
respondents sharing the same name who report being black. Wilson is a dummy that is 1 for 1913 and after.
The dependent variable is a dummy that is 1 if the post office is headed by a first, second or third class
postmaster. Standard errors clustered at the post-office level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                   29
Appendix

                           Figure A1: Sample of the Federal Registers 1913




 Notes: Sample of the federal Register for the year 1913. Record highlighted in red is the example described in
 subsubsection 3.3.1.




                                                    30
                                     Figure A2: Match rate of civil servants over time




                    1
                    .8   .6
                Match rate
               .4   .2
                    0




                              1907      1909     1911     1913          1915   1917   1919   1921
                                                                 Year

Notes: Match rate of civil servants from the sample of the federal Register over time.




                                                            31
                               Table A1: Validating black measure
                                                                (1)       (2)
                                                             Black (hand coded)
               Mean of dep. var                               0.0623    0.0623
               Pr(Black | Full name, Birth state)            0.685***
                                                             (0.072)
               1[ Pr(Black | Full name, Birth state) > 1/2 ]           0.580***
                                                                        (0.067)
               Observations                                     626       626
Notes: Random sample of 1,000 civil servants drawn from the Treasury. Hand match rate is 62%. Depen-
dent variable is a dummy for a black civil servant. Pr(Black | Full name, Birth state) is the share of census
respondents who report being black and share the same full name and birth state.




                                                   32
