                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MY TAXES ARE TOO DARN HIGH:
        TAX PROTESTS AS REVEALED PREFERENCES FOR REDISTRIBUTION

                                        Brad C. Nathan
                                     Ricardo Perez-Truglia
                                      Alejandro Zentner

                                      Working Paper 27816
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27816


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We are thankful for excellent comments from colleagues. This project was reviewed and
approved in advance by the Institutional Review Board at The University of Texas at Dallas. The
experiments were pre-registered in the AEA RCT Registry (#0005992). Adrian Cadena Medina,
Luisa Cefala, Dongwook Chun, Karl Dill and Santiago De Martini provided superb research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Brad C. Nathan, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, and Alejandro Zentner. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
My Taxes are Too Darn High: Tax Protests as Revealed Preferences for Redistribution
Brad C. Nathan, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, and Alejandro Zentner
NBER Working Paper No. 27816
September 2020
JEL No. C93,H2,H26,Z13

                                           ABSTRACT

In all U.S. states, individuals can file a protest with the goal of legally reducing their property
taxes. This choice provides a unique opportunity to study preferences for redistribution via
revealed preference. We study the motives driving tax protests through two sources of causal
identification: a quasi-experiment and a pre-registered large-scale natural field experiment. We
show that, consistent with selfish motives, households are highly elastic to their private benefits
and private costs from protesting. We also find that social preferences are a significant motive:
consistent with conditional cooperation, households are willing to pay higher tax rates if they
perceive that others pay high tax rates too. Lastly, we document significant differences between
the motivations of Democrats and Republicans.

Brad C. Nathan                                    Alejandro Zentner
Naveen Jindal School of Management                Naveen Jindal School of Management
The University of Texas at Dallas                 The University of Texas at Dallas
800 W Campbell Rd.                                800 W Campbell Rd.
Richardson, TX 75080                              Richardson, TX 75080
brad.nathan@utdallas.edu                          azentner@utdallas.edu

Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley 545
Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ricardotruglia@berkeley.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5992
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27816
                                     Dedicated in loving memory of Alberto Alesina (1957­2020)


1     Introduction
Taxation and redistribution are prerequisites for the success of modern democracies, and
among the oldest topics of study in political economy (Alesina and Glaeser, 2004). How-
ever, studying redistribution preferences presents significant measurement challenges and,
as a result, the existing evidence is largely restricted to survey data (Alesina and Giuliano,
2011). In this paper, we exploit a novel context that provides revealed preference evidence
on individuals' support for government taxation and redistribution: tax protests.
    In many U.S. counties, individuals can file a protest with the goal of legally reducing their
property taxes. These protests are consequential: while there is no guarantee that a protest
will reduce one's tax bill, in practice they often do. In this paper, we study the choice to
protest taxes, and use the data to shed light on the roots of preferences over taxation and
redistribution.
    Although tax protests are allowed across the country, our analysis focuses on one of the
largest counties in the United States: Dallas County, Texas. We look at a specific county for
practical reasons ­ among them that it is easier to implement a field experiment in a single
county. Still, to the extent that protests work similarly across counties ­ and they do work
similarly in at least all counties in Texas ­ our results should be generalizable. Moreover,
studying property taxes in Texas is especially relevant, as the stakes are high: because Texas
does not have a state income tax, property taxes are a key source of revenue for the provision
of government services. For example, the average household from Dallas County is expected
to pay around $5,916 in property taxes in 2020, corresponding to a tax rate of 2.01% on their
home's market value.1
    The protest process in Dallas county can be summarized as follows. The Dallas Central
Appraisal District (DCAD) formulates a proposed assessment of the property's market value
and notifies the household of it (hereinafter, we refer to this amount as the proposed value.
The property taxes will be calculated based on this proposed value. The household can file a
protest, arguing, for example, that the proposed value is too high.2 Next, owners can protest
on their own (which is the main focus of this paper) or they can hire an agent to protest on
their behalf. If the protest is successful, the effective assessed value as well as the respective
tax bill will be reduced. In 2020, a total of 8.40% of households in Dallas County filed a
1
  These statistics are based on administrative data and focus on the universe of single-family homes. Unless
  stated otherwise, all the statistics provided in this paper are based on this sample.
2
  We describe the protest process in more detail in Section 2 below.



                                                     2
protest of their property taxes on their own, and an additional 8.42% of households protested
with the help of an agent, resulting in a total protest rate of 16.83%. We estimate that 49.4%
of the protests in 2020 were successful and that these successful protests resulted, on average,
in $601 in tax savings.3
    Teasing apart the motives for protesting from the raw data is challenging. Take, for
example, the fact that only a minority of households choose to protest each year. One
interpretation of this fact could be that the majority of households support taxation and
redistribution and would not want to free-ride on the taxes paid by others. A very different
interpretation is that most households are selfish and would prefer to free-ride, but they still
choose not to protest because their private cost from protesting is greater than their expected
tax savings. In this paper, we use publicly available administrative data and exploit quasi-
experimental and experimental variation to address these questions.
    First, we exploit quasi-experimental variation to measure how private benefits from
protesting affect the decision to file a protest. All counties in Texas must use a cap when
calculating taxes for households with homestead status.4 This cap generates a sharp, dis-
continuous kink in the expected benefits from protesting. The analysis of this sharp kink
indicates that households are more likely to protest when they stand to gain more from
protesting. A 0.1 percentage point (pp) increase in the tax rate cap causes an increase in the
probability of protesting by 3.65 pp. This effect translates into a 7.34 elasticity ­ meaning
that the decision to protest is highly elastic to the financial benefits.
    Second, we study the role of hassle costs. Any household can protest for free, so there
are no pecuniary costs from protesting; however, households may still incur hassle costs:
protesting takes time, and some households may have trouble figuring out how to do it.
We conducted a pre-registered field experiment to create exogenous variation in the hassle
costs of protesting. We selected a subject pool of 78,462 households and sent letters to a
random sample of 50,394 with helpful information on how to file a protest. As a whole, this
subject pool was estimated to pay $560 million dollars in property taxes in 2020. In the
letters, we randomized the intensity of our aid provision. The basic letter treatment included
information such as step-by-step guides for filling out the forms by mail or online. A second
letter type included extra instructions based on the fact that, when protesting property taxes,
one of the most challenging aspects of the process is preparing an argument to support the
3
  These statistics are for households that protested on their own, as a significant fraction of the protests
  through agents have not been resolved by the time we conducted the analysis. This estimate and other
  estimates related to the outcomes of 2020 protests are still preliminary and will be updated with the latest
  administrative data in a future version of this paper.
4
  Homestead is a legal status that can be granted to properties that constitute the main residence for the
  household. This legal status comes with several benefits related to property taxes (e.g., exemptions and
  caps) and other benefits such as exemption from forced sale for collection of debt.


                                                      3
request. The extra aid message included an argument tailored to each recipient, who could
simply copy-paste it into their own protest form. These letters presented information about
a comparison property near the recipient's own property that was similar in all observable
characteristics and had been recently sold for a lower price than the market value proposed
by DCAD.
    We find that the letters had a large impact on the probability of filing a protest; and while
the basic aid was helpful, the impact was significantly higher when the letter included the
additional instructions. The letter with extra aid led to a protest rate increase of 3.51 pp; for
comparison, the fraction of households protesting in the control group that received no letters
was 8.67 pp. In other words, a simple intervention by mail increased the protest rate by a
whopping 40.5%. This evidence suggests that hassle costs are of first order in the decision to
protest taxes.5 Moreover, we combine the experimental and quasi-experimental estimates to
quantify the hassle costs. Our back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that, at the margin,
the hassle cost of protesting amounts to $226. Indeed, this estimate constitutes just a lower
bound, as our intervention reduces some of the hassle costs but is far from eradicating them
completely.
    These results have important implications for the preferences for redistribution. For
households that protested on their own in 2020, the average reduction in the tax bill was $297
(including successful and unsuccessful protests). Because the great majority of households
do not protest, one naive interpretation could be that the great majority of households are
not selfish and are happy to pay the extra $297 in taxes; however, the fact that the hassle
costs are in the order of $226 challenges this interpretation. Given the magnitude of average
costs and average benefits, a more plausible interpretation is that most households would
want to reduce their own taxes, but do not protest because the hassle costs are just too large
relative to their expected savings.
    That the evidence presented here suggests that selfishness plays a significant role in the
decision to protest taxes does not mean that social preferences cannot play a role as well.
We introduced an additional treatment arm in the field experiment to measure conditional
cooperation: that is, whether households are more willing to tolerate a higher tax rate if they
perceive the average citizen as facing a higher tax rate, too. Conditional cooperation has
been documented in laboratory public good games (Gächter, 2007). However, it is not clear
whether the results from the laboratory would be economically significant with real-world
issues such as property taxes. Among other things, the stakes are orders of magnitude higher
for property taxes than for laboratory games, and individuals may have strong views about
5
    Our evidence of hassle costs is consistent with frictions found in other contexts such as the take-up of social
    benefits (Finkelstein and Notowidigdo, 2019) and filing income taxes (Bhargava and Manoli, 2015; Benzarti,
    Benzarti).


                                                          4
the government that do not manifest in laboratory games (Huet-Vaughn et al., 2019).
     Our identification strategy to study conditional cooperation is based on an information-
provision experiment embedded in the field experiment: we randomized whether the letter
sent to each household included accurate information on the average tax rate in the county. To
the extent that households have systematic misperceptions, the information experiment can
generate exogenous variation in subjects' perceptions of the average tax rate in the county. To
validate this research design, we simultaneously conducted a separate, pre-registered, survey
experiment with a different sample of respondents.
     Results from the field experiment suggest that the average household displays conditional
cooperation: when persuaded that the average tax rate in the county is higher, they become
less likely to protest their own taxes. This effect is not only statistically significant, but also
economically large. To appreciate the quantitative importance of conditional cooperation,
consider the following counterfactual analysis based on our preferred estimates combined
with our results from the homestead cap quasi-experiment. If we increased a household's
tax rate by 0.1 pp while holding everyone else's tax rates constant, the protest probability
for that household would increase by 9.63 pp. If, instead, we increased the household's tax
rate by 0.1 pp while increasing everyone else's tax rates by 0.1 pp, too, then the household's
protest probability would still increase but by 6.43 pp. Thus, the conditional cooperation
preferences dampen a third of the effect of the tax hike.
     Last, we explore heterogeneity by partisan identity in the motives for protesting. Evi-
dence from survey data suggests that Republicans and Democrats have significantly different
opinions on preferences for redistribution and taxation (Stantcheva, 2020). By comparing
their preferences for protesting, we can explore whether these differences exist when Re-
publicans and Democrats face real stakes. We matched the individual-level data from the
property tax records to the Texas voter files to construct a proxy for whether each taxpayer
is likely to be Democrat or Republican. We show that there are some systematic differences
between Democrats and Republicans regarding their propensities to protest. Although both
Democrats and Republicans are highly elastic to the private costs and private benefits of
protesting, there are some significant differences in magnitude: relative to Democrats, Re-
publicans are somewhat more elastic to their private incentives. We also find that Democrats
care a lot more about conditional cooperation than Republicans, but the difference is impre-
cisely estimated so this result must be taken with a grain of salt.6
     This study is both related and contributes to various strands of scholarship. First, this
study contributes to the literature on the decision to protest taxes. Protesting property
6
    Our evidence is consistent with the findings from Cullen et al. (2020) suggesting that partisanship can affect
    tax compliance.



                                                         5
taxes is allowed in all 50 U.S. states (Dobay et al., 2019).7 Protesting property taxes is
allowed outside of the United States, too (Dobay et al., 2019; Group, 2019).8 Despite being
so common, tax protests have received little attention in the economics literature. To the
best of our knowledge, there are two exemptions: Jones (2019) uses data on the decision to
protest taxes to provide a test of loss aversion,9 and Avenancio-León and Howard (2019) show
that local governments place a disproportionate fiscal burden on racial and ethnic minorities
and further document that some of those differences operate through tax appeals.10 We
contribute to this literature by being the first to use tax protests to learn about preferences
for redistribution. Furthermore, we identify and measure three important factors that affect
the protest decision: private benefits, private costs, and conditional cooperation. Indeed,
these findings can provide key inputs for the design of a more equitable system of tax appeals.
    Second, we contribute to the literature on preferences for redistribution. Revealed prefer-
ence evidence has proved elusive in this body of literature because individuals do not get to
choose their tax rates. The typical way in which economists study preferences for redistribu-
tion is through survey data (Alesina and Giuliano, 2011; Cruces et al., 2013; Kuziemko et al.,
2015), which has a number of well-known limitations ­ for example, individuals may say that
they want high redistribution due to social pressure, but when the stakes are high they may
act selfishly instead. Few efforts have been made to study preferences for redistribution with
revealed-preferences data, such as using survey data on voting preferences (Fisman et al.,
2017; Epper et al., 2020) or charitable giving (Fisman et al., 2007), but they all have their
own sets of limitations.11 We contribute to this literature by being the first to study prefer-
ences for redistribution using the decision to protest taxes. While this context is not ideal,
7
  In practice, protesting property taxes may be more common in some counties than in others, for example
  due to institutional differences. As an illustration, while none of the counties in Texas charge a fee to
  protest property taxes, some counties outside of Texas can charge fees, which can be substantial in some
  cases (Dobay et al., 2019).
8
  For example, Dobay et al. (2019) found that protesting property taxes was allowed in all 10 countries that
  were examined, and Group (2019) shows that property tax protests are allowed in several Latin American
  countries too.
9
  In essence, Jones (2019) shows that the probability of protesting increases when the assessed value is
  revised upwards and decreases when the assessed value is revised downwards, but the effect is much larger
  (in absolute value) for the upwards revisions than for the downward revisions.
10
   Some studies look at property taxes more generally, without focusing on protests. One recent example is
   Cabral and Hoxby (2012), providing evidence of how salience affects property tax rates and limits.
11
   Voting is secret, and thus can only be observed at the individual level with survey data. Furthermore,
   voting is inconsequential in that the probability of a single vote being pivotal is often negligible. While
   preferences for redistribution is certainly one issue that people have in mind when deciding whom to vote
   for, the decision can depend largely on non-economic factors such as abortion rights and Second Amendment
   rights. Charitable giving constitutes a much smaller fraction of GDP. Giving is largely driven by factors
   other than preferences for redistribution, such as religious participation (Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2015).
   Moreover, giving removes the government from the equation, which can be misleading: some people may
   be willing to give to charity but would still not want government redistribution.



                                                      6
we believe it provides significant improvement in a number of respects. Most notably, tax
protesting is a type of high stakes behavior that can be measured objectively with admin-
istrative records. Indeed, we provide detailed instructions so that other researchers can use
this same experimental framework to study preferences for redistribution as well as other
topics.
    Our study is also related to other strands in the literature; for example, research on
tax compliance (Slemrod, 2018; Holz et al., 2020). We contribute by sharing findings from
our study of a form of tax compliance that has been entirely overlooked in the literature:
tax appeals. Our study also relates to the literature on behavioral public finance showing
that insights from behavioral economics can have important implications for public policy
(Chetty, 2015). More precisely, we show that information frictions and social preferences
play a significant role in the decision to protest taxes.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional context.
Section 3 discusses the role of private benefits. Section 4 presents evidence on the private
costs. Section 5 discusses the results on conditional cooperation. The last section concludes.


2        Institutional Context
Dallas County is the second largest county in Texas with an estimated population of 2.6
million in 2020. In Texas, counties collect property taxes, which they use to fund various
services, including schools, roads, and the police and fire departments. The Dallas County
tax assessor contractually collects property taxes. While the county collects property taxes
on both residential and business properties, this study focuses on residential single-family
homes. We use publicly available administrative data from DCAD. For each home in the
county, the data include information on ownership, address, property characteristics (e.g.,
number of bedrooms), and historical yearly data on proposed and certified market values, ex-
emption amounts, taxable values, tax rates as well as details on property tax protest records.
Whenever needed, we complement the administrative records with other data sources.
    The tax amount due is calculated by DCAD using a multi-step formula that starts with
the proposed assessment value of the home. Taxes due are a function of a host of factors
such as the household's exemptions and the specific tax rates that pertain to the household,
depending on the jurisdictions to which the home belongs.12 Homeowners have the right
12
     The jurisdictions in Dallas County are four county-level jurisdictions, 23 of the cities within the county,
     nine school districts, the Dallas Community College system, the Parkland Hospital system, and 49
     Public Improvement Districts (PID) that fund special public services in some areas (Source: https:
     //www.dallascounty.org/departments/tax/jurisdictions.php). Appendix A.1 provides a additional
     details about the property taxes in Dallas County, while Appendix A.1 provides further details about the



                                                        7
to protest if they disagree with DCAD's proposed assessment value. Among other reasons,
homeowners can protest if they believe the proposed value of their property is too high relative
to the market value of comparable houses that were sold in the county; if their properties'
proposed values are too high relative to the proposed values of comparable houses in the
district; or if there are errors in the public records of the property (e.g., an incorrect number
of bedrooms). For instance, according to the 2020 data for households that protested on
their own, 91.87% of them selected the option "Value is over market value" in their online
forms. When filing a protest, homeowners can also provide an "Opinion of Value", which is
how much they believe their property was actually worth as of January 1st .
    Homeowners can file protests on their own. We refer to this type of protest as direct
protests. Because such protests are the focus of this paper, we always refer to this type of
protests unless we explicitly note otherwise. Instead of protesting on their own, homeowners
can hire an agent to protest on their behalf. In exchange for representation, agents normally
charge some combination of a flat fee and a percentage of the tax savings (which can be as
high as 50% of the tax savings).
    For the sake of completeness, we present results for both direct protests and protests
through agents; however, protests through agents are less relevant to our study for a couple
of reasons. First, we designed parts of the field experiment specifically to reduce the hassle
costs from protesting directly ­ which, if anything, should crowd-out protests through agents.
Second, the timing of the protests through agents makes it more difficult for them to be
affected by the type of quasi-experimental and experimental variation used in our research
design. According to anecdotal accounts, households often sign contracts with agents months
before the proposed values are announced. Indeed, the decision to protest through an agent
may have been made years previously, as agents offer long-term contracts to automatically
protest on the owner's behalf every year.13
    The timing of the protest process is quite simple. Each year, the DCAD appraises the
value of all homes in the county based on properties' market values as of January 1st . The
DCAD shares with homeowners the proposed values through its website and, for most house-
holds, by mailing a "Notice of Appraised Value". Households have a month from the notifica-
tion date to file a protest. DCAD's notifications include estimated taxes, which are based on
each property's proposed value. These taxes are "estimated" because, technically, property
tax rates are determined later in the year, so the county uses the prior year's jurisdictional
     data sources.
13
     While there is no publicly available data on who entered into these long-term contracts, we do find some
     suggestive evidence in the protest data: households that protested through an agent in a given year have a
     high likelihood of protesting again through an agent in the following year. For instance, of the homeowners
     who protested through agents in 2019, 62.67% protested again through agents in 2020; in contrast, of the
     homeowners who protested directly in 2019, only 28.62% protested again directly in 2020.


                                                        8
tax rates to estimate taxes due in the Notice of Appraised Value. In practice, tax rate changes
are not common so the approximation error is often negligible. For the sake of brevity, in this
study we refer to taxes directly, but all analysis is technically based on "estimated" taxes.
     In 2020, DCAD presented the proposed values on May 15th ; as a result, the deadline
to protest was June 15th . After that deadline, disputes can be resolved by homeowners
at different stages. Some protests are resolved because the owner accepts the settlements
proposed by the county. This settlement may be offered through informal channels, such
as an email or phone exchange with a staff member from DCAD. If an agreement is not
reached, the protest advances to a formal hearing with a quasi-judicial entity called the
Appraisal Review Board.14 The formal hearing entails no risk: if the DCAD schedules a
hearing and households do not attend, the protest is simply dismissed with no penalty.15
After protests are resolved one way or another, the final assessed home values (from hereon,
"certified" values) and tax amounts are calculated, and taxes are due and payable on October
1st , 2020.
     In 2020, 8.40% of homeowners protested directly. An additional 8.42% protested through
an agent, resulting in total protest rate of 16.82%. This rate of protests is not atypical when
compared to recent years: for example, looking at the same sample of households, we find that
13.82% protested in 2017, 15.09% protested in 2018, and 13.89% protested in 2019. Filing a
protest directly is simple. Homeowners can protest using a paper form provided by Dallas
CAD to households that received notification by mail, a form from the Texas Comptroller
that can be printed from the Internet, or via a simple online tool called uFile. To protest
online, households need to search for their own name or address on a website, click on their
account, and then follow some straightforward steps. In 2020, 75% of direct protests were
filed online while the remaining 25% were filed by mail.
     Before moving on to the causal identification, we provide some simple descriptive statistics
to illustrate the importance of causal identification in this context. Figure 1.a shows the
relationship between the tax burden (i.e., the tax amount the household would pay based on
the proposed value) and the protest probability. There is a steep relationship: the protest
probability is much higher for households that pay higher tax amounts, which holds true for
the overall protest rate as well as separately for the direct protest and the protest through
14
   Formal hearings are typically conducted in person before a panel of three independent board members
   proposed by the DCAD and appointed by the Local Administrative District Judge of Dallas County. In
   response to the COVID-19 emergency in 2020, the DCAD staff did not conduct face-to-face negotiations,
   and all settlements were offered via email or telephone. Formal hearings were conducted over the phone
   with a single board member. If all else fails, the homeowner has the option to contest the decision in court.
15
   Of the 2019 direct protests that contain information on the form in which it was resolved, we find that
   31.4% were settled informally, 44.4% were settled after a formal hearing, and 24.2% were either withdrawn
   or dismissed.



                                                       9
agents. However, this steep relationship could be due to different mechanisms and thus have
different implications for our understanding of preferences for redistribution. Specifically, this
relationship could be due to selfish reasons: households with a higher tax bill may protest
more just because their expected benefits are greater than their expected costs. Alternatively,
the steep relationship may be due to social preferences: the richest households protest because
they feel that they are contributing more than their fair share. This study explores each of
these mechanisms.
    Disentangling why some households are more likely to protest can also be of interest to
policymakers. For instance, Figure 1.b compares the protest rates of Hispanics and Whites.
This analysis is based on a subsample for which we have a proxy for ethnicity based on last
names (Perez-Truglia and Cruces, 2017). The results are broken down by each quintile of the
distribution of the tax amount in this sample. Note that within each of the first four quin-
tiles is a statistically significant and economically large difference in protest rates between
Hispanics and Whites. For example, in the lowest quintile, the probability of protesting is
36% smaller for Hispanics than for Whites (4.99 pp versus 7.84 pp). Across the five quintiles,
Hispanic households are 1.97 pp less likely to protest than comparable White households.16
This statistic constitutes suggestive evidence that the protest system may disadvantage mi-
nority groups (Avenancio-León and Howard, 2019). Parsing out the mechanisms behind the
decision to protest may serve to explain the roots of these disadvantages. More importantly,
the causal estimates may provide hints on how to alleviate the inequalities in the system.


3        Private Benefits
3.1       Conceptual Framework
In this section, we use quasi-experimental variation in the pecuniary incentives to protest
provided by Texas's property tax regulations. In Texas, homeowners may apply for home-
stead status for their primary residence. Among other benefits, the Texas Property Code
guarantees that any increase in the appraised value of a homestead property is limited to
10% per year, which is referred to as the homestead cap. This regulation generates a sharp
kink in the expected benefits from protesting. We exploit this kink as a natural experiment.
    In practice, the amount of taxes that a household pays is calculated through a formula
that involves the proposed value and the tax rates for the various jurisdictions as well as
other factors, such as the homestead cap and other exemptions. Because households have
16
     This finding is based on a comparison of the 2020 protest rates between Hispanic and White households
     that control linearly for the logarithm of the 2020 estimated taxes.



                                                     10
the opportunity to protest every year, dynamic considerations may arise, too. For the sake
of simplicity and to fix the intuition for the empirical analysis, however, we now introduce a
simple model of the decision to protest. Let A be the proposed value of the household and
T be the amount the household has to pay in property taxes. Under a simple proportional
tax rate ( ), the tax burden without a homestead cap is the following:

                                         Tnocap =  · A                                        (1)

   Let C denote the cost of protesting. Assume that households can protest (P = 1) or not
(P = 0), and let A  0 be a random variable that corresponds to the reduction in A that
would result from a protest. Then the expected net benefit from protesting is:

             E[U (P = 1) - U (P = 0)]nocap =  · P(A > 0) · E[A |A > 0] - C                    (2)

and the household will protest if the above expected net benefits are positive and will not
protest if they are non-positive. Now, let's introduce the homestead cap. Let the cap thresh-
old be A ¯. Taking this threshold into consideration, the tax burden can be computed as
follows:

                                                       ¯}
                                      Tcap =  · min{A, A                                      (3)

    If the cap is not binding (A < A  ¯), then Tcap is identical to Tnocap , and thus the decision
to protest is not affected by the homestead cap. The interesting case is when the cap is
binding (A > A  ¯). As a result of a binding cap, the expected net benefit from protesting are
as follows:

                                            ¯) · E[A - (A - A
 E[U (P = 1) - U (P = 0)]cap =  · P(A > A - A               ¯)|A > A - A
                                                                       ¯] - C, (4)

   This equation can be re-arranged as follows:

    E[U (P = 1) - U (P = 0)]cap = · P(A > 0) · E[A |A > 0] - C
                                                                                              (5)
                                                    ¯) · E[A |0 < A < A - A
                                 -  · P(0 < A < A - A                     ¯]

    Note that first two terms in the RHS in equation 2 are identical to the first two terms on
the RHS in equation 5. Thus, the last term in equation 5 is the difference in incentives to
protest introduced by the cap. The cap reduces the expected benefits from protesting when
it is binding. Note that the expected benefits are lower the larger the difference between
the proposed value and the homestead threshold (A - A   ¯). The intuition is straightforward:
absent a cap, the household knows that a reduction in the assessed value will result in a
reduction in the tax bill. When a household's proposed value is above the cap, however, the
marginal reduction in the assessed value will not affect the final tax bill. If the proposed

                                               11
value is just $1 above the cap, then the first dollar reduction in the assessed value will not
affect the tax bill but every dollar after that will. In that case, the cap should matter little to
the household's decision to protest. However, if the proposed value is $15,000 above the cap,
then none of the first $15,000 reduction in the assessed value will affect the tax burden, and
thus the cap will substantially affect the expected benefits from protesting: the household
will only see a reduction in the tax bill if the home value assessment is revised downwards
by more than $15,000.


3.2       Results
Our analysis of the effects of the homestead cap on protest rates is based on the universe of
423,607 single-family homes that were subject to property taxes in Dallas County in 2020. In
Appendix A.3, we present detailed descriptive statistics for this sample, which we summarize
below. The average home has a value of about $300,000 and pays $6,150 annually in property
taxes, which implies a tax rate of around 2%. For a subsample of these subjects, we obtained
individual-level demographic data from a private company.17 The average subject is 52 years
old, 65% are White, 9% are African-American and 20% are Hispanics. Most relevant for this
analysis, 74% of these households had a homestead status approved for 2020, and thus their
homestead caps can be binding. We focus on this 74% subsample for the main analysis, but
leverage the remaining 26% of the households for a falsification test.
    Figure 2 summarizes the main results. This figure is a binned scatterplot of the rela-
tionship between a given outcome and the distance between the proposed value (A) and
the potential homestead cap threshold (A    ¯). For the sake of simplicity, Figure 2 includes a
minimal set of controls (the proposed value, a dummy for whether the household protested
in the previous year, and a set of school district dummies). This figure also focuses on a
narrow band around the homestead cap threshold ($15,000 above and below). Later we show
that the results are robust under alternative specifications. The three panels on the left of
Figures 2 (2.a, 2.c and 2.e) correspond to the properties with homestead status ­ for which
the homestead cap threshold can be binding. In turn, the three panels to the right correspond
to the properties without homestead status, for which the homestead cap threshold should
be irrelevant and thus serve as a falsification test.
    We start with Figure 2.a, in which the outcome variable measured on the vertical axis
is the amount of property taxes in 2020. The horizontal axis measures the distance to the
homestead cap threshold. The blue dots correspond to the observations to the left of the
homestead cap threshold, with the blue line corresponding to the linear fit. The coefficient
17
     The company used the names and addresses to merge the records at the individual level. For more details
     about these data, see Appendix A.2.


                                                      12
from the linear regression is reported in blue, too. For ease of exposition, we normalize all of
the coefficients so that they correspond to the effects from a $10,000 increase in the proposed
value. In turn, the red dots and red lines correspond to the observations to the right of the
potential homestead cap threshold.
    As expected, there is a sharp kink at the threshold: after hitting the homestead cap
threshold, households had to pay less in taxes than they would have needed to pay absent the
homestead cap. This kink is not only large in magnitude, but also statistically significant:
we can reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient to the left of the threshold (-97) is
equal to the coefficient to the right of the threshold (-306), with a p-value<0.001. The
following thought experiment can illustrate the magnitude of the effect of the cap. Suppose
the proposed value starts right at the threshold, and then it increases by $10,000. The
dashed blue line projects the linear fit from the left side to estimate what the outcome would
have looked like in the absence of the homestead cap. In contrast, the solid red line shows
what the taxes actually looked like under the homestead cap. The estimates indicate that,
absent the cap, the $10,000 increase in proposed value would have resulted in an additional
$209 (=306-97) in taxes. In turn, Figure 2.c reproduces Figure 2.a, but using the tax rate
instead of the tax amount as the dependent variable. The results are similar: because of the
homestead cap, a household that is $10,000 above the threshold ends up paying a tax rate
that is 0.118 pp (=0.163-0.045) lower.
    However, the effects of the homestead cap on taxes (Figures 2.a and 2.c) are mechani-
cal. What we really care about is whether the lower tax burden affects the probability of
protesting. To explore that, Figure 2.e is identical to Figures 2.a and 2.c, except that the
vertical axis is the protest rate: for example, an indicator that takes the value 100 if the
owner protested directly and 0 otherwise. We find that, as expected, there is a sharp kink in
Figure 2.e at exactly the homestead cap threshold. This kink is not only large in magnitude,
but also statistically significant: we can reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient to the
left of the threshold (2.881) is equal to the coefficient to the right of the threshold (-1.604),
with a p-value<0.001.
    Next, the three panels in the right half of Figure 2 (2.b, 2.d and 2.f) provide a sharp
falsification test. These panels correspond to the properties without homestead status, and
thus for which the homestead cap threshold should be irrelevant.18 Thus, this sample provides
a natural falsification test: a kink in the right panels would suggest that the results shown
above for the left panels are due to a confounding factor. As expected, we find that, in each
of the three right-side panels of Figure 2, there are no kinks at the homestead cap threshold:
18
     In these figures, the hypothetical homestead cap threshold is defined as 110% of the assessed value in the
     previous year (2019).



                                                       13
we cannot reject the null hypotheses that the coefficients are equal below and above the
homestead cap threshold. Most importantly, the coefficients are precisely estimated in the
right-side panels of Figure 2, meaning that we can rule out not only the large kinks shown
in the left-side panel of Figure 2, but also small kinks.
    Now, we need a way of quantifying the effects of the homestead cap presented in Figure 2.
According to the model from Section 3.1, above, each additional dollar in which the tax bill is
reduced due to the homestead cap reduces the expected benefits from protesting, which should
translate into a lower protest probability. Indeed, this prediction is borne out by the data: as
we move to the right of the threshold, the tax rate decreases linearly (Figure 2.c). Likewise,
the protest probability goes down linearly (Figure 2.e). Combining these two figures, we
can quantify the relationship between the tax rate and the protest probability. Figure 2.c
indicates that going $10,000 above the homestead cap causes, on average, a reduction of 0.118
pp in the tax rate. In turn, Figure 2.e indicates that going $10,000 above the homestead
cap causes a reduction in the protest probability of 4.485 percentage points. By taking the
ratio of these two estimates, we conclude that each 0.1 pp reduction in the tax rate decreases
the protest probability by 3.65 pp. To simplify the interpretation of this magnitude, we can
express it as an elasticity. The 0.1 pp reduction in the tax rate corresponds to 5% of the
average tax rate of approximately 2%, while the 3.65 pp reduction in the protest probability
corresponds to 36.7% of the average protest probability. These percent changes suggest that
                      .7
there is a 7.34 (= 365
                         ) elasticity of the protest probability with respect to the tax rate. In
other words, the decision to protest is highly elastic to the financial benefits.
    We can translate the previous analysis into a single parameter from an instrumental
variable regression. Consider the sample of subjects with homestead status. Let Pi2020 be an
indicator variable that takes the value 100 if household i protested directly in 2020.19 We
continue the notation from Section 3.1 and define Ai as property i's proposed value and A      ¯i
as the potential homestead cap threshold (i.e., 110% of the appraised value from the previous
year). The relevant Instrumental Variables regression is:

                Pi2020 =0 + 1 · i + 2 · (Ai - A ¯i ) + Xi X + i
                                                                                                      (6)
                    i =0 + 1 · 1(Ai > A¯i ) · (Ai - A¯i ) + 2 · (Ai - A
                                                                      ¯i ) + Xi X + i

   Xi stands for an extensive set of additional control variables to improve power and to
address any remaining concerns about confounding factors. We use this exact same set of
control variables in all regressions in the paper: the proposed value in levels and its annual
growth, dummies for multiple owners, school and special districts, number of years since
19
     In all the analysis presented in this paper, we include protests that were marked as received by DCAD
     through July 1515th . For more details, see Appendix A.2.



                                                     14
the last protest, a dummy for homestead status, and for each year since 2015, a dummy
indicating if the household protested in that year and the outcome of the protest (if any)
as a %-reduction in the market value.20 Note that the endogenous variable in the equation
(6) is the tax rate, and the excluded instrument is the interaction 1(Ai > A        ¯i ) · (Ai - A¯i ).
The coefficient 1 corresponds to the key quantitative exercise from the graphical analysis
above: it measures the effect of an additional 1 pp reduction in i , through the cap, on the
probability of protesting.
    The results are reported in Table 1. Column (1) indicates that a 0.1 pp increase in the tax
rate causes an increase of 3.65 pp in protest probability. This coefficient is not only large but
also highly statistically significant (p-value<0.001). Figure 2 offers a first falsification test, by
reproducing the analysis for properties that are not subject to the homestead cap. Column
(2) of Table 1 offers an alternative falsification test: the regression is identical to that from
column (1); but the dependent variable indicates whether the household protested in 2019
(instead of whether the household protested in 2020). This is a falsification test in the spirit
of event-study analysis: whether the 2020 proposed value ends up being above or below the
2020 homestead cap should not affect whether a household protested a year prior, in 2019. As
expected, we find that the coefficient is close to zero (-5.740), statistically insignificant, and
precisely estimated (indeed, it is more precisely estimated than the corresponding coefficient
from column (1)). We can also confidently reject that the coefficient from column (2), -5.740,
is equal to the coefficient from column (1), 36.507, with a p-value<0.001. Moreover, we
find that this falsification test is robust not only when looking at the 2019 protests but also
when using the protests for all the years for which we have data: 2018, 2017, 2016, and 2015
(results reported in Appendix A.4).
    As shown in Figure 2.a, the homestead cap affects the tax rate as well as the tax amount.
As a result, for a robustness exercise we can reproduce the analysis using the tax amount
instead of the tax rate as the endogenous variable.21 Columns (3) and (4) reproduce columns
(1) and (2), but using the tax amount instead of the tax rate as endogenous variables. The
results are robust both qualitatively (i.e., in terms of sign and statistical significance) as well
as quantitatively. For example, we showed above that the results from column (1) imply
an elasticity of 7.34. If we reproduce that analysis but based on the estimates reported
in column (3) instead, we find an elasticity of 13.01, which is somewhat larger but in the
same order of magnitude.22 In turn, column (4) reproduces the falsification test that uses the
20
   Note that this specific regression has no variation in homestead status so that the control variable is
   irrelevant, but the homestead status variable will have variation in other regressions below.
21
   In principle, households may care about the tax rate, the tax amount, or a combination of both. Whether
   one or the other is more important in practice may depend on several factors; for example, the tax amount
   could be more relevant if the protest costs are fixed with respect to the proposed value.
22
   A $100 increase in the tax amount, which corresponds to a 1.69% increase with respect to the average tax


                                                    15
protest in 2019 as a placebo outcome: as expected, the coefficient is close to zero, statistically
significant, and precisely estimated.
     In addition to the direct protests, we can look at the effects of the homestead cap on the
protests through agents. As discussed in Section 2, above, the timing of the protest through
agents is quite different. It is possible that those who protest through agents have signed
their contract way before May 15, when the proposed values were announced. As a result, it
would be impossible for the homestead cap to affect the decision of those households. It is
still possible, however, that the homestead cap could dissuade some households from finding
an agent at the last moment. The results are presented in column (5), which is identical to
column (1), except that the dependent variable indicates whether the household protested
through an agent (instead of indicating whether the household protested on its own). The
effects on agent protests are qualitatively consistent with the results on direct protests; how-
ever, consistent with the timing issues described above, the effects are quantitatively smaller
for the protest through agents. For example, while a 0.1 pp increase in the tax rate would
increase the probability of protesting directly by 3.65 pp, a 0.1 pp increase in the tax rate
would increase the probability of protesting through an agent by just 0.61 pp (and their
difference is statistically significant, p-value<0.001). In turn, the dependent variable from
column (6) indicates if the household protested at all, regardless of whether it was direct or
through an agent. The effects on total protests (column (6)) are similar in magnitude to the
effects on direct protests (column (1)).
     Columns (7) and (8) reproduce column (1) for alternative bandwidths. Note that the re-
sults should not be identical in magnitude: since the instrumental variables model estimates
a local average treatment effect, if there are heterogeneous effects then it would be natural for
the estimates to be quantitatively different in different samples. However, we would expect
the results to be qualitatively robust and remain in the same order of magnitude. The spec-
ification from column (7) is identical to that of column (1) except that it uses a wider band:
proposed values must be within $30,000 of the homestead cap threshold instead of within
$15,000. As a result, the total number of observations increases from 96,274 in column (1)
to 179,452 in column (7). The results are both qualitatively and quantitatively quite similar:
the coefficient on i is 36.507 (p-value<0.001) in column (1) versus 30.644 (p-value<0.001) in
column (7). In column (8), we use an even wider bandwidth: observations within $150,000
of the threshold, which further increases the sample size to 308,000 households. The results
are quantitatively somewhat smaller, but still highly statistically significant (p-value<0.001)
and, due to the larger sample size, the coefficient is more precisely estimated.
  amount ($5,916), results in an increase in the protest probability of 2.2 pp, which is in turn equivalent to
  22% of the average protest probability (9.98 pp).



                                                     16
4       Private Costs
4.1       Conceptual Framework
If households are able to free-ride by protesting taxes, why doesn't everybody do it? As illus-
trated in the model from Section 3, one explanation is that there is a private cost associated
with protesting that­if significant enough­may discourage households from protesting even
if they would like to pay less in taxes. In this section, we seek to provide direct evidence of
those costs as well as to quantify them.
     There are no fees or monetary costs associated with filing a protest directly in Texas.
Instead, the private cost that we are referring to is non-pecuniary. We hypothesized two
specific sources of hassle costs, and then designed a mailing intervention aimed at reducing
each of those two types of costs. If those costs are significant, our intervention should increase
the probability that the subjects protest.
     The first source of hassle cost consists of identifying the steps to complete the protest
process. While filing a protest on your own is smooth in theory, it may be otherwise in
practice. Some households may not even know where to start. Some may think the process
is a lot more difficult than it actually is. Other households may be less sophisticated, and
thus need step-by-step guidance on how to protest. Indeed, instructions on how to protest
are not readily available. At the time of the experiment, only one official source online
had instructions on how to file a protest: a PDF document posted on the Dallas CAD's
website.23 However, this document was long, had broad instructions, and was tucked deep
into the Dallas CAD's website. There were also a few unofficial online sources, such as blog
posts, but those were usually incomplete, outdated, and difficult to find. Moreover, those
sources often had a commercial interest, deliberately presenting the protest process more
complicated than it really was.
     The second source of hassle cost we identified consisted of a specific step in the protest
procedure: providing an opinion of value for the home and an argument supporting it. While
this process may be undertaken in different ways, typically protesters identify a comparison
property that has been sold recently for less than the proposed value of their own property.
The comparable property's sale price can then serve as the opinion of value, and information
about the recent transaction can be used as the argument. To find a proper comparison
property entails a number of steps: First, the household needs to access a tool, such as Zillow,
to identify properties that have been sold recently. Then, the household needs to use the tool
to filter among recently sold properties those with comparable features yet were sold for less
23
     This document can be found in the following address: http://www.dallascad.org/Forms/Protest_
     Process.pdf.


                                                17
than one's own proposed value within a few months of the start of the year. Though finding
this comparison property manually may be relatively easy for someone skilled in searching for
information online, this task could be daunting for some people who have limited Internet
skills or financial literacy, or possess those skills but not the patience to do the research,
or are unfamiliar with the tool. Indeed, plenty of evidence indicates that households have
trouble finding even easily accessible information such as information on the inflation rate or
changes in average home prices (Cavallo et al., 2017; Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2020).
    It must be noted there are probably other sources of hassle costs in addition to the two
sources described above. Even with the aid of our mailing intervention, households must
spend time filing and keeping tabs on their protests. Additionally, some may find paperwork
to be such an unpleasant activity that its costs well surpass the opportunity cost of time. In
that sense, our estimates will provide a lower bound of the full private costs from protesting.


4.2        Mailing Design
We begin with a general description of the letters sent to the subjects. We included a number
of features to signal that, though this letter was unsolicited, it came from a legitimate source.
The envelope (see Appendix B for a sample) includes the logo of the University of Texas at
Dallas, a well-known institution in Dallas County, and the name of one of the professors from
that university. The envelope also included non-profit organization postage.
    Figures 3 and 4 show the first and second page of this sample letter, but with the addition
of some red boxes highlighting the parts that were randomized.24 The letter contained
additional measures to reassure the recipient that the communication was legitimate: the
official logo of the University of Texas at Dallas in the header as well as a physical address
that they could write to and the URL for the study's website. The website included general
information about the study (without discussing any hypotheses or what the study was about)
as well as contacts for the researchers and the Institutional Review Board. The letters were
tailored to the recipients too: the salutation at the top of the first page included the name of
each recipient; and their names and addresses were shown at the bottom of the second page
(which appeared through the envelope window).25
    There are some additional features of the letter that we summarize briefly for now but will
be discussed in detail in Section 5. All letters included a table in the middle of the first page
with information related to the subjects' properties' proposed values and estimated taxes;
we defer the discussion of this treatment arm to Section 5 below. At the bottom of the first
24
     Appendix C provides a full-page sample of the letter without the additional red boxes.
25
     Some properties are jointly owned by multiple individuals (typically, husband and wife). In those cases,
     we sent a single letter addressed to all the individuals listed as owners.



                                                      18
page, all letters included a URL to an online survey. To verify that the respondents were
legitimate subjects and to link survey responses at the household level, we included a unique
five-letter survey code for survey access. From here on, we refer to this as the Field Survey.
The first goal of this survey was to provide a proxy for the dates that recipients opened
the letters (Perez-Truglia and Cruces, 2017; Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2020). The survey
included some questions meant to be used as outcomes in the analysis and are discussed in
Section 5, below.


4.3       Experimental Design
Subjects can be randomly assigned to receive no letter or to receive one of two types of
letters. The basic aid letter was designed to address the first type of hassle cost described in
Section 4.1, above. This baseline aid consisted of a number of useful tips to help the recipient
file a protest. All of that information is found on the first page of the letter, a sample of
which appears in Figure 3. A key part of the first page is that it mentions recipients could
find instructions on how to file a protest on the project's website. We designed our website
instructions to be concise, easy to follow, and as explicit as possible. A full copy of the
website is in Appendix D. The website included step-by-step instructions on how to file a
protest online or by mail. These walkthroughs included hyperlinks to the relevant websites
as well as screenshots of a fictitious application for added clarity.
     The second letter type, extra aid letter, is identical to the basic aid letter except that it
includes additional information on the second page. Figure 4.a shows what the second page
of the letter would look like if assigned to the basic aid treatment, while Figure 4.b shows
what it would look like under the extra aid treatment. The extra aid message in Figure 4.b is
highlighted inside of a red box with dashed lines (this box is shown for expositional purposes
and was not included in the actual letters sent to subjects). The extra aid message was
intended to reduce the second source of hassle costs described in Section 4.1, above.
     The first paragraph of the extra aid message began by providing some facts about the
protest filing process, such as that protesting is simple, can be done without an agent,
may not require a hearing (which could be intimidating to some subjects) when the DCAD
proposes a settlement offer; and even if a hearing is scheduled, there is not any risk if it is not
attended. Then, it provided an argument for the protest. More specifically, we presented the
most common type of argument: based on the recent sales price of a comparable property,
the proposed value for the property is over the market value.26 To make it simpler to use
this information, we presented it much how it would look on the actual protest form: with
26
     We identified one comparable property for all households in the subject pool, but we only display this
     information in the letter for the subjects randomly selected for the extra aid letter.


                                                     19
a check mark in the "Value is over market value" box, an opinion of value field with the
sales price of the comparison property filled in, and then a handwritten note with a usable
argument. For example, in the sample letter shown in Figure 4.b, the handwritten note
reads, "I found a home that is similar to mine but was recently sold for less than my home's
appraised market value. The property located at 2234 Meadowstone Dr. (Carrollton, TX)
is 0.20 miles away from my home, and has the same number of bedrooms and a similar
square footage. That property was sold on 10/31/2019 for $160,000." Households could
have used our proposed argument directly; however, to clarify that the content is just a
suggestion, we included the following: "You can find information about this sale by searching
for the property's address on Zillow.com or Redfin.com. On these websites you can find other
comparable properties to support your protest." Additionally, we mentioned that subjects
could protest based on different arguments, offering the following message: "You can also
protest based on the appraised market values of comparable properties, which can be found
on www.dallascad.org/SearchAddr.aspx."
    We created an algorithm that identified one comparison property for each household by
combining data from the tax rolls with data from recent property sales from websites such
as Zillow and Redfin. For each subject, the algorithm searches for properties that have been
sold by late 2019 or early 2020, and were similar to the subject's own property in a number of
dimensions (e.g., number of bedrooms, bathrooms, square footage built, location) but were
sold for less (between 5% and 20%) than the proposed value for the subject's own property. In
Appendix A.5, we provide details about this algorithm as well as some descriptive statistics.
If a homeowner were to hire an agent to protest on his or her behalf, we believe it is likely
that the agent would use a similar (or even the exact same) argument.


4.4        Subject Pool and Implementation Details
We started with the universe of 423,607 residential single-family properties used for the
analysis in Section 3.2, above, and focused on a subsample of 78,462 of those households,
which constitutes our subject pool for the field experiment. We arrived at that subsample
after applying a number of filters. For example, we excluded households that, according to
the latest available data from DCAD, had already filed a protest ­ because it would not
matter if we sent them a letter or what we included in the letter, because their decision had
been made already.27 The most important condition was to focus on households for whom our
algorithm could find comparison properties that we could utilize in the extra aid message ­
27
     We initially selected a sample of 79,322 properties. However, due to a lag of a few days in the way DCAD
     reports the data, we had to drop 860 of them from the subject pool; with the updated data, we discovered
     that they had already protested by the time we mailed the letters.


                                                      20
for the full criteria, see Appendix A.2. In Appendix A.3, we provide the descriptive statistics
for the subject pool. While not identical, the subject pool is quite similar to the universe of
households in observable, pre-treatment characteristics. Additionally, Appendix A.7 breaks
down the pre-treatment characteristics by treatment groups. We find that, consistent with
successful random assignment, the observable characteristics are balanced across all treatment
groups.
    The timing of the intervention was carefully planned.28 We created the letters as soon as
the administrative data including the 2020 proposed values became available (on May 16th ,
2020). To accelerate delivery time, we used a mailing company located in Dallas County (i.e.,
within the same county as all of the recipients). As a result, the vast majority of the letters
should have gotten to the subjects quickly. The mailing company dropped the letters off at
the local post office's facility on May 20th . This company estimated that the vast majority
of the letters would be delivered in the next couple of days. Consistent with this projection,
we began to receive some answers to the Field Survey and visits to the website on May 21th .
Moreover, the post office scans mail pieces when they reach the last mile immediately before
delivery. More than 90% of the letters had been scanned by Friday, May 22nd , 2020. Based
on data from previous years, most subjects file protests close to the deadline, which in 2020
was June 15th . For that reason, we feel confident that there was enough time between receipt
of the letter and the protest deadline so that, at least for most households, the information
provided in the letter could influence their decision to protest. Moreover, in Appendix A.8,
we provide suggestive evidence in support of this view based on the dates when subjects
responded to the Field Survey and visited the project's website.


4.5        Econometric Model
Recall that Pi2020 , the main outcome, is an indicator variable that takes the value 100 if the
subject filed a protest in the post-treatment period. We want to compare the probability of
protesting between subjects who were sent a letter and subjects who were not sent a letter;
or between subjects assigned to different types of letters. We use a simple linear probability
model:

                        Pi2020 = 0 + basic · Lbasic
                                              i     + extra · Lextra
                                                               i     + Xipre X +      i           (7)

   The variable, Lbasic
                    i    is an indicator that takes the value 1 if the household was mailed a
basic aid letter and 0 otherwise. Likewise, Lextra
                                              i    is an indicator that takes the value 1 if the
household was mailed an extra aid letter. Lastly, Xipre is a vector of pre-treatment controls,
28
     For additional details about the implementation of the field experiment, see Appendix A.6.



                                                      21
which is the exact same set of control variables listed in Section 3.2, above. Given that this
is an experiment, the only goal of using pre-treatment controls is to gain statistical power
by reducing the variance of the error term (McKenzie, 2012). Additionally, in the spirit of
event-study analyses, we use the pre-treatment data to construct falsification tests by using
protest in previous years as the dependent variable.


4.6    Results
The regression results are presented in Table 2. All regressions are based on the same
specification given in equation (7), above, but differ according to the dependent variable.
The dependent variable in column (1) takes the value 100 if the owner protested directly
and 0 otherwise. The basic aid letter increased that probability of protesting by 1.792 pp,
a highly statistically significant (p-value<0.001). In turn, the extra aid letter increased the
protest probability even more, by 3.509 pp.
    Column (2) of Table 2 presents an event-study falsification test. This column is identical
to column (1) except that the dependent variable indicates whether the owner protested
directly in 2019 instead of 2020. Since the letters were sent in 2020, they should have no
effect on the 2019 protests. As expected, we find point estimates that are close to zero,
statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated. Moreover, we find that this falsification
test is robust not only when looking at the 2019 protests but also when looking at protests
in all the years for which we have data: 2018, 2017, 2016, and 2015 (results reported in
Appendix A.4).
    Column (3) shows the effects on the probability of protesting through an agent. Since
our letter is providing aid for households to protest directly, it should not make them more
likely to protest through an agent. If anything, our letter could crowd-out protests through
an agent: for example, households that were about to hire an agent may receive our letter
and decide to protest directly instead. However, the data suggest that there was no such
crowd-out: the coefficients on the letters are close to zero (0.030 and -0.122 for the letters
with the basic aid letter and extra aid letter, respectively), statistically insignificant, and
precisely estimated. A likely explanation for why there was no crowd-out is based on the
timing. As explained in Section 2, above, it is likely that households had signed contracts
with agents earlier in the year or even long-term contracts in previous years. As a result,
by the time they received our letter, it would have been too late for them to change their
decision. In turn, the results in column (4) combine both types of protests: the dependent
variable in column (4) indicates whether the owner protested, either directly or through an
agent. Due to the lack of effects on agent protests (column (3)), the effects on total protests



                                              22
(column (4)) are almost identical to the effects on direct protests (column (1)).29
    What were the precise mechanisms behind these effects? Column (1) indicates that the
effect of the basic aid letter was positive (1.792 pp) and statistically different from the effect
of the extra aid letter (3.509 pp). The difference between the coefficient estimates indicates
that the extra aid message, on its own, had an effect of 1.717 pp (= 3.509 - 1.792), which
was highly statistically significant (p-value<0.001). The content of the aid message was quite
specific, so the interpretation of its effect is straightforward. In contrast, the basic aid letter
had many components to it, so it is a bit less clear what the underlying mechanisms were.
    One potential interpretation is that the basic aid letter acted as a reminder of the op-
portunity to protest, or made it more salient. This explanation is unlikely, however, as the
proposed property taxes are quite salient around the time subjects received our letter. To test
this hypothesis more directly, we exploit heterogeneity on whether households were mailed
a notification by the DCAD. Starting on May 15, any homeowner was able to download the
Notice of Appraised Value by going to the DCAD webpage (we provide a sample of this
notification in Appendix G). Additionally, DCAD sent notifications by mail to some house-
holds but not to others. For example, all households whose proposed value increased relative
to the previous year were mailed a notification. DCAD mailed the official notifications on
Friday, May 15, a few days earlier than we mailed our letters, on Wednesday, May 20, so the
households should have received the official notification around five days before our letter. If
our basic aid letter worked primarily through a reminder effect, it should have had a larger
effect on the households that did not receive the Dallas CAD notification.
    The results are presented in columns (5) and (6), which split the sample based on whether
the subjects were (column (5)) or were not (column (6)) mailed a notification from the
DCAD.30 The effects of the basic aid letter on subjects that were and were not mailed a notice
(coefficients of 1.449 and 1.935, respectively) are statistically indistinguishable from each
other. If anything, the point estimate is a bit larger in the sample that received a notification
from the DCAD ­ that is, the difference has the opposite sign as the one predicted by the
reminder channel. This finding constitutes suggestive evidence that the effect of the basic aid
letter went way beyond a simple reminder effect. As additional evidence, in Appendix A.9,
we present evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design showing that the official DCAD
mail notification did not have significant effects on the probability of protesting. If the official
notification did not act as a reminder, it is unlikely that our unofficial notification would.
    Instead, our favorite interpretation is that the walkthroughs that we provided through our
29
   The only difference between the results in columns (1) and (4) lies in the effects relative to the baseline
   (i.e., the ratio between the coefficient and the corresponding average of the dependent variable).
30
   We split the sample using publicly available data that DCAD posted on its website; for details, see Ap-
   pendix A.9.


                                                     23
project's website were one of the key mechanisms behind the effects of the basic aid letter. A
first piece of evidence for this interpretation relies on a perhaps unusual source of data. In the
project's website, we provided an email address to contact the researchers in case the subjects
had any concerns about the research project. While this was not the purpose of providing
the email address, a number of subjects sent emails to this address expressing gratitude for
the letter. We cannot share these messages because they are confidential, but their content
is broadly consistent with the letter having reduced subjects' hassle costs. For example,
some subjects mentioned that they had wanted to protest for years but did not know how to
until receiving our letter. Other subjects mentioned that they thought protesting was more
complicated than it was until they looked at our instructions. Similarly, the Field Survey
included a final, open-ended question in case the subjects wanted to share any thoughts with
the researchers. Many subjects used that space to express gratitude and sometimes made
explicit how the information contained in the letter and the website helped them navigate
the protest process.
    A second piece of evidence for this mechanism relies on data from the traffic to the
project's website. We start by noting that the basic aid provided in the letters generated
a total of 903 additional direct protests; we arrive at this figure by taking the effect of the
basic aid letter (1.792 pp, from column (1)) and multiplying it by the total number of letters
sent that included at least the basic aid message (50,394). We can compare this number of
additional protests to the number of unique visits to the website. Google Analytics recorded
a total of 2,769 unique visits to the walkthroughs to protest online or by mail (for more
details, see Appendix A.8). Some of those visitors may have looked at the walkthroughs but
did not protest, while some of those visitors may have used the walkthroughs but would have
protested even without them. If we assume that around a third of those website visitors were
induced to protest by our website, we would explain all the 903 additional protests generated
by the basic aid information. In other words, it would not be far-fetched to attribute the
entire effect of the basic aid letter to the walkthroughs.
    For more evidence on how our website played an important role in the effects of the
letters, notice that, of the households that visited the walkthroughs, 94.8% looked at the
online walkthrough and the rest looked at the mail walkthrough. As a result, we would
expect that the effects of our letters acted primarily through the online protests. To test
this hypothesis, in column (7), the dependent variable is an indicator that takes the value
100 if the household protested directly online but 0 if the household protested by mail or
did not protest at all. The evidence suggests that the vast majority of the effects operated
through online protests: that is, the coefficient on the basic aid letter from column (7), 1.591,
is 88.7% as large as the corresponding coefficient from column (1), 3.509. In other words, and


                                               24
consistent with the data on the visits to the website, we find that a strong majority (88.7%)
of the additional protests induced by our letter were conducted online.
    We can also provide some complementary evidence about the effects of the extra aid
message. One simple interpretation is that subjects just took our suggested argument and
used it "as is" in their protest form. An alternative interpretation is that they used the
message as a proof of concept but then figured out an argument on their own. We can
conduct a suggestive test of these alternative hypotheses using data from the online protests,
for which we can observe the opinion of value that the protesters entered in the online form.
The dependent variable in column (8) takes the value 100 if the households provided an
opinion of value in their protest, which is within half a percentage point of the value we
selected for their extra aid message. However, these results must be taken with a grain
of salt: they are based on a non-random subsample (households that protested online and
entered a value in the opinion of value field), and thus they may be subject to endogeneity
biases despite the random assignment.
    Column (8) shows that, in the control group with no letter, there is a 3.37 pp chance
that a household enters an opinion of value that almost coincides with the value that we
would have shown them if they had been assigned to the extra aid message treatment. In
other words, it is a rare coincidence for subjects to use an almost identical opinion of value
as the one we would have suggested. For households that received the basic aid letter, that
probability remains equally low. For households that received the letter with the extra aid,
however, this outcome jumps drastically by 15.287 pp (p-value<0.001), which constitutes
strong evidence that a substantial fraction of households that received the extra aid message
used it "as-is".
    Lastly, we want to see if our treatments were consequential. One potential concern is
that our letters induced protests that were ultimately not successful ­ that is, that they
were just a waste of time. We can provide direct evidence that this was not the case. In
column (9), the dependent variable takes the value 100 if the household protested directly
and won (i.e., received a discount in their assessed value) and 0 otherwise (i.e., if the protest
was unsuccessful, or if the household did not protest directly). The coefficients are still
economically and statistically significant. The ratio between the coefficients from columns (1)
and (9) suggests that 52% (55%) of the marginal protests that were induced by our letter with
basic (extra) aid were successful. These success rates are comparable to the corresponding
success rate of 58% in the control group.31 In other words, the additional protests that were
induced by our letters were, on average, roughly as successful as the protests in the control
31
     This success rate is based on the ratio of the share of direct protests that were successful (5.07, from column
     (9)) to the share of direct protests (8.67, from column (1)).



                                                         25
group.
    In the same vein, column (10) is similar to column (9), except that instead of measuring
the extensive margin of the success, it measures the intensive margin. In column (10), we
define the dependent variable as equal to the percentage point reduction in the assessed value,
regardless of the type of protest. This outcome takes the value 0 by construction for subjects
with no protests or with unsuccessful protests. Consistent with the extensive margin results
from column (9), we find significant effect on this outcome, too, further corroborating that
our letters were consequential.


4.7       Magnitude of the Hassle Costs
In this section, we discuss the economic magnitude of the hassle costs in more depth. A
first challenge of interpreting the magnitudes in mailing experiments is non-compliance: for
example, some households may not have received the letters, or they may have received them
but did not read them. To correct for these types of non-compliance, we need an estimate of
the reading rate (i.e., the share of recipients that actually read the letter on time). Following
Bottan and Perez-Truglia (2020), we combine estimates from different sources to approximate
the reading rate. According to the US Monitor Non-Profit Standard Mail Delivery Study,
around 95% of standard non-profit mailers were successfully delivered (U.S. Monitor, 2014).
Based on data from the US Postal Service Household Diary Survey (Mazzone and Rehman,
2019), we estimate that, conditional on delivery, around 74% of our letters were opened by
the recipients.32 If we combine the two estimates above, we arrive at a reading rate of 70.3%
(= 0.95 · 0.74). As a result, to account for this source of attenuation bias, we need to scale the
                                          1
coefficients up by a factor of 1.42 (= 0.703 ). The resulting scaled-up effects would be 2.55 pp
for the basic aid letter and 4.98 pp for the extra aid letter. This is still a conservative scale-up
factor, as some households may not have opened the letter on time (i.e., after they had filed
a protest or after the protest deadline, whichever came first), but we are not accounting for
that form of non-compliance.
    To translate the hassle costs into dollar amounts, we combine the results from the field
experiment with the results on the homestead cap from Section 3. We focus on the effect
of the most complete letter (the extra aid letter), which would still give a lower bound on
the costs from protesting, as this letter did not eliminate the hassle costs completely. For
example, subjects still had to follow the instructions to file the form, which may take at least
a few minutes. Subjects may also need to take further action in the future, such as discussing
32
     This figure is based on the 2018 HDS Recruitment Sample and corresponds to the estimate of treatment
     of advertising mail reported in Figure 5.3 of (Mazzone and Rehman, 2019). See Bottan and Perez-Truglia
     (2020) for more details.


                                                     26
a settlement in formal or informal hearings. The scaled-up effect of the extra aid letter is
4.98 pp. According to the results from column (3) of Table 1, we would need to reduce the
tax amount by $226 (= 04..02298
                                ) in order to generate an equivalent reduction of 4.98 pp in the
protest rate. That is, our lower bound for the hassle costs are estimated at $226.33
    As a sanity check, we can compare our estimate of hassle costs to the fees charged by
agents that protest on households' behalf. We identified one such company that offered the
service for a flat fee. Let's assume that the marginal client of this firm is indifferent between
hiring this agent or protesting on her/his own. In that case, the flat fee should constitute a
measure of his/her hassle cost.34 In 2020, the flat fee was $139 for properties assessed below
$200,000, and $305 for properties assessed between $200,000 and $500,000. 35 Those flat fees
($139 and $305) are in the same order of magnitude as our estimated average hassle cost
($226), thus suggesting that our estimates are in the right order of magnitude.


5     Conditional Cooperation
5.1     Conceptual Framework
The above sections provide evidence suggesting that households are quite elastic to the pri-
vate benefits and costs of protesting. While this evidence suggests that selfish motives are
important, we show that social preferences ameliorate incentives to act selfishly. More pre-
cisely, we measure conditional cooperation: that is, whether households are more willing to
tolerate taxes when they think their fellow citizens are also paying taxes. Let  represent the
household's own tax rate, while  ^ represents the household's perception about the average
tax rate in the county. We can summarize the decision to protest with the following equation:

                                 P(P = 1) = own ·  + avg · ^+                                          (8)

   The coefficient own < 0 would represent the effects of the private benefits: for example,
households dislike paying taxes, so they are more likely to protest when they face higher
tax rates. Most importantly, an avg > 0 would indicate that households are conditional
cooperators, that is, they are more willing to tolerate taxes if other households contribute
33
   This is just a rough approximation. Among other things, it assumes that households only care about the
   costs and benefits this year, but in reality there may be dynamic considerations too.
34
   This is just a rough approximation. First, the marginal household may be indifferent between protesting
   through an agent or not protesting at all. Second, there may be additional factors at play. For example,
   the marginal customer may be willing to pay more than the hassle costs if he/she believes that the agent
   can negotiate higher tax savings.
35
   Source: https://www.dfwtaxadvisor.com/practice_areas/property-tax-protest/, accessed on May
   15th 2020.



                                                    27
too.36 Moreover, the ratio between the coefficients avg and own can quantify the strength
of conditional cooperation: that is, what additional tax rate households tolerate for each
percentage point increase in what they think everyone else is paying.


5.2     Design of the Field Experiment
We designed a treatment arm of the field experiment to measure the strength of conditional
cooperation in the context of property taxes. Ideally, we would just randomize how much
others are paying in taxes and measure the effect of that amount on protest rates. However,
that measure is not feasible. Instead of manipulating the average tax rates directly, we
manipulate the subject's perception of the average tax rate. We use an information-provision
design to create exogenous variation in those perceptions. The idea is to leverage that the
information on how much others pay in taxes is not easily accessible and thus probably not
well known; for example, some households may underestimate how large  is, while others
may over-estimate it. Hence, by providing households with accurate information about  , we
can induce exogenous shocks to households' perceptions of  . Then, we can measure whether
these information shocks affect their decisions on whether to protest.
    We introduced another layer of randomization in the mailing experiment: the content of
the table appearing in the middle of the first page. In Figure 3, this table is highlighted inside
a red box with dashed lines. This box is just for explanatory purposes (it was not included
in the actual letters sent to the subjects). All letters included a table, but we randomized
(with 50% probability) whether the table included the column with the figures for the average
Dallas home (positioned in the last column). This table provided information on whether
households' tax rates were above or below the average Dallas home, and by how much.37
    The random inclusion of an additional column was meant to provide a shock to house-
holds' perception of the tax rate other households pay. However, a naïve comparison of
the protest rate among households that received the information shock and those that did
not, would deliver incorrect estimates to the extent that households update heterogeneously
to the information shock (Cruces et al., 2013; Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2018; Bottan and
Perez-Truglia, 2020; Fuster et al., 2018). For example, suppose that half of the sample was
originally downward-biased and, thus, updated upwards, while the other half, who was orig-
36
   The parameter  agglomerates the remaining factors, such as the hassle costs. Also, note that this simple
   model makes the implicit assumption that households care about the tax rate that others pay. In theory,
   households could care about the average tax amount instead of the average tax rate. The main motivation
   for this specification choice is survey data indicating that the vast majority of households think that it
   would be fair for all households to pay the same tax rate. The results are presented in Appendix A.10.
37
   As described in the RCT pre-registration, we cross-randomized a minor aspect of the table for a robustness
   check: whether it included a row making the tax rates explicit. For more details about this additional
   randomization and the results, see Appendix A.7.


                                                     28
inally upward-biased, reacted in the opposite direction. In such a case, despite the fact
that households react to the information, we would find a null average effect of informa-
tion disclosure, because the two opposite effects cancel out. To overcome this limitation,
and as anticipated in the pre-registration, we adapt the research design from Bottan and
Perez-Truglia (2020) to our context. We explain this in detail below.


5.3        Design of the Mturk Survey
We designed a supplemental survey to validate the research design from the field experiment.
This survey was conducted on a separate sample recruited from Amazon's Mechanical Turk
(Mturk) online marketplace. From here on, we refer to this survey as the Mturk Survey.
The goal of the survey was to reproduce the same information-provision experiment from the
field experiment and measure how households updated beliefs in response to the information
given to them. One key advantage of the Mturk Survey is that it can measure perceptions
both before and after the information-provision takes place, thus allowing us to observe the
prior misperceptions as well as the belief updating.38
    The full survey instrument was included in the same RCT pre-registration, and the sur-
vey was conducted around the same dates as the main field experiment: from June 5th to
June 15th , 2020. The full survey instrument of the Mturk Survey is in Appendix F, and is
summarized below:

         Step 1 (Elicit Prior Belief): We elicit perceptions about average property taxes and
         average home market values in their county in 2019.

         Step 2 (Information-Provision Experiment): All respondents were told that some
         survey participants will be randomly chosen to receive information about home values
         and property taxes in 2019. In the following screen, respondents discovered whether
         they were assigned to receive the information. Just like in the field experiment, subjects
         were assigned to receive the information with 50% probability.

         Step 3 (Elicit Posterior Belief): We re-elicited their guesses about average property
         taxes and average home market values in their county. Following (Cavallo et al., 2017),
         we elicited perceptions about average property taxes and market values in their county
         in 2020 instead of 2019. We did this to avoid asking the same question twice, which
         could induce respondents to just repeat their initial guess. By eliciting the posterior
38
     Relative to the Field Survey, the Mturk Survey has other advantages, such as the fact that the information-
     provision experiment happens after the start of the survey, and thus we do not need to worry about
     endogenous selection into the survey.



                                                       29
         about 2020, we also avoid pressuring the respondents to answer exactly with the feed-
         back given to them in Step 2. Moreover, to try to mimic the field experiment as closely
         as possible, we took the respondents' posterior beliefs and created a table identical to
         the one used in the field experiment: comparing their own property taxes and homes'
         market values to those of their respective county averages.39

         Step 4 (Elicit Survey Outcomes): We measured a number of outcomes that we
         conjectured could be affected by the perceptions of the average taxes paid by others.
         The first question simply asked whether the household pays too much in taxes relative
         to other households in the county. The second question asked whether the household
         pays too much in taxes without making any reference to the taxes paid by others.
         The next question elicits this last question in a more quantitative way, by asking what
         would be a fair amount for this household to pay in property taxes, explicitly holding
         constant how much other households pay.

    We followed several best practices for recruiting individuals in Mturk ­ for more details
about the design and implementation of this survey, see Appendix A.11. We collected re-
sponses from 2,065 U.S. homeowners. Appendix A.3 provides descriptive statistics for this
sample. We show that, in terms of their observable characteristics, the Mturk sample is cer-
tainly not identical to the other samples used in this paper, but not wildly different either.


5.4        Results from the Mturk Survey
Before presenting the results of the field experiment, we use the data from the Mturk Survey to
validate the design of the information-provision experiment. Figure 5.a shows subjects' initial
misperceptions regarding average property taxes. The x-axis corresponds to the household's
actual relative taxes in 2019: that is, the difference between the average tax rate in the
county and the household's own tax rate. The y-axis shows the individual's prior beliefs
about the relative taxes in 2019. A slope of 1 would correspond to the case of accurate
perceptions. Instead, the coefficient (0.237) falls significantly short of 1, indicating significant
misperceptions. More precisely, Figure 5.a shows that the misperceptions are systematically
skewed toward the middle: individuals who pay more than average underestimate how much
they pay relative to others, and individuals who pay less than average overestimate how
much they pay. Indeed, this type of middle-bias has been documented in a variety of settings
(Cruces et al., 2013). As a result, we would expect individuals toward the left side of the
39
     We also mimicked the additional randomization we included in the field experiment related to whether the
     table would contain the extra row making the tax rates explicit. For more details, see Appendix A.12.



                                                      30
x-axis in Figure 5.a to update their beliefs downwards, while individuals toward the right
side of the x-axis should update their beliefs upwards.
    Figure 5.b shows the actual belief updating. The x-axis is the same as in Figure 5.a,
but the y-axis corresponds to the subjects' posterior beliefs (that is, after the information-
provision experiment) instead of their prior beliefs. The blue dots correspond to subjects in
the control group (those not shown the feedback about the true average tax rate). For this
group, the relationship between perceived and real rates continues to be weak. In contrast, the
red diamonds correspond to the treatment group (i.e., subjects who were shown the feedback).
These red diamonds show that, as expected, the correlation between perceptions and truth
becomes markedly stronger when individuals are provided with accurate feedback. This
finding means that individuals who were overestimating updated downwards, and individuals
who were underestimating updated upwards. For a more formal test, we can compare the
slope between perceptions and truth in the control group (0.154) versus the corresponding
slope in the treatment group (0.613) ­ consistent with significant learning, the difference
between the two is not only large but also highly statistically significant (p-value<0.001).
    Figure 5.b illustrates the intuition behind the identification strategy: we know whether
the disclosure of accurate information translated into upwards or downwards revisions in
beliefs, based on whether a household is toward the left or the right of the x-axis. We can
summarize these findings in a single regression coefficient, based on the adaptation of the
disclosure-randomization design of Bottan and Perez-Truglia (2020) to our context. Let i
be the individual's own tax rate,  be the actual average tax rate in the county and let  post
                                                                                            i
be the individual's posterior belief about the average tax rate in the county. And let Di be
an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the information on the average tax rate was
shown to the subject. The regression of interest is the following:

                   post
                   i    = 0 + 1 · Di · ( - i ) + 2 · ( - i ) + 3 · Di + i                  (9)

    The coefficient 2 shows the relationship between the truth and the posterior beliefs
when the truth is not disclosed to the individual, while 1 measures how much stronger that
relationship becomes when the truth is disclosed. In Figure 5.b, 1 would correspond to the
difference between the slopes in the treatment versus the control groups. A coefficient 1 > 0
would indicate that subjects are incorporating the information shown to them.
    Table 3 shows the results from this econometric model based on the data from the Mturk
Survey. All regressions in this table are based on the same specification, but using different
dependent variables. The dependent variable in column (1) is the posterior belief about the
average tax rate in the county. The coefficient on the variable  shown in the table corresponds
to the information shock variable (i.e., Di · ( - i )). The coefficient on  from column (1)


                                              31
indicates that a 1 pp increase in the information shock increases the posterior belief by 0.393
percentage points. This finding demonstrates that subjects update their beliefs when given
information. To the extent that this coefficient falls short of 1, it suggests that individuals did
not fully incorporate the feedback given to them, which is perfectly consistent with rational
learning: for example, individuals may not fully update because they feel confident about
the accuracy of their prior beliefs or because they do not feel confident about the accuracy
of the signal provided to them. Most importantly, the rate of pass-through is significantly
above zero, and in the ballpark of the pass-through found in survey experiments covering a
range of topics.40
    Column (2) provides a falsification test in an event-study fashion. The dependent vari-
able is the prior belief (i.e., measured before the information-provision experiment) about
the average tax rate in the county. Because the information cannot have effects until it is
disclosed, we would not expect an effect on the prior beliefs. As expected, the coefficient
from column (2) is close to zero, statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated.
    Another potential concern is that the information provision on the average tax rate may
affect beliefs other than the average tax rate. In the context of the Mturk experiment,
subjects may not remember the exact tax rate that they pay themselves and, as a result,
may use the feedback on the average taxes to update their beliefs about their own tax rates.41
To see if the concern is real, column (3) shows a specification in which the dependent variable
is the posterior belief about their own tax rate. The coefficient is close to zero, statistically
insignificant, and precisely estimated, indicating that the information shock did not affect
the respondents' perceptions about their own tax rates.
    The previous evidence validates the design of the information experiment, which was
the main goal of the Mturk Survey. Additionally, we can use the Mturk Survey to assess
whether the shocks to perceptions about the average tax rate had an impact on attitudes
toward taxation. We report these results in columns (4) through (6) of Table 3, each of which
uses as the dependent variable a different measure of whether the household thinks that their
taxes are too high. In column (4,) the dependent variable reports a relative measure: whether
the household states that their own taxes are too high specifically in comparison to other
households in the county, on a 1­10 scale. In column (5), instead, we report an absolute
measure: here, the dependent variable takes the value 100 if the respondent thinks that their
40
   For example, Bottan and Perez-Truglia (2020) finds a pass-through of 0.205 in the context of home price
   expectations (coefficient reported in column (1) of Table 2). And Cavallo et al. (2017) reports that,
   when forming inflation expectations, the average Argentine respondent assigns a weight of 0.432 to the
   information and the remaining 0.568 to their prior beliefs (coefficient -statistics reported in Panel B,
   column (1) of Table 1).
41
   This concern is limited to the Mturk experiment because all letters we mailed included the tax rate that
   subjects themselves pay.


                                                    32
own taxes are too high. Finally, in column (6) the dependent variable is the desired tax cut:
in other words, the difference between the tax rate that the household currently pays and
the tax rate that the household thinks it would be fair to pay. The coefficients from columns
(4) through (6) are all negative, indicating that perceiving that others pay more in taxes
leads households to complain less about their own taxes. The three coefficients are on the
same order of magnitude: a 1 pp information shock decreases the outcome variable by 0.16,
0.10, and 0.24 standard deviations in columns (4), (5) and (6), respectively. Two out of these
three coefficients are statistically significant: p-values of 0.060, 0.205, and 0.039, in columns
(4), (5), and (6), respectively. In sum, this evidence suggests that households' tolerance
for taxation depends on what they think the tax rates paid by others are. In the following
section, we measure if these effects are also present in the decision to protest property taxes.


5.5    Results from the Field Experiment
We now turn to the results from the field experiment. This analysis is based on the sample
of 50,394 subjects from the field experiment who were randomly selected to receive a letter.
For this analysis, we use the same econometric model presented in Section 5.4 above. Recall
that Pi2020 , the main outcome, is an indicator variable that takes the value 100 if the subject
filed a protest in the post-treatment period. The regression of interest is as follows:

      Pi2020 = 0 + 1 · Di · ( - i ) + 2 · ( - i ) + 3 · Di + M · Mi + Xipre X + i            (10)

    The key coefficient of interest is 1 , corresponding to the effect of the information shock.
Additionally, to help interpret the magnitude of this coefficient, we include an additional
independent variable, Mi , that takes the value 1 if the subject was assigned to receive the
extra aid message and 0 if not. Its coefficient, M , measures the effect of the extra aid message.
Xipre corresponds to the vector of control variables, which contains the same variables used for
the rest of the analysis and listed in Section 3.2 above. Again, since this is an experiment, the
goal of using pre-treatment controls is to gain statistical power by reducing the variance of the
error term (McKenzie, 2012). We also use the pre-treatment data to construct falsification
tests in an event-study fashion.
    Table 4 presents the estimation results. As in Table 3, the coefficient on  corresponds
to the coefficient on the information shock variable (i.e., Di · ( - i )). Additionally, to
help interpret the magnitude of the coefficient on  , Table 4 reports two additional rows of
coefficients related to the findings presented in the previous sections. The second row reports
the effect of the extra aid message (i.e., coefficient M . The coefficient on i , reported in the
last row of Table 4, corresponds to a separate regression: an Instrumental Variables regression


                                               33
used in the quasi-experiment analysis from Table 1, but restricted to the same sample used
to estimate the coefficient on  . Recall that this Instrumental Variable regression exploits
variation within the subset of households with homestead status in 2020. And to maximize
statistical power, we use a bandwidth of proposed values within $150,000 of their respective
homestead cap thresholds.
    The columns of Table 4 correspond to different regressions with the same specification
but different dependent variables. In column (1), the dependent variable takes the value
100 whether the household protested directly in 2020. The coefficient on  indicates that
an additional 0.1 pp in information shock about  decreases the probability of protesting in
2020 by 0.094 pp, which is statistically significant (p-value=0.066). Column (2) presents a
falsification test in the spirit of event-study analyses. The dependent variable is the protest
indicator for 2019 instead of 2020. Since our letters had not been sent yet, the information
shocks should not have had an effect on 2019 protests. As expected, the coefficient on  from
column (2) is statistically insignificant. However, this coefficient is imprecisely estimated,
and thus we cannot reject the null hypothesis that it is equal to the coefficient from column
(1). We also ran this falsification test using data on protests from 2018, 2017, 2016, and
2015, and found that the estimated coefficient on  is statistically insignificant for each of
those years (results reported in Appendix A.4).
    One challenge with interpreting the magnitude of the coefficient on  is that it is an
intention-to-treat effect, due to multiple sources of non-compliance. As discussed in Sec-
tion 4.7, some of the letters may not have even been opened, or may have been opened when
it was too late. Additionally, even for those letters that were successfully opened, households
may not have paid enough attention to the information on average taxes provided in the
table. We can partially address these forms of non-compliance by focusing on the subsample
of households that responded to the Field Survey. By construction, all of those households
must have read the letter (otherwise they would not know the survey link and the survey code
needed to fill out the survey). Furthermore, it is reasonable to assume that this subsample of
survey respondents cared enough about the topic to pay close attention to the information
provided in the letter.
    Column (3) of Table 4 repeats the same analysis as in column (1), except that it is
restricted to the subsample of 1,888 households that responded to the Field Survey.42 The
survey respondents are certainly not a random sample of the subject pool (for a detailed
comparison, see Appendix A.3). The most important difference is that the protest probability
is much higher in the survey sample (50.26% protested) relative to the full sample (11.29%
42
     The implied response rate to the survey, 3.7%, may seem low at first glance, but it is substantially higher
     than the response rates in comparable studies that sent a survey link through letters (Perez-Truglia and
     Troiano, 2018; Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2020).


                                                       34
protested). Our preferred interpretation is that the subjects who paid the most attention to
our letter were those on the fence about protesting or not.43
    When we focus on the survey respondents, the coefficient on  is -12.566, and statisti-
cally significant (p-value=0.021). This coefficient is substantially larger than the coefficient
reported in column (1), which is partly mechanical due to the larger baseline rate (50.26 in
column (3) versus 11.29 in column (1)). Additionally, we attribute this difference to the fact
that the subsample of survey respondents paid closer attention to the letter. Considering
that both the Extra Aid Message and the average tax rate were included in the letter, we
should observe a larger coefficient on Extra Aid Message in column (8) as well. Consistent
with this interpretation, while the coefficient on  is substantially larger (13 times as large)
in the survey respondents sample (column (3)) relative to the full sample (column (1)), the
coefficient on Extra Aid Message is also substantially larger (16 times) in column (3) relative
to column (1).
    One concern with the analysis from column (3) of Table 4 is that the results may be
contaminated by endogenous sorting into the survey. To address this concern, column (4)
presents the same type of falsification test from column (2), where we used the 2019 protest
instead of the 2020 protests as the dependent variable, but restricting the sample to survey
respondents. The rationale for this exercise is that observing "effects" on the 2019 protests
would suggest that they are driven by selection into the survey. Reassuringly, the effects on
that placebo outcome are close to zero, statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated.
    The Field Survey included two questions meant to be used as outcome variables: the
unfairness of the amount of property taxes paid relative to other households in the county,
and the stated intention to protest property taxes at the time of answering the survey.44 The
effects on those survey outcomes, U2020 and I2020 , are presented in columns (5) and (6) of
Table 4.
    In column (5), the dependent variable U2020 is whether the households think that their
own taxes are unfair relative to the taxes paid by others. We would expect that an increase
in the perceived  would reduce this feeling of unfairness. As expected, the coefficient on  is
negative and statistically significant (p-value=0.060). The magnitude is rather large as well:
a 0.1 shock to  decreases the feeling of unfairness by 0.046 points on a 10-point scale. We can
also look at the effects of the Extra Aid Message and the homestead cap on this unfairness
outcome. Due to its content, we do not expect the Extra Aid Message to affect the feeling
of unfairness. Indeed, the coefficient on Extra Aid Message from column (5) is close to zero
(0.083), statistically insignificant, and precisely estimated. Regarding the coefficient on i ,
43
   This difference may be driven by reciprocity, too: the households that found our letter helpful were the
   ones likely to protest and wanted to reciprocate our help by responding to our survey.
44
   A copy of the full survey is included in Appendix E.


                                                    35
we expect it to be positive: the question is whether your own taxes are unfair relative to the
taxes paid by others. The homestead cap increases your own tax rate while holding constant
the tax rates of everyone else. As a result, the homestead cap should have an effect on this
unfairness outcome. As expected, we find the coefficient on i to be positive (1.730) and
statistically significant (p-value=0.046).
    The dependent variable in column (6), I2020 , corresponds to the intention to protest at
the time of the survey: it takes the value 100 if the household states that it is likely or very
likely that it will protest in 2020, and 0 otherwise. Because the households were less likely
to protest, we would anticipate a negative effect on their expected probability of protesting,
too. Consistent with this prediction, the coefficient on  is negative and highly statistically
significant (p-value=0.008). By the same token, we would expect the coefficients on Extra
Aid Message and i to be qualitatively consistent between column (6) (expected behavior)
and column (3) (actual behavior). Indeed, we find that those pairs of coefficients are not
only qualitatively consistent but also consistent in magnitude.


5.6    Magnitude of Conditional Cooperation
To illustrate the magnitude of conditional cooperation, we need to account for non-compliance.
We focus on the results from column (3) of Table 4, because for this sample we are confident
that the subjects read the letter. However, a second form of non-compliance must still be
accounted for: even if they read the letter, households are not expected to fully incorporate
the feedback into their beliefs. We can use the results from the Mturk Survey to correct
for this additional form of non-compliance. Because each additional 1 pp in the information
shock increased the perceived average tax rate by 0.393 pp (column (1) of Table 3), we should
                                      1
use a scale-up factor of 2.54 (= 0.393  ). Scaling-up the coefficient on  from column (3) of
Table 4 implies that increasing a household's perception of the average tax rate paid in the
county by 0.1 pp would decrease the protest probability by 3.19 pp (= 0.1 · 12.566 · 2.54).
The 0.1 pp reduction in the average tax rate corresponds to a 5% reduction relative to the
baseline (2.01 pp), while the 3.19 pp reduction in the protest probability corresponds to 6.3%
of the average protest probability reported in column (3). These percent-changes suggest
that the elasticity of the protest probability with respect to the perceived average tax rate
             .3
is 1.26 (= 65   ); in other words, households are elastic to their perceptions of the taxes paid
by everyone else.
    We can better illustrate the magnitude of conditional cooperation with the following
counterfactual analysis. In policy A, we increase a household's tax rate by 0.1 pp but hold
constant the tax rates paid by everyone else. In policy B, we increase a household's tax rate
by 0.1 pp, but at the same time increase the tax rates of everyone else by 0.1 pp. We further

                                              36
assume that households have accurate perceptions of these changes in their own and average
tax rates. We can use the coefficient on i from column (3) of Table 4 to approximate the effect
of policy A: the protest probability would increase by 9.63 pp. The effect of policy B can be
approximated by combining the coefficient on i and the scaled-up  : the protest probability
would increase by 6.44 pp (= 9.63 - 3.19); in other words, the conditional cooperation is
                                -6.43
dampening a full third (= 9.63 9.63
                                      ) of the effect of the tax hike.
    An alternative way to assess the magnitude of the coefficient on  is to compare it to the
corresponding change in i , which would generate the same effect. Using the same scaled-up
coefficients from the previous paragraph, we find that the effect of a 1 pp increase in the
perceived average tax rate is equivalent to the effect of a 0.33 pp reduction in one's own tax
rate. This ratio is remarkably similar to what has been found in laboratory experiments of
the public good game. Take, for example, Fischbacher et al. (2001), one of the earliest studies
on conditional cooperation. According to Figure 1 from that paper, for each additional dollar
in the average contribution of others, the average subject is willing to contribute an additional
0.35 dollars.45 This ratio of 0.35 is close to the 0.33 ratio reported above.


5.7        Heterogeneity by Partisanship
One of the most robust findings from laboratory games is that individuals are heterogeneous
in their degree of conditional cooperation. While some subjects are willing to match one-to-
one the contributions made by others, other subjects do not care about the contributions of
others at all (Gächter, 2007). It is then fitting to explore whether this result holds outside
the laboratory as well. Given the survey-based evidence that Democrats and Republicans
are rather divided in their preferences for redistribution, exploring heterogeneity by partisan
identity seems like a natural starting point.
    To split the analysis by Republican and Democrat households, we matched the individual-
level data from the property tax records to the Texas voter files. We constructed a proxy
for whether each taxpayer is likely to be a Democrat or a Republican. The details of this
categorization as well as a validation exercise are in Appendix A.13.46 55% of the subjects are
categorized as more likely to identify as Democrats and the remaining 45% are categorized
as more likely to be Republican. Indeed, this narrow advantage for the Democrats is consis-
tent with recent electoral results from Dallas County: for example, in the 2012 presidential
election, Barack Obama received 57% of the votes while Mitt Romney received 42% of the
45
     Unfortunately, the authors do not report the slope from Figure 1, so 0.35 is our best guess.
46
     A majority of the sample can be categorized as Democrat or Republican directly using their participation
     in primary elections. We then use a simple predictive model to extrapolate to the rest of the sample. This
     prediction model is complemented by other data sources, such as precinct-level data on presidential voting
     results.


                                                       37
votes.
    The last two columns of Table 4 break down the baseline results from column (1) by
Republican and Democrat subjects. Column (7) of Table 4 presents the estimates for the
Democrat subjects, while column (8) corresponds to the Republican subjects. First, the
coefficients on  suggest that the conditional cooperation preferences are driven primarily
by Democrats: the coefficient for Democrats is large (-1.325) and statistically significant (p-
value=0.030), but the coefficient for the Republicans is close to zero (-0.253) and statistically
insignificant (p-value=0.778). This finding suggests that there are indeed partisan differences
in the degree of conditional cooperation; however, notice that the difference between the two
coefficients is not precisely estimated and is thus statistically insignificant (p-value=0.323).
    We can also compare the partisan heterogeneity in the role of private costs and private
benefits. While the coefficients on Extra Aid Message are statistically significant for both
Democrats and Republicans, the magnitude is more than twice as large for Republicans
(2.480) as for Democrats (1.076), and their difference is highly statistically significant (p-
value=0.012). Likewise, the coefficient on i are statistically significant for both Democrats
and Republicans, but the magnitude is 29% larger for Republicans than for Democrats. This
difference is statistically significant (p-value=0.071). These two findings suggest that self-
ish motives are important for both Republicans and Democrats, although somewhat more
important for Republicans. These partisan differences in behavior are qualitatively consis-
tent with documented partisan differences in survey data (Stantcheva, 2020). However, in
quantitative terms the partisan differences that we find are not as dramatic as some of the
differences documented in the survey data.
    We note that these partisan differences may be attributed to underlying differences in
values and beliefs between Republican and Democrats such as trust in government or altru-
ism. The partisan differences may also be due to other differences between Republican and
Democrats, such as their demographics (e.g., income, age) or the probability of having kids
enrolled in public schools.


6    Conclusions
The choice to file a protest of property taxes provides a unique opportunity to study prefer-
ences for redistribution via revealed preferences. Using experimental and quasi-experimental
methods, we provided evidence on the determinants of the decision to protest taxes. We
showed that households are highly elastic to their private benefits and private costs from
protesting, which suggests that selfish motives are important. We showed that social prefer-
ences are also a significant motive: consistent with conditional cooperation, households are


                                               38
more willing to pay a higher tax rate when they perceive that the average household faces a
higher tax rate, too. We documented some partisan differences in the decision to protest.
    While in this study we used our field experiment to study preferences for redistribution, we
believe that this same framework can be adapted to study other questions from fields such as
political economy, public economics, and behavioral economics. Our framework has a number
of features that we believe can make it attractive to researchers. The effects on behavior are
measured with objective data from administrative records in a naturally occurring context
and based on high-stakes choices. The experiment can be conducted entirely based on publicly
available data, without the need of non-disclosure or other agreements. The experiment can
be implemented in a few weeks and the final results may be ready in a couple of months.
The mailing experiment is relatively cheap, costing less than $0.25 per subject. Lastly, the
experiment can be implemented on massive scales; in Dallas County alone, it can potentially
involve hundreds of thousands of subjects at a time and be scalable to millions of subjects
by pooling multiple counties. In this spirit, the Online Appendix provides detailed accounts
of the implementation and the data that may be helpful to other researchers. Moreover,
we are happy to share data, code, tips or any other resources that may be helpful to other
researchers.
    Finally, while the main focus of this paper is to study preferences for redistribution via
revealed preferences, some of the findings may serve as key inputs for the design of the
protesting process. For instance, because the private costs and benefits are so important
in the decision to protest, the current protest system may create undesired inequities. Our
evidence supports the view that richer households protest more just because they stand to
gain more from doing so. Similarly, our experimental evidence suggests that some groups
­ such as racial and ethnic minorities ­ may have unequal access to protests if they find it
more difficult to navigate the protest process. Indeed, our findings could explain the large
differences in access to tax protests documented with observational data (Avenancio-León
and Howard, 2019).
    More importantly, our experimental findings hints at potential solutions to these prob-
lems. Because households are so responsive to aid, access to protests may be made more
equal by targeting aid to disadvantaged groups (Finkelstein and Notowidigdo, 2019). For
example, by one account presented in Section 2, Hispanic households were 1.97 pp less likely
to protest than comparable White households. In comparison, we find that our letter with
extra aid increased the protest rate of Hispanic households by 2.53 pp (p-value<0.001).47
Thus, sending the extra aid letter just to the Hispanic households would have been more
47
     This result corresponds to the regression from column (4) of Table 2, but estimated with the 20.39% of
     the sample that was classified as Hispanic.



                                                     39
than sufficient to close the gap between Hispanics and Whites. Some low-cost interventions
of this type ­ promoted internally by county assessor's offices or externally through NGOs ­
could go a long way into making the system to protest taxes more equitable.


References
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2011). Preferences for redistribution. In Handbook of Social Economics,
  Volume 1, pp. 93­131. Elsevier.
Alesina, A. and E. Glaeser (2004). Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe. Oxford University Press.
Avenancio-León, C. and T. Howard (2019). The Assessment Gap: Racial Inequalities in Property
  Taxation. Available at SSRN 3465010 .
Benzarti, Y. How Taxing is Tax Filing? Using Revealed Preferences to Estimate Compliance Costs.
Bhargava, S. and D. Manoli (2015). Psychological Frictions and the Incomplete Take-Up of Social
  Benefits: Evidence from an IRS Field Experiment. American Economic Review 105 (11), 3489­
  3529.
Bottan, N. and R. Perez-Truglia (2015). Losing my religion: The effects of religious scandals on
  religious participation and charitable giving. Journal of Public Economics 129.
Bottan, N. and R. Perez-Truglia (2017). Choosing Your Pond: Location Choices and Relative
  Income. NBER Working Paper No. 23615 .
Bottan, N. and R. Perez-Truglia (2020). Betting on the House: Subjective Expectations and Market
  Choices. NBER Working Paper No. 27412 .
Cabral, M. and C. Hoxby (2012). The Hated Property Tax: Salience, Tax Rates, and Tax Revolts.
  Technical Report 18514, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cavallo, A., G. Cruces, and R. Perez-Truglia (2017). Inflation expectations, learning, and su-
  permarket prices: Evidence from survey experiments. American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics 9 (3), 1­35.
Chetty, R. (2015). Behavioral Economics and Public Policy: A Pragmatic Perspective. American
  Economic Review 105 (5), 1­33.
Cruces, G., R. Perez-Truglia, and M. Tetaz (2013). Biased perceptions of income distribution
  and preferences for redistribution: Evidence from a survey experiment. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 98, 100­112.
Cullen, J., N. Turner, and E. Washington (2020). Political alignment, attitudes toward government
  and tax evasion. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming .
Cullen, Z. and R. Perez-Truglia (2018). How Much Does Your Boss Make? The Effects of Salary
  Comparisons. NBER Working Paper No. 24841 .



                                                40
Dobay, N., F. Nicely, A. Sanderson, and P. Sanderson (2019). The best (and worst) of international
  property tax administration. Technical report, COST (Council On State Taxation).
Epper, T., E. Fehr, and J. Senn (2020). Other-regarding preferences and redistributive politics.
  Technical Report 339.
Finkelstein, A. and M. J. Notowidigdo (2019). Take-up and targeting: Experimental evidence from
  SNAP. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3), 1505­1556.
Fischbacher, U., S. Gächter, and E. Fehr (2001). Are people conditionally cooperative? Evidence
  from a public goods experiment. Economics Letters 71 (3), 397­404.
Fisman, R., P. Jakiela, and S. Kariv (2017). Distributional preferences and political behavior.
  Journal of Public Economics 155, 1­10.
Fisman, R., S. Kariv, and D. Markovits (2007). Individual Preferences for Giving. American
  Economic Review 97 (5), 1858­1876.
Fuster, A., R. Perez-Truglia, M. Wiederholt, and B. Zafar (2018). Expectations with Endogenous
  Information Acquisition: An Experimental Investigation. NBER Working Paper No. 24767 .
Gächter, S. (2007). Conditional cooperation: Behavioral regularities from the lab and the field
  and their policy implications. In Economics and psychology: A promising new cross-disciplinary
  field., CESifo seminar series., pp. 19­50. Cambridge, MA, US: MIT Press.
Group, T. W. B. (2019). The Administrative Review Process for Tax Disputes : Tax Objections
  and Appeals in Latin America and the Caribbean - A Toolkit.
Holz, J. E., J. A. List, A. Zentner, M. Cardoza, and J. Zentner (2020). The $100 Million Nudge: In-
  creasing Tax Compliance of Businesses and the Self-Employed using a Natural Field Experiment.
  NBER Working Paper No. 27666 .
Huet-Vaughn, E., A. Robbett, and M. Spitzer (2019). A taste for taxes: Minimizing distortions
  using political preferences. Journal of Public Economics 180, 104055.
Jones, P. (2019). Loss Aversion and Property Tax Avoidance. Working Paper .
Kuziemko, I., M. I. Norton, E. Saez, and S. Stantcheva (2015). How elastic are preferences for
  redistribution? Evidence from randomized survey experiments. American Economic Review 105,
  1478­1508.
Mazzone, J. and S. Rehman (2019). The Household Diary Study Mail Use and Attitudes in FY
  2018. Retrieved March 28, 2020, from https://www.prc.gov/dockets/document/109368 .
McKenzie, D. (2012). Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments. Journal
  of Development Economics 99 (2), 210­221.
Perez-Truglia, R. and G. Cruces (2017). Partisan interactions: Evidence from a field experiment in
  the United States. Journal of Political Economy 125 (4).
Perez-Truglia, R. and U. Troiano (2018). Shaming Tax Delinquents. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 167, 120­137.

                                                41
Slemrod, J. (2018). Tax Compliance and Enforcement. Journal of Eonomic Literature Forthcomin.
Stantcheva, S. (2020). Understanding Tax Policy: How Do People Reason?      Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
U.S. Monitor (2014).     7 Myths of Direct Mailing.       Retrieved March 28, 2020, from
  https://www.targetmarketingmag.com/promo/7MythsofDM.pdf .




                                             42
                                                                                                  Figure 1: Descriptive Statistics about Tax Protests

                                                               a. By Tax Amount                                                                                                              b. By Ethnicity

                            40%                                                                                                                                40%
                                                    Through Agent                                                                                                     White
                                                    Direct                                                                                                     35%    Hispanic
                            35%

                            30%                                                                                                                                30%
     2020 Protest (Share)




                                                                                                                                        2020 Protest (Share)
                            25%                                                                                                                                25%

                            20%                                                                                                                                20%

                            15%                                                                                                                                15%
                            10%                                                                                                                                10%
                            5%
                                                                                                                                                               5%
                            0%
                                                                                                                                                               0%
                                        0

                                              00

                                                          00

                                                                   00

                                                                             00

                                                                                      00

                                                                                                00

                                                                                                         00


                                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                                  00

                                                                                                                                   00
43




                                     00




                                                                                                                                 00
                                               0

                                                        0

                                                                  0

                                                                           0

                                                                                     0

                                                                                              0

                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                               ,0

                                                                                                                                ,0




                                                                                                                                                                           4




                                                                                                                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     86
                                  1,

                                            2,

                                                     3,

                                                               4,

                                                                        5,

                                                                                  6,

                                                                                           7,

                                                                                                     8,

                                                                                                                              9,




                                                                                                                                                                        59




                                                                                                                                                                                        04




                                                                                                                                                                                                         74




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         08
                                                                                                                            10

                                                                                                                             00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,0
                               -$


                                          $

                                                      $

                                                               $

                                                                         $

                                                                                  $

                                                                                            $

                                                                                                     $

                                                                                                               $




                                                                                                                                                                     3,




                                                                                                                                                                                         ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                       1-

                                                   1-

                                                            1-

                                                                      1-

                                                                               1-

                                                                                         1-

                                                                                                  1-

                                                                                                            1-

                                                                                                                         -$

                                                                                                                          $2




                                                                                                                                                                                      $5




                                                                                                                                                                                                       $6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                     $
                             $0




                                                                                                                       0-




                                                                                                                                                                                   5-




                                                                                                                                                                                                    5-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -$




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                $
                                     00

                                              00

                                                          00

                                                                   00

                                                                             00

                                                                                      00

                                                                                                00

                                                                                                         00

                                                                                                                      01
                                     ,

                                               ,

                                                         ,

                                                                  ,

                                                                            ,

                                                                                     ,

                                                                                               ,

                                                                                                        ,

                                                                                                                    ,0

                                                                                                                    00




                                                                                                                                                                                 59




                                                                                                                                                                                                  04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  42
                                  $1

                                            $2

                                                      $3

                                                               $4

                                                                         $5

                                                                                  $6

                                                                                            $7

                                                                                                     $8

                                                                                                                $9

                                                                                                                 0,




                                                                                                                                                                                  ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,7
                                                                                                                                                                               $3




                                                                                                                                                                                                $5
                                                                                                              $1




                                                                                                                                                                                                              $6
                                                                         2020 Tax Amount ($)                                                                                                    2020 Tax Amount ($)


Notes: This figure presents descriptive statistics based on the sample of 423,607 single-family homes who were subject to property taxes in
Dallas County in 2020. Panel (a) breaks the sample down by the estimated taxes based on the proposed values announced on May 15th , 2020.
The height of the bars represent the overall share in each group that protested in 2020. The stacked bars differentiate between the households
who protested through agents (in red) or directly (in blue). Panel (b) is based on a subsample of 45,511 households for which we obtained
data on ethnicity and it indicated that they were either Hispanic or White. The x-axis denotes the five quintiles of the estimated taxes based
on the proposed values announced on May 15th , 2020. Each dot represents the share of those households who protested directly in 2020,
with 90% confidence intervals in parentheses. Red dots correspond to the households identified as Hispanic, while blue dots correspond to
White households.
                                   Figure 2: Effects of the Homestead Cap on the Probability of Protesting
                            a. Homestead Status: Tax Amount                                                                           b. No Homestead Status: Tax Amount
                       $5,500                                                                                 N=96,274                $4,800                                                                                 N=57,851
                                        $10K
                                      1        = -97.646 (12.652)
                       $5,400                                                                                                         $4,700

                       $5,300                                                                                                         $4,600

                       $5,200                                                                                                         $4,500
                                                                                                                                                         $10K
                                                                                                                                                       1        = -2.371 (1.771)
               Ti




                                                                                                                              Ti
                       $5,100                                                                                                         $4,400

                                                                                                                                                                                                  $10K
                       $5,000                                                                                                         $4,300                                                  2          = 3.006 (1.965)

                       $4,900                                                                                                         $4,200
                                                                                $10K
                                                                             2          = -306.980 (11.450)
                       $4,800                                                                                                         $4,100

                       $4,700                                                                                                         $4,000
                             -$15,000        -$10,000     -$5,000       $0              +$5,000    +$10,000     +$15,000                    -$15,000         -$10,000     -$5,000       $0          +$5,000       +$10,000     +$15,000
                                                      Distance to the Homestead Cap Threshold                                                                         Distance to the Homestead Cap Threshold


                              c. Homestead Status: Tax Rate                                                                             d. No Homestead Status: Tax Rate
                       2.2                                                                                    N=96,274                 3                                                                                     N=57,851




                                      $10K
                       2.1         1         = -0.045 (0.005)                                                                         2.9


                                                                                                                                                  $10K
                        2                                                                                                             2.8         1          = -0.003 (0.001)
               i




                                                                                                                              i




                                                                                                                                                                                                 $10K
                       1.9                                                                                                            2.7                                                    2          = 0.003 (0.001)


                                                                                 $10K
                       1.8                                                   2          = -0.163 (0.005)                              2.6



                       1.7                                                                                                            2.5
                        -$15,000        -$10,000        -$5,000       $0           +$5,000        +$10,000      +$15,000               -$15,000        -$10,000         -$5,000       $0          +$5,000         +$10,000     +$15,000
                                                    Distance to the Homestead Cap Threshold                                                                         Distance to the Homestead Cap Threshold


                            e. Homestead Status: Protest Rate                                                                         f. No Homestead Status: Protest Rate
                       16                                                                                     N=96,274                16                                                                                     N=57,851

                       15                                                                                                             15
                       14                                                                                                             14
                       13                                                                                                             13
                       12           $10K
                                                                                                                                      12
                                   1         = 2.881 (0.260)
                       11                                                                                                             11
                       10                                                                                                             10
               P2020




                                                                                                                              P2020




                                                                                                                                                      $10K
                        9                                                     $10K
                                                                                                                                       9          1          = 3.247 (0.251)
                                                                             2          = -1.604 (0.234)
                        8                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                                                                              $10K
                        7                                                                                                              7                                                     2          = 3.195 (0.354)
                        6                                                                                                              6
                        5                                                                                                              5
                        4                                                                                                              4
                        3                                                                                                              3
                       -$15,000        -$10,000         -$5,000       $0           +$5,000        +$10,000      +$15,000              -$15,000        -$10,000          -$5,000       $0          +$5,000         +$10,000     +$15,000
                                                    Distance to the Homestead Cap Threshold                                                                         Distance to the Homestead Cap Threshold

Notes: This figure features a binned scatterplot of the relationship between a given outcome (indicated in the y-axis of each panel) and the distance between
the 2020 proposed value and the 2020 potential homestead cap threshold (defined as 110% of the appraised value in the previous year). All regressions control
for the proposed value, a dummy for whether the household protested in the previous year and a set of school district dummies. The sample is restricted to
properties for which the proposed value is within $15,000 of the potential homestead threshold. The lines correspond to linear regressions, with normalized
slopes reported next to them along with as robust standard errors (in parentheses) and the number of households (in brackets). The panels on the left half
((a) (c) and (e)) corresponds to households with 2020 homestead status, while the panels on the right half ((b) (d) and (f)) correspond to households without
2020 homestead status. The dependent variables are: Ti is the estimated 2020 tax amount based on 2020 proposed values; i is the corresponding tax rate;
P2020 is an indicator variable that takes the value 100 if the household protested directly in 2020 and 0 otherwise.




                                                                                                                         44
                                   Figure 3: First Page of Sample Letter




                  Joan Robinson,




           800 W. Campbell Road               Website: https://www.utdallas.edu/taxproject/   Please
           Richardson, TX 75080                                                               recycle




Notes: A sample of the first page of the letter used in the field experiment. The information
in the table varied by treatment group. Sample tables for every treatment group are
presented in Figure A.6. The table appears inside a red frame with dashed lines (this
frame was added to this figure for emphasis but does not appear in the actual letters).




                                                       45
                                                Figure 4: Second Page of Sample Letter
                             a. Extra Aid Message: No                               b. Extra Aid Message: Yes



            y!!:"P_TTdM^OPdQnMUSdn`MLPTP^^PLO
            _d^uPtU^ULPh}!?!;!!!:
            !;"


            ~!!



            cTPSdQLMPd^dPL
            
            
46




               JOAN ROBINSON                                              JOAN ROBINSON




     Notes: A sample of the second page of the letter used in the field experiment. Panel (a) does not contain the Extra
     Aid Message, while panel (b) does in the section framed with the red dashed lines. This red frame in panel (b) was
     added to this figure for emphasis but does not appear in the actual letters.
                                Figure 5: Prior Misperceptions and Belief Updating in the Mturk Survey

                         a. Prior Misperceptions                                             b. Belief Updating
47




Notes: This figure shows binned scatterplots based on the Mturk Survey. Each line corresponds to a separate OLS regression, with robust
standard errors in parentheses and the number of observations in brackets.  - i refers to the difference between the average tax rate in
the respondent's county and the tax rate paid by the respondent. In both panels the x-axis corresponds to the potential feedback that could
have been shown to the subjects (i.e., the actual difference in tax rates). In panel (a) the y-axis corresponds to the prior beliefs about that
difference (i.e., the respondent's perceptions before the feedback could have been shown) while in panel (b) the y-axis is the corresponding
posterior belief (i.e., after the information provision experiment). The results from panel (b) are broken down by treatment group: the
red diamonds (labeled "Feedback") correspond to respondents who were who were shown the feedback while the blue circles (labeled "No
Feedback") correspond to those not shown the feedback.
                                  Table 1: Effects of the Homestead Cap on the Probability of Protesting

                                       (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                                                      agent         all
                                      P2020        P2019      P2020       P2019      P2020        P2020        P2020         P2020
          i                         36.507        -5.740                            6.174      42.681        30.644       20.928
                                     (4.979)     (3.611)                            (2.954)     (5.506)       (1.436)      (0.526)
          Ti                                                 0.022        -0.004
                                                             (0.004)     (0.002)
          Bandwidth                   $15K         $15K       $15K        $15K       $15K        $15K          $30K         $150K
          Mean Outcome                 9.98         6.12       9.98       6.12       5.93        15.91         8.94          8.21
          Std. Dev. Outcome            29.97       23.97      29.97      23.97       23.62       36.58         28.53        27.45
          Observations                96,274      96,274      96,274     96,274     96,274       96,274       179,452      308,000
48




     Notes: Significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Each column presents results from a different
     Instrumental Variable regression that follows the specification presented in equation (6) from Section 3.2. The endogenous
     variable (i ) corresponds to the property tax rate (in percentage points) that the household is subject to, except in columns
     (3) and (4) where it is the tax amount (in dollars, Ti ). The excluded instrument is the interaction between two variables: the
     difference between the proposed value and the potential homestead cap, and an indicator variable for whether that difference
     is positive. The regression controls for the difference between the proposed value and the potential homestead cap as well as a
     host of additional variables ­ see Section 3.2 for the full list. Results based on households with single-family homes and 2020
     homestead status. The row Bandwidth indicates how the sample has been further restricted based on the absolute difference
     between the proposed value and the potential homestead cap. The dependent variables are defined as follows: P2020 is an
     indicator variable that takes the value 100 if the owner filed a direct protest in 2020 and 0 otherwise; P2019 indicates a direct
                        agent                                                all
     protest in 2019; P2019   indicates a protest through an agent in 2020; P2019 indicates any type of protest (direct or through agent).
                               Table 2: Effects of the Two Types of Letters on the Probability of Protesting

                                             (1)        (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)         (8)         (9)       (10)
                                                                 agent        all                            online                   won
                                            P2020      P2019    P2020       P2020      P2020      P2020     P2020       SO2020      P2020      2020
     Basic Aid Letter(i)                  1.792        -0.286  0.030      1.822      1.449      1.935      1.591         0.795     0.939      0.065
                                          (0.249)     (0.199) (0.181)     (0.283)    (0.347)    (0.339)    (0.231)      (0.719)    (0.196)    (0.018)
     Extra Aid Letter(ii)                 3.509        -0.288 -0.122      3.387      3.108      3.745      3.306       15.287      1.939      0.094
                                          (0.258)     (0.198) (0.179)     (0.288)    (0.364)    (0.350)    (0.241)      (0.979)    (0.203)    (0.017)
     P-value (i)=(ii)                      <0.001      0.995     0.409    <0.001      <0.001     <0.001     <0.001      <0.001     <0.001      0.125
     CAD Notification                                                                   No         Yes
     Mean Outcome (No Letter)               8.67        6.14     6.07      14.74       6.03      10.33       7.18        3.37        5.07       0.41
     Std. Dev. Outcome (No Letter)         28.14       24.00    23.89      35.45      23.80      30.43      25.82        18.05      21.94       1.95
     Observations                          78,462     78,462    78,462     78,462     30,356     48,106     78,462       5,026      78,462     78,462
49




     Notes: Significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Each column presents results from a different regression
     with two independent variables: Basic Aid Letter is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the subject was randomly chosen to receive a
     basic aid letter and Extra Aid Letter is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the subject was randomly chosen to receive an extra aid
     letter. The omitted category is comprised by subjects who were randomly chosen not to receive a letter. Columns (5) and (6) split the sample
     by whether DCAD mailed the subjects an official notification. The dependent variables are defined as follows: P2020 is an indicator variable
                                                                                                                                         agent
     that takes the value 100 if the owner filed a direct protest in 2020 and 0 otherwise; P2019 indicates a direct protest in 2019; P2019     indicates
                                              all                                                             online
     a protest through an agent in 2020; P2019 indicates any type of protest (direct or through agent); P2020 indicates a direct protest that was
     filed online; SO2020 is defined for a subsample that protested directly online and provided an opinion of value, and it takes the value 100 if the
     subject provided an opinion of value within half a percentage point of the value we selected for their extra aid message. P2020 won indicates with

     100 if a direct protest resulted in a reduction in the assessed value. And all
                                                                                 2020 is the percentage point reduction in the assessed value, which by
     construction takes the value 0 if the household did not protest or if the protest was unsuccessful.
        Table 3: Effects of the Information on Average Tax Rate in the County on Beliefs and Attitudes in the Mturk Survey

                                                     (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
                                                                                        post
                                                      post
                                                      i          prior
                                                                 i           i        Ri         Hipost     ipost
                                                   0.393        0.028      -0.066    -0.319      -5.135 -0.138
                                                   (0.071)     (0.086)    (0.044)    (0.169)    (4.052) (0.067)
                         Mean Outcome                1.24        1.39      1.28        6.14      42.57       0.37
                         Std. Dev. Outcome           0.77       0.92        0.80       2.03      49.46        0.57
                         Observations               2,065       2,065      2,065      2,065      2,065       2,065

     Notes: Significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Each column presents results from a different
     regression using data from the Mturk Survey. All regressions follow the same specification given by equation (9) from Section 5.4.
     The coefficient on  corresponds to the information shock (Di · ( - i )). The dependent variables are defined as follows:  post      i  is the
50




                                                                                                                       prior
     posterior belief (i.e., after the information-provision experiment) on the average tax rate in the county.  i           is the corresponding
                                                                                                                                              post
     prior belief (i.e., before the information-provision experiment). i is the posterior belief about the respondent's own tax rate. Ri           ,
     elicited after the information-provision experiment, measures if the individual thinks that his or her own taxes are higher than the
     ones paid by others in the county, in a 1-10 scale. Hipost , elicited after the information-provision experiment, is an indicator taking the
     value 100 if the respondent thinks that his or her own taxes are too high. ipost is the desired tax cut: i.e., the difference between
     the tax rate that the household currently pays and the tax rate that the household would find most fair (both measured after the
     information-provision experiment).
                  Table 4: Effects of the Information on Average Tax Rate in the County on the Probability of Protesting
                                                      All                        Survey Respondents                         All
                                               (1)            (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)             (8)
                                              P2020          P2019     P2020       P2019     U2020      I2020      P2020           P2020
                    Field Experiment:
                                             -0.937          -0.398   -12.566      -2.284   -0.459    -11.919     -1.325           -0.253
                                             (0.509)        (0.340)    (5.424)    (2.822)   (0.244)     (4.495)   (0.611)         (0.897)
                    Extra Aid Message        1.719           0.013    27.373       0.821     0.083    12.795      1.076           2.480
                                             (0.274)        (0.202)    (2.206)    (1.355)   (0.098)    (1.758)    (0.349)         (0.433)
                    Quasi-Experiment:
                    i                       38.158           -2.103 96.314        -21.086   1.730     56.739      36.992      47.827
                                             (2.270)        (1.646) (24.284)     (14.663)   (0.867)   (19.575)     (2.927)     (5.230)
                    Subsample                                                                                      Dem.            Rep.
51




                    Mean Outcome              11.29          5.85      50.26       10.33     7.12       81.90        9.91          12.97
                    Std. Dev. Outcome          31.65        23.48      50.01       30.44    2.15        38.52       29.88          33.59
                    Observations              50,394        50,394     1,888       1,888    1,888       1,867      27,633         22,761
 Notes: Significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Each column presents results from two sets of regressions based
 on the same sample and with the same dependent variable. All results are based on households who received a letter in the field experiment. The
 estimates from Field-Experiment were estimated based on equation (10) from Section 5.5. The coefficient on  corresponds to the information shock
 (Di · ( - i )), while Extra Aid Message corresponds to an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the household was assigned to the extra aid
 message. Quasi-Experiment corresponds to the Instrumental Variable regression given by equation (6) from Section 3.2, in which the tax rate (i , in
 percentage points) is the endogenous variable. This regression exploits variation in the proposed value within $150,000 of the potential homestead
 threshold and for the subset of households with a 2020 homestead status. The dependent variables are defined as follows: P2020 is an indicator variable
 that takes the value 100 if the owner protested directly in 2020 and 0 otherwise; P2019 indicates whether the owner protested directly in 2019. Columns
 (3) through (6) are restricted to the respondents to the Field Survey. U2020 corresponds to a question about whether the taxes of the respondent are
 unfair relative to the taxes of everyone else, in a 1-10 scale. I2020 is an indicator variable that takes the value 100 if the household reported to be either
 likely or very likely to protest in 2020. Columns (7) and (8) reproduce column (1) for the subsample of Democrats and Republicans, respectively.
