                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHAT EXPLAINS THE GAP IN WELFARE USE AMONG IMMIGRANTS AND NATIVES?

                                         Xiaoning Huang
                                          Neeraj Kaushal
                                      Julia Shu-Huah Wang

                                       Working Paper 27811
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27811


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Xiaoning Huang, Neeraj Kaushal, and Julia Shu-Huah Wang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Explains the Gap in Welfare Use among Immigrants and Natives?
Xiaoning Huang, Neeraj Kaushal, and Julia Shu-Huah Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 27811
September 2020
JEL No. H0,I31,I38

                                           ABSTRACT

We investigate the gap in welfare use between immigrants and natives over a 24-year period
using the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the Current Population Survey from
1995-2018, spanning periods of economic recessions and recoveries, changes in welfare policy
regimes, and policies towards immigrants. A novel contribution of our research is to adopt the
Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition analysis to study the effects of demographic factors,
macroeconomic trends and policy on welfare use gap between immigrants and natives. Our
analysis leads to three main findings: one, if immigrants had the same demographic
characteristics as natives their participation in means-tested programs would have been much less
overall and much below those of natives. This finding holds true across broader measures of
welfare receipt capturing cash and near cash programs and health insurance as well as
participation in five specific safety net programs. It also holds true across periods of economic
recessions and recovery. Second, we find evidence that the business cycle impacts immigrant and
native welfare participation differently. Immigrant participations in Temporary Assistance to
Needy Families, Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program and State Children's Health
Insurance Program are more sensitive to the business cycle than native participations. Three, we
find that changes in program eligibility explain only a modest proportion of the immigrant-native
gap in welfare use. A possible explanation for this finding is that changes in eligibility rules have
affected only specific immigrant populations (e.g. new immigrants) whereas our analysis pertains
to all immigrants.

Xiaoning Huang                                    Julia Shu-Huah Wang
Columbia University                               The University of Hong Kong
1255 Amsterdam Avenue                             Hong Kong
New York, New 10027                               jshwang@hku.hk
xh2278@columbia.edu

Neeraj Kaushal
Columbia University
School of Social Work
1255 Amsterdam Avenue
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nk464@columbia.edu
Introduction

            We investigate the gap in welfare use between immigrants and natives over a 24-year

period, using the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the Current Population Survey

from 1995-2018, spanning periods of economic recessions, including the Great Recession, and

recoveries, changes in welfare policy regimes, and policies towards immigrants. A novel

contribution of our research is to adopt the Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition analysis to extrapolate

the sources of differences in welfare use gap between the two groups. We specifically examine

the role of demographic factors, macroeconomic trends, and policy in "explaining" welfare use

gap between immigrants and natives.

            In 1996, the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act

(PRWORA) dramatically changed the rules of welfare participation by imposing restrictions on

welfare use to a maximum of five years, instituting work requirements on participants and

sanctions for noncompliance. As we describe in detail below, PRWORA imposed additional

restrictions on immigrant eligibility for welfare programs. Partly as a result of these changes and

partly on account of other demographic and macroeconomic factors, immigrant and native

participation in cash and near-cash programs in the United States has seen dramatic swings since

1996. During 1994-1996, three years prior to reform, low-educated 1 immigrant-headed

households with children were 5 percentage points more likely than similar households headed

by natives to receive assistance under at least one of the three primary cash and near-cash

transfer programs, namely, Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), Supplemental

Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP), and Supplemental Security Income (SSI). Both groups

1
    Low-educated are defined as individuals with a high-school or lower education.




                                                           2
experienced sizable reductions in participation in the following five years, with the decline being

greater among immigrants, such that in the early years of the 2000s they were less likely than

natives to receive these benefits. Participation inched upward for both groups during 2000-2006,

followed by a sharp rise during the Great Recession, and a modest fall in the recent recovery

(Figure 1, top panel). A broader definition of public assistance that includes public health

insurance coverage shows similar swings but with a clear trend depicting increasing uptake for

both groups over the years (Figure 1, bottom panel).

       What explains these trends? To what extent is the gap in receipt of means-tested

programs among immigrant and native low-educated households with children due to differences

in demographic characteristics of the two groups; to what extent due to the business cycle and its

diverse impact on the two groups; to what extent due to welfare policy changes specific to

immigrants, to what extent on account of changes in local immigration enforcement and other

policies specific to immigrants; and to what extent due to differences in the geographic locations

of the two groups? While a number of studies have compared trends in immigrant and native use

of means-tested programs (e.g. Bitler and Hoynes, 2013; Borjas, 2011), there is no research that

systematically studied the effects of all the above-mentioned factors on welfare use gap between

immigrant and natives over the past quarter century.

       In this paper, we investigate the association between immigrant-native participation gap

in welfare programs and a range of policies depicting immigrant eligibility for safety-net

programs, and other policies aimed at immigrant inclusion (state Dream Act, eligibility for

driver's license), and policies aimed at immigrant exclusion (E-verify, local immigration

enforcement, and Secure Communities Program). Using the Oaxaca-Blinder "decomposition"




                                                 3
analysis, we examine to what extent the gap in welfare use between the two groups is on account

of differences in demographic characteristics, geographic locations, macro-economic trends,

welfare policy variations, local immigration policies and to what extent on account of differences

in "sensitivity" of the two groups to these factors.

        We start the analysis with two summary outcomes of welfare participation in low-

educated households with children. The first outcome is a narrow measure of public assistance

capturing take-up of at least one of the three main cash and near-cash transfer programs: TANF,

SNAP, and SSI. The second outcome is a broader measure and captures receipt of cash/near-cash

programs and public health insurance (Children's Health Insurance Program [CHIP] and

Medicaid). 2 For brevity, throughout the paper we use the term 'cash and near-cash transfer'

programs to describe the first outcome and 'safety net' programs to describe the second. We also

present results for each of these five programs separately.

        Briefly, our analysis leads to the following findings: one, if immigrants had the same

characteristics as natives their participation in means-tested programs would have been much

less overall and much below those of natives. This finding holds true across the two summary

measures of welfare receipt as well as five specific safety net programs. It also holds true across

periods of economic recession and recovery. Second, we find evidence that the business cycle

impacts immigrant and native welfare participation differently. Immigrant participations in

TANF, SNAP and SCHIP are more sensitive to the business cycle than native participations.

Three, we find that changes in program eligibility explain only a modest proportion of the


2
 Specifically, the second outcome is whether the household received any of the five programs: TANF, SSI, SNAP,
Medicaid, and SCHIP.




                                                       4
immigrant-native gap in welfare use. A possible explanation for this finding is that changes in

eligibility rules have affected specific immigrant populations (e.g. new immigrants) whereas our

analysis pertains to all immigrants.

Policies toward Immigrants' Eligibility for Means-tested Programs

         An important factor associated with differences in welfare use among immigrants and

natives is the welfare eligibility rules the two groups encounter. In 1996, the Personal

Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) transformed immigrant

eligibility for safety net programs. Prior to 1996, legal immigrants and naturalized citizens faced

the same eligibility rules as the US-born. PRAWORA changed legal immigrant eligibility for

means-tested programs by splitting them into groups based on citizenship and period of arrival.

New immigrants living in the United States for less than five years (new immigrants hereafter)

were banned from federally funded means-tested programs. But for immigrants who had lived in

the country for five or more years (old immigrants hereafter), the federal government allowed

state governments' discretion to use federal funds for TANF, Medicaid, and SNAP benefits. 3

Most, but not all, states granted eligibility to old immigrants. A number of states also used their

own funds to create substitute programs for new immigrants. The welfare eligibility rules for

naturalized citizens remained the same as those for US-born households. The undocumented and

temporary residents were never eligible for means-tested programs and the 1996 reform did not

change their eligibility.




3
  In the case of SSI, federal law made immigrant eligibility contingent on 40 quarters of work, irrespective of their
duration of stay in the US, but five states used own funds to cover other immigrants (Kaushal, 2011). The Federal
law also imposed work requirements on SNAP eligibility for able-bodied adults without dependents.




                                                           5
       A number of legislations following PRWORA restored immigrants' eligibility for some

of the programs. First, responding to the public outcry at the perceived injustice of denying

certain benefits to immigrants, the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 restored Supplemental Security

Income (SSI) benefits and Medicaid to all legal immigrants who were receiving SSI pre-

enactment. The bill also restored eligibility to pre-enactment elderly and disabled immigrants

(Dodson, 2001; Fix et al., 2009; Bitler & Hoynes, 2013; Haider et al., 2004; Kaushal 2011).

Second, the Agricultural Research, Extension and Education Reform Act of 1998 granted food

stamp eligibility to elderly and disabled immigrants who were receiving food stamp pre-

enactment as well as pre-enactment child immigrants. Nearly one-third of immigrants who had

lost food stamp benefits under PRWORA had their benefits restored via this act (Haider et al.,

2004). Third, the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 further restored food stamps

to disabled immigrants, immigrant children, and adults with five years of legal residence.

       In 1997, the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) followed the same principle as

PRWORA of granting legal immigrant children public health insurance if they were in the

country for at least five years. Several states extended SCHIP (State CHIP) to immigrant

children in the country for less than five years. By 2002, when most states had implemented the

key provisions of the 1996 welfare law, immigrant eligibility for TANF, SNAP, SSI, and public

health insurance differed depending on their state-of-residence and duration of stay. Post-2002

changes have been few with the exception of the 2009 SCHIP reauthorization that lifted the 5-

year bar to cover all legal immigrant children and pregnant women (Fix et al., 2009; Bitler &

Hoynes, 2013). The 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) followed the

PRWORA guiding principle and restricted Medicaid eligibility to citizens and permanent legal




                                                 6
residents who have been in the US for more than five years, but a few states issued exemptions

to cover certain excluded populations (Pedraza, Nichols, & LeBrón, 2017).

Macro-Factors Affecting Welfare Use: Economic Cycles and Immigration Policies

        Trends in receipt of means-tested programs among immigrants and natives could differ

on account of differences in their demographic and labor market characteristics. The two groups

are also differently affected by the business cycle. Orrenius & Zavodny (2010) for instance

found that immigrants suffered a sharper increase in unemployment during the Great Recession

than natives. They also experienced higher poverty than natives (Bitler & Hoynes, 2013).

        In addition to the business cycle, immigration enforcement intensified in the past two

decades through programs such as Section 287(g) of the Illegal Immigration and Immigrant

Responsibility Act, Secure Communities Program, and Priority Enforcement Program could also

have influenced immigrant receipt of means-tested programs. Prior studies have found that the

escalated federal immigration enforcement (Watson, 2014) and Secure Communities Program

(Pedraza & Zhu, 2015) reduced immigrant Medicaid participation. Further, increased risk of

deportation was associated with lower WIC uptake (Vargas & Pirog, 2016) and Medicaid

participation (Vargas, 2015). The rollout of the Secure Communities Program also reduced

SNAP and SSI participation among Hispanic citizens (Alsan & Yang, 2019). There is mixed

evidence of a chilling effect of restrictive immigration policies on welfare use among US-born

Latino populations {Allen (2018) found spillover effects; Allen & McNeely ((2017) did not}4.

Previous Research on Immigrant and Native Safety Net Programs Use

4
 Allen (2018) found that county level Latino population density moderated the effect of Omnibus bills on program
enrollment with counties with higher densities of Latino population experiencing low enrollment. Allen and
McNeely (2017) did not consider county level factors.




                                                        7
       A number of studies have examined the gap in immigrant versus native use of safety net

programs. Studies in the pre-1996 welfare reform period had three main findings: one,

immigrants were more likely than natives to receive safety-net programs (Borjas, 1995; Borjas &

Hilton, 1996; Borjas & Trejo, 1991). Two, immigrant households had more frequent and longer

welfare spells than native households (Borjas & Hilton, 1996). Three, the gap in welfare use

among the two groups largely disappeared after adjusting for their demographic characteristics

and economic circumstances (Butcher & Hu, 2000).

       The 1996 welfare reform and subsequent state and federal changes in immigrant welfare

eligibility spawned a large body of research. These studies indicate that the welfare caseload fall,

subsequent to the reform, was larger for immigrants than natives and many researchers

concluded that this was on account of a chilling effect of the policy change that created

confusion about eligibility and fear of welfare use among immigrants (Loftstrom and Bean, 2002;

Fix et al., 2009; Fix & Passell, 1999; Kaestner &Kaushal, 2005). As expected, the decline was

higher for recent arrivals who were more acutely affected by welfare reform (Borjas, 2003; Fix

& Passell, 1999). Further, many studies examined if welfare reforms led to behavioral changes in

immigrants and natives across various domains (e.g., employment: Loftstrom and Bean, 2002;

Kaestner & Kaushal, 2005; fertility: Joyce et al., 2001; food insecurity: Borjas, 2004; poverty:

Borjas, 2011; health insurance: Borjas, 2003; Kaushal and Kaestner, 2005; health: East, 2018).

       More recent research has examined the role of local welfare policies ­ restrictive as well

as expansionary - and local immigration enforcement measures on welfare use. Watson (2014)

and Weber (2015) found that stricter immigration enforcement was associated with a fall in

Medicaid and SCHIP enrollment among immigrants and their children. On the other hand,




                                                 8
inclusionary policies such as the US Department of Agriculture outreach initiative and the SNAP

expansion under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act increased SNAP participation

among immigrant households (Skinner, 2012; Kaushal, Waldfogel, & Wight, 2013).

           A couple of studies have examined trends in welfare use among natives and immigrants.

The most comprehensive of these studies is by Bitler and Hoynes (2013), who investigated

welfare use among foreign-born and US-born households with children using the CPS data for

1995-2010 and found that immigrant-headed households were 20 percentage points more likely

to use any safety net program than their native counterparts. But in samples restricted to low-

income households, the welfare use gap turned negative with the likelihood of immigrant

households using food stamps, TANF, and SSI falling below those of native households. 5

Camarota (2015) used data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) in 2012

and also found that immigrants used welfare more than native households across various

programs. He estimated that immigrants used welfare programs more than natives regardless of

their childbearing status, work status, and education levels. However, the gap in welfare use was

not examined in the multivariate models that can simultaneously control for all these factors.

           We contribute to this literature in three ways. First, our study covers a longer period (24

years versus one to 15 years in aforementioned studies) including the period of post-Great

Recession recovery. Second, we specifically estimate the association between immigrant

participation in welfare programs and policies depicting immigrant eligibility for safety-net

programs and the business cycle. Previous research has not systematically and simultaneously

investigated the influence of demographic characteristics, macroeconomic factors, and welfare

5
    Borjas (2011) examined trends in poverty and welfare participation among native and immigrant children.




                                                          9
and immigration related policies on welfare use gap between immigrants and natives. Our study

offers a more holistic view. Third, ours is the first study to conduct an Oaxaca-Blinder

decomposition analysis to "explain" the gap in welfare use between immigrants and natives.

Specifically, we examine to what extent the gap is associated with demographic characteristics,

differences in immigrant and native settlement patterns, business cycle, welfare policies towards

immigrants, local immigration enforcement policies and other policies specific to immigrants

and to what extent it is on account of differences in "sensitivity" of the two groups to these

factors.

Data

           The empirical analysis is based on the Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the

Current Population Survey (also known as the March CPS), a nationally representative data of

US households. These data provide detailed information on participation in a range of means-

tested programs and public health insurance, the key outcomes of interest in our analysis. The

analytical samples are from 1995 to 2018 measuring welfare receipt during 1994-2017. In order

to study immigrant and native welfare use among low income families, following previous

research, we restrict our analysis to low-educated households (household heads with high-school

or lower education) because they have a high likelihood of welfare participation (Schoeni and

Blank, 2000; Blank, 2002; Kaestner and Kaushal, 2005; Ziliak, 2015).

           We study two summary outcomes of welfare use. The first outcome is a narrow measure

of public assistance capturing take-up of at least one of the three main cash and near-cash

transfer programs: TANF, SNAP, and SSI. The second outcome is a broader measure and

captures receipt of cash/near-cash programs and public health insurance (Children's Health




                                                 10
Insurance Program [SCHIP] and Medicaid). Further, we do all analyses on participation in each

of the following five programs: TANF, SNAP, SSI, SCHIP, and Medicaid. 6 For the two

summary outcomes, the samples are low-educated households with children. We use the same

household level sample for the analyses for TANF, SNAP and SSI. For Medicaid, we use a

sample of all adults with a high school or lower education, for SCHIP, all children in low-

educated households.

        We study cash/near-cash programs and public health insurance separately for two reasons.

One, these programs have diverse impacts on the exchequer. Receipt of cash and near-cash

benefits impose a direct cost. The overall cost of health insurance on the exchequer would differ

across populations: those in poorer health would impose a greater burden than those in better

health. Previous research documents that immigrants generally have better health than natives

(Antecol & Bedard, 2006; Kennedy et al., 2015; Riosmena, Kuhn, & Jochem, 2017). Further, if

lack of health insurance causes immigrants to avoid healthcare when needed, thus deteriorating

their health and resulting in emergency care, which is more expensive, the overall impact of

health insurance on the exchequer may actually be less cost (Ku & Matani, 2001; Mohanty et al.,

2005; Sommers, 2013). Moreover, previous research suggests that increase in Medicaid lowered

SSI participation among disabled adults (Burns and Dague, 2017; Soni, Burns, Dague, and

Simon, 2017). Thus, immigrant health insurance may be cost effective. Two, policy changes

over the past quarter century have been generally, though not always, to restrict immigrant

access to cash and near cash programs (e.g. the 1996 welfare reform and public charge rule).


6
  In supplementary analysis, we included housing subsidy as one of the measures of welfare, and the results were not
significantly different compared to the analyses without housing subsidy.




                                                        11
Changes in health insurance policies on the other hand, until very recently, have been to reduce

restrictions on immigrants' access to health insurance (e.g. 1997 SCHIP law, 2013 ACA, and the

associated Medicaid expansions.)

       The March CPS is rich in respondents' demographics and household information that we

use to construct control variables for the regression analysis. Age is included as a categorical

variable with five-year intervals. Education is captured through a dummy variable indicating

whether the household head (or individual) had completed high school. Marital status is a set of

dummy variables indicating whether the household head (or individual) is currently married,

divorced, widowed, or never married. Race/ethnicity is captured by a set of dummy variables

indicating if the household head (or individual) is non-Hispanic white (reference category), non-

Hispanic black, Hispanic, or other race/ethnicities. We also control for foreign-born respondents'

country/region of origin: (US-born [reference category]) Mexico, rest of North America, Central

America, Caribbean countries, South America, Europe, East Asia, South East Asia, other Asia,

Africa, or Pacific countries), period of arrival (five years or less, 6 to 10 years, 11-15 years, 16-

20 years, 21- 30 years, or over 30 years [reference category]), cohort of arrival (before 1970,

1970-80, 1981-90, 1991-1996, 1997-2000, 2001-2010, or after 2010 [reference category]) and

citizenship status (whether all household members [reference category], some household

members, or none are citizens). We also control for household characteristics including number

of children in the household (whether the household has one child [reference category], two

children, or three or more children) and household size (the household has two [reference

category], three, four, or five or more people).




                                                   12
           We construct immigrant eligibility for cash, near-cash, and public health insurance

programs by state and year using various data sources. Bitler & Hoynes (2013) has detailed data

on immigrant eligibility for TANF, SNAP, SSI, and public health insurance for some years

between 1997 and 2009. We use various additional sources described below to supplement their

data. Because federal policy did not distinguish between immigrants and natives before the

Welfare Reform, we treat immigrants in all states before 1997 as eligible. Data on immigrant

eligibility for state-funded TANF are from the Welfare Rules Databook (Heffernan et al., 2018).

Data on immigrant eligibility for SNAP are from the United States Department of Agriculture's

SNAP Policy Database (ERS, 2017) and Food and Nutrition Service annual reports on state

options (USDA, 2019). Data on immigrant eligibility for SSI are from the National Immigration

Law Center (NILC, 2002) and the Social Security Administration website (SSA, 2019). Data on

immigrant eligibility to Medicaid and SCHIP are from the Medicaid.gov (2016), the National

Immigration Law Center (NILC, 2017), a report from the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF, 2019),

and the Health Insurance and Health Reform Authority (Norris, 2019). Appendix Tables 1 and 2

document state-specific immigrant eligibility for TANF, SNAP, SSI, Medicaid, and SCHIP.

           Overall, based on immigrants' state-of-residence and duration of stay, there are three

variants of immigrant eligibility for Medicaid/SCHIP across states (Medicaid for new

immigrants; Medicaid for old immigrants; SCHIP for new immigrant children 7); two variants of

immigrant eligibility for TANF (TANF for new immigrants and old immigrants), one variant

each for SNAP (for new immigrants) and SSI (all immigrants). In our empirical analysis for the

summary measures, we create a welfare policy score that gives each program equal weightage,

7
    Legal immigrant children, in the country for more than 5 years, are eligible for SCHIP in all states.




                                                            13
and this score ranges between 0 and 4, with a higher value indicating a higher level of generosity.

Appendix Table 3 uses the immigrant eligibility in 2002 as an example to demonstrate how we

calculate the policy score for each program in each year. Our analyses for specific programs are

based on policy scores specific to those programs.

         Data on state unemployment rates are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS, 2018).

Local immigration enforcement policies under section 287(g) and the Secure Communities are

taken from the Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) website archives (ICE, 2009; ICE,

2013; ICE, 2018). These enforcement data are by county and year. Because the CPS does not

provide data on county of residence for a majority of the sample, 8 we create enforcement policy

data by state and year using population weights. The population data are from the US Census

Bureau's annual resident population estimates (Census 2018). Information on state policies

specific to undocumented immigrants such as state dream act, eligibility for driver's license, and

E-Verify requirements are from Kaushal, Wang, & Huang (2018), Wang and Kaushal (2018) and

the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) websites (NCSL, 2015; NCSL, 2016). All

state-level variables are lagged by one year and merged with the CPS data by state and year. 9

         A limitation of our study is that we are unable to adjust for underreporting of benefit

receipt in government-administered surveys, including the CPS. The underreporting rate sharply

increased during our study period (Klerman, Ringel, & Roth, 2005; Meyer, Mok & Sullivan,

2015). Underreporting may be due to stigma associated with program receipt or simply due to

recall bias or confusion of program names (Meyer, Mok & Sullivan, 2015). In the case of
8
  38.6% of our analytic sample has county identifiers.
9
  Because the March-CPS asked for the welfare participation in the previous year, unless specified otherwise the
year used in the paper always refers to one year prior to the CPS survey year. Therefore, for the state-level variables,
the one-year lag is relative to the year prior to the CPS survey year.




                                                          14
immigrants, there is an additional fear that program receipt may jeopardize the immigration

status of family members. Bruckmeier and colleagues (2015) compared the underreporting rates

of welfare receipt between immigrants and native-born populations in Germany and did not find

a significant difference in their rates of reporting. Such evidence, to our knowledge, is not

available in the US context. If immigrants' underreporting rates differed from those of natives,

our results would be biased. If the underreporting rates are similar among immigrants and natives

as in the German context, under-reporting would be a lesser issue in our analysis.

Empirical Strategy

       We use logistic regression models to estimate the association between social assistance

and a welfare policy score (-1 ) that captures state generosity towards immigrants in

terms of their eligibility for various programs. Equation (1) describes the empirical specification.

       Pr (
              )
(1)  1-Pr(         = -1  1 +   -1  2 +   3 +   4 +
               )


-1  5 +   -1  6 +  + 

       In equation (1),  is an indicator of whether respondent i in state j received social

assistance in year t. We begin with the two summary measures of social assistance. The first

measure "cash and near-cash assistance" is equal to 1 if a household received TANF, SNAP or

SSI in year t, otherwise 0. The second measure, receipt of safety net programs (cash/near-cash

programs and public health insurance), is equal to 1 if a household received TANF, SNAP, SSI,

Medicaid or SCHIP, otherwise 0.  is a dummy variable indicating whether the

respondent was born outside of the United States.  denotes a vector of household and

individual characteristics namely age, gender, education, marital status, race/ethnicity, household




                                                 15
size, and number of children in the household. Iijt denotes a vector of immigrant characteristics

including country of origin 10, years since immigration, cohort of immigration, and number of

citizens in the household. The specific construction of these variables is described in the data

section. We also control for a set of time-varying state characteristics (-1 ) namely state

unemployment rate as an indicator of the business cycle and state/local policies that have

specifically targeted immigrants, namely: state dream act, driver's license, E-Verify, and

measures of local immigration enforcement under Section 287(g) of Immigration and

Naturalization Act and the Secure Communities Program. All state-level variables are lagged by

one year.  and  denote state fixed effects and year fixed effects. Further, we also estimate

fully interacted models in which the foreign-born variable is interacted with all covariates except

for immigrant characteristics and year fixed effects.

           Next, we estimate an equation similar to equation (1) to estimate participation in each of

the five programs separately. In these regressions, the variable -1 is replaced by a policy

variable(s) specific to the program. For the outcome on TANF participation, policy is a set of

two dichotomous variables: (i) TANF for new immigrants, which is equal to 1 if a state allowed

TANF for post-enactment new immigrants (arrived after 1996 and in the US for less than five

years), otherwise 0; (ii) TANF for old immigrants, which is equal to 1 if a state allowed post-

enactment older immigrants (arrived after 1996 and in the US for more than five years), and

these variables respectively interact with post-enactment new immigrants and older immigrants.

For the outcome on SNAP participation, the policy variables are: (i) SNAP for new immigrants

(equal to 1 if a state allowed SNAP for post-enactment new immigrants, otherwise 0); (ii) SNAP
10
     The foreign-born variable is not included in the model due to the presence of the country of origin variable.




                                                            16
for old immigrants (equal to 1 if a state offered SNAP for post-enactment old immigrants), and

these variables are respectively interacted with post-enactment new and old immigrants.

       Similarly, for Medicaid participation, we construct two policy variables: (i) Medicaid for

new immigrants (equal to 1 if a state allowed Medicaid for post-enactment new immigrants,

otherwise 0); (ii) Medicaid for old immigrants variable (equal to 1 if a state-provided Medicaid

for post-enactment old immigrants), and the two Medicaid variables are respectively interacted

with post-enactment new and old immigrants. All states provide SCHIP to foreign-born legal

immigrant children who have lived in the US for five years. For the SCHIP regressions, therefore,

the policy variable is equal to 1 if a state allowed SCHIP for post-enactment new immigrant

children, and it is interacted with post-enactment new immigrants. In the regression for SSI, the

policy variable is equal to 1 if states offered SSI benefit to post-enactment immigrants, and the

variable is interacted with post-enactment immigrants (arrived after 1996). Throughout, we

estimate robust standard errors clustered on state of residence to adjust for heteroskedasticity

(Huber, 1967).

Blinder-Oaxaca Decomposition

       Our final objective is to investigate to what extent the gap in welfare use between

immigrant and native households/individuals is on account of differences in

household/individual characteristics, state-level welfare restrictions, immigration policies, and

macroeconomic trends and to what extent on account of differences in "sensitivity" to these

factors. We follow the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition method for this analysis (Blinder, 1973;

Oaxaca 1973). Specifically, we adopt the "twofold" decomposition mostly used in the

discrimination literature (Jann, 2008).




                                                 17
       The method slices ("decomposes") the gap of welfare use between the two groups,

immigrant and native households, ( -  ), into two components: gap due to differences in

endowments or characteristics (E) and gap on account of responses to these characteristics

captured by the coefficients (C). Let V be a vector containing all predictors in our model

(individual and household characteristics, state unemployment rate, state immigrant-related

policies, state and year fixed effects) and a constant and B be the slope parameters and the

intercept. The twofold decomposition hypothesizes that there is a vector B* that can determine

the contribution of the differences in the predictors.

Equations (2) ­ (4) describe the "decomposition" mathematically:
                                                                   
(2)             -  =  -    +  ( -  ) +  ( -  ), where

                                
(3)             =  -    , and
                                       
(4)             =  ( -  ) +  ( -  )

       Equation (2) shows the part of the welfare use gap that is explained by the differences in

the predictors (characteristics) of immigrant and native households. E reflects a counterfactual

comparison of the welfare use gap if immigrant households had the same endowments

(covariates) as native households. In the second part (Equation (4)), C denotes the gap

attributable to differences in coefficients or the effect that remained unexplained on account of

differences in endowments. The decomposition analysis is performed using Stata 15 with the

"oaxaca" command, which provides linear predictions (Jann, 2008).

       We also use the "pooled" option to pool covariates into groups and generate coefficients

for each group to explore to what extent the gap of program participation is on account of

differences in household/individual characteristics, state-level welfare restrictions, other policies



                                                 18
targeting immigrants, and macroeconomic trends. We conducted the decomposition analysis for

the two summary outcomes of welfare participation and separately for participation in each of

the five programs for the entire 24-year period. Further, to examine if the association changed

over time or differed across periods of recessions or recovery, we also did the analysis slicing the

24-year period into five periods: pre-welfare reform period (1994-1996); welfare reform

implementation period (1997-2002); post-reform period (2003-2007); Great Recession (2008-

2012); and post-recession (2013-2017). One concern with the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition is

that the decomposition results depend on the reference category of categorical predictors. We use

the normalization option to overcome this problem (Oaxaca and Ransom, 1999).

Results

       Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of the immigrant and native samples: households

with children headed by individuals with a high-school or less education. The immigrant

households are less educated (42% of immigrant household heads, versus 76% of native

household heads, have a high school degree); more likely to be of Hispanic ethnicity (73%

versus 12%); more likely to be currently married; have larger household sizes and more children.

Several of these characteristics put immigrants at a higher risk of receiving benefits. Three-

fourths of the foreign-born sample has at least one non-citizen in the household. Because the

1996 welfare reform restricted welfare eligibility for several groups of non-citizens, many

households in the immigrant sample are also likely to be ineligible for benefits.

Trends in Welfare Use Gap between Immigrants and Natives

          Figure 2 presents trends in program participation in low-educated immigrant and native

headed households with children over the 24-year period, and Figure 3 presents the same




                                                19
adjusted for age, education, gender, marital status, and race. There are four main points to note:

One, after the 1996 welfare reform TANF participation in immigrant and native households has

fallen sharply. While both groups experienced a marginal increase in TANF use during the Great

Recession, overall less than 5% of households in either group received TANF at the peak of the

recession and the participation fell in the post-recovery period. Two, SSI participation registered

a modest, yet steady increase among native households and a modest, yet steady decline among

immigrant households. Three, unlike TANF and SSI participation, SNAP use in both groups has

been largely anti-cyclical; since 1997, immigrant households have on average a lower probability

of receiving SNAP than native households. Four, since 1997, health insurance coverage of

immigrant and native households has generally been rising and immigrant receipt of public

health insurance (Medicaid for adults and SCHIP for children) is greater than those of natives

without adjusting for household characteristics. This finding is qualitatively similar to Borjas

(2011) who studied program participation by children in immigrant and native households

(Figure 3 in Borjas, 2011). Once the trends are adjusted for demographic characteristics, natives

receipt of public health insurance is greater than those of immigrants, which is similar to Bitler

and Hoynes (2013).

       Camarota (2015) however used data from the Survey of Income and Program

Participation, 2012 and found that immigrants used welfare programs more than natives

regardless of their childbearing status, work status, and education levels. To investigate if our

finding differs from his on account of the difference in our data (SIPP versus CPS), we computed

welfare use by groups similar to those reported by Camarota in Appendix Table 4. We find that




                                                 20
while the CPS sample consistently shows lower welfare participation compared to SIPP, 11 the

welfare use gaps between natives and immigrants are similar using both datasets. The primary

difference between Camarota's models and the adjusted trends we present is that our adjusted

estimate control for age, education, gender, marital status, and race simultaneously, whereas his

models include these controls one at a time.

Association between Policies towards Immigrants and Welfare Receipt Gap

         Table 2 presents the association between program participation and state welfare

generosity towards immigrants, based on the welfare policy score 12 (higher score indicating

greater generosity towards immigrants) and state unemployment rate as specified in equation (1).

Model (1) restricts the effect of individual and household characteristics and state fixed effects to

be the same for immigrants and natives; Model (2) drops this restriction. 13, 14

         Estimates suggest immigrants' higher probability of program receipt (for both outcomes)

as policy score increased (increased program generosity). The results remain consistent across

specifications. We also find that program participation for cash and near-cash assistance is anti-

cyclical in that it increases with unemployment. The association between cash/near-cash

transfers and unemployment is statistically different for immigrants and natives, with immigrants




11
   Other studies have also documented this difference (Meyer et al., 2015).
12
   For the cash and near-cash participation outcome, we used a policy score that was based on eligibility to cash and
near-cash programs.
13
   For a sensitivity analysis, we conducted the same models with randomly selected 50% samples. The results
remained similar to those reported.
14
   We also estimated these models using county unemployment rate and county level policies towards immigrants
for the observations where county information is given in the CPS and state level variables (unemployment rate and
state policies) for the rest of the state without county identifiers. These models controlled for county (state fixed
effects for those that do not have county identifiers). Estimates, presented in Appendix Tables 6 and 7, were similar
to those in Tables 2 and 4.




                                                         21
using cash and near-cash assistance more when facing economic downturns. The unemployment

effect is statistically the same for both groups with safety-net programs as the outcome.

       Table 3 presents the estimated effects for specific programs. For brevity, we only present

estimates based on the fully interacted models. Estimates based on equation (1) are in Appendix

Table 5 and are generally similar to those in Table 3. Estimates in column 1 suggest that state

policies that allowed TANF benefits for new and old immigrants did not increase TANF use

among the eligible populations in the post-enactment period. One possible explanation for this

finding is that other restrictions on TANF eligibility (e.g. time-limited benefit, work

requirements and sanctions) that are common across eligible immigrants and natives have

rendered TANF to be a much smaller program and thus relegating TANF restrictions specific to

immigrant families to be a lesser factor in restricting their TANF participation.

       Estimates in column 2 suggest that state SNAP programs for new and old immigrants

were associated with higher use of SNAP by these groups, but the effect is statistically

insignificant for new immigrants. Estimates in column 3 suggest that state SSI programs for

post-enactment immigrants had no statistically significant effect on their SSI use. One possible

explanation for this finding is that the SSI provisions were restricted to aged, blind, and disabled

immigrants whereas our analysis is based on all households with children.

        Column 4 has results for Medicaid participation using a sample of low-educated adults

aged above 18 and suggests that state Medicaid eligibility for new immigrants and old

immigrants were associated with higher levels of Medicaid participation by both immigrant

groups. Estimates in column 5 suggest that state CHIP policy for new immigrants is associated

with a higher level of SCHIP participation among new immigrant children, yet the effect is




                                                 22
statistically insignificant. Finally, the associations between state unemployment rate and the

take-up of TANF, SNAP and SCHIP are statistically different for immigrants and natives in that

immigrants are more likely to use safety net programs when facing economic downturns. 15

Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition

         Tables 4 ­ 6 have results from the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition analyses. In Table 4,

columns 1 and 2 present estimates on the gap in immigrants' and natives' program participation

in cash and near-cash assistance programs and columns 3 and 4 have estimates on the gap in

safety net programs. The top panel shows the overall gap in welfare use and how much is

attributed to the differences in the two groups' endowments and their responses to endowments

(coefficients). Estimates suggest that immigrant households' use of cash and near-cash programs

is 2.3 percentage points lower than that of native households. If immigrant households had the

same endowments as natives, their receipt of cash and near-cash benefits would further decrease

by 5 percentage points on account of differences in responses. On the other hand, immigrants'

use of cash and near-cash benefits would increase by 7.3 percentage points, if their response to

endowments (coefficients) were the same as those of natives and only endowments differed.

         The second panel of Table 4 presents how differences in specific sets of endowments

(characteristics) contribute to the gap in program participation if immigrants and natives had the

same responses (coefficients). Overall, differences in educational attainment (% with a high-

school degree) and race (% of non-Hispanic whites) have the largest effects. These estimates




15
  We also conducted sensitivity analysis adding "omnibus laws" which are sometimes referred as "show me your
papers" laws as a control in the models in Tables 2, 3 and 4. The addition of this policy did not affect our estimates.




                                                          23
suggest that if immigrant households had the same proportion of high-school graduates as native

households, immigrants' use of cash and near-cash benefits would fall by 4.5 percentage points.

         Likewise, immigrants' use of cash and near-cash assistance would reduce by 2.3

percentage points if their racial/ethnic composition were identical to those of natives. Further,

immigrant use of cash and near-cash benefits would reduce by 3.8 percentage points if they had

the same proportion of non-Hispanic whites among them as natives. One possible explanation is

that our race variables capture unobserved socioeconomic disparities that result in minority

racial/ethnic groups being at a higher risk of receiving cash and near-cash programs. The

estimate for state fixed effects suggests that immigrants' participation in cash and near-cash

assistance would increase by 1.7 percentage points if immigrants had the same geographic

dispersion across states as natives.

         The third panel of Table 4 presents how differences in response to specific endowments

(coefficients) contribute to the overall gap in program participation. Our objective is to examine

to what extent the gap in welfare use among immigrants and natives is on account of differences

in characteristics and to what extent on account of differences in response to characteristics.

Therefore, for ease of interpretation, to distinguish policies towards immigrants and natives we

reversed the coding for welfare policy variables (in Tables 4-5).16 Overall, most of the gap not

explained by differences in endowment can be attributed to differences in immigrants and

natives responses to social welfare policy, educational attainment, household characteristics,

race/ethnicity and state-fixed effects (settlement patterns). Because our reversed welfare policy


16
  This simply changed the sign of reported coefficients. We also did the analysis defining policies as in Tables 2
and 3 and the estimates were of the same magnitude with the coefficient being of the opposite sign.




                                                         24
score captures the level of restrictiveness of state welfare policy towards immigrants, as expected,

immigrant response (coefficient) is associated with a lower benefit use.

       Estimates suggest immigrants' use of cash and near-cash programs would decrease by 2.3

percentage points if immigrants responded to high-school degrees the same way as natives. This

could mean that a high-school degree for immigrants does not fetch as good jobs as a high-

school degree for natives. Among the least educated (those without a high-school degree),

immigrants' use of cash and near-cash benefits would increase by 2.1 percentage points if

immigrants responded to having less than high-school education the same way as natives. This

could be because of larger number undocumented among immigrants without a high-school

degree, who are ineligible for benefits (Passel and Cohn, 2011). Less-educated immigrants may

also be less aware of welfare programs and how to obtain them.

       Estimates in columns 3 and 4 suggest that immigrants were 9.6 percentage points more

likely to use safety net programs than natives. Given that overall immigrants used less cash and

near-cash benefits than natives, the positive gap in safety net use is primarily driven by

immigrants' higher receipt of public health insurance. As found in Figures 2 and 3, this could be

substantially on account of changes in immigrant eligibility for public health insurance under the

2009 SCHIP reauthorization and ACA Medicaid expansions. Here, almost the entire the gap is

on account of differences in endowments, and the net contribution on account of differences in

response (coefficients) to various factors is negligible.

       In Panel 2, similar to cash and near-cash benefits, differences in educational attainment

(% with a high-school degree) and race (% of non-Hispanic white) have the largest effects. Here

too we find that the difference in receipt of safety net programs on account of exposures to




                                                  25
macroeconomic factors (e.g., unemployment) and immigrant inclusion and exclusion policies is

modest. The estimate for state fixed effects suggests that immigrants' participation in safety net

programs would increase by 2.6 percentage points if immigrants had the same geographic

dispersion as natives. These results (along with those for cash/near cash programs) reject the

welfare magnet hypothesis that immigrants make residential choices to maximize welfare use.

        Estimates in Panel 3 suggest that immigrants' use of safety net programs would increase

by 4.2 percentage points if immigrants responded to more restrictive state welfare policies

towards immigrants the same way as natives. Estimates suggest that immigrants' participation in

safety net programs would decrease by 2.1 percentage points if they responded to being

Hispanics the same way as natives. One likely explanation is that foreign-born Hispanics may be

working in jobs that do not offer health insurance, which would increase their dependence on

public health insurance.

       We also find some evidence that if immigrants' responded to immigrant exclusionary

policies, namely local immigration enforcement under Section 287(g), the Secure Communities

program, and E-Verity the same way as natives, immigrants' receipt of safety net programs

would increase by 1 percentage point. Because these policies do not directly involve immigrant

eligibility for these programs, the evidence here suggests that immigration exclusionary policies

may be causing a "chilling effect" on immigrant use of welfare programs. We are cautious in

reading too much into this evidence, as most exclusionary policies are specific to cities, whereas




                                                26
the smallest geographic unit available for all observations in our data is state, which limits our

ability to specify the exclusionary policies with precision. 17

         Table 5 presents decomposition estimates for specific programs. The overall differences

of TANF, SSI and SCHIP participation between immigrants and natives are small and

insignificant. Compared to natives, immigrants are much more likely to receive Medicaid and

less likely to receive SNAP. The attribution of the differences is mostly consistent with those of

the summary measures in Table 4: differences in educational attainment and ethnicity are the

main drivers of the difference in welfare use. Notably, for specific programs, immigrants did not

respond to eligibility policy for that specific program significantly differently than natives except

for TANF. This finding is different from the previous estimate in Table 3 where we found that

specific policies had significant effects, specifically in case of SNAP and Medicaid participation.

One explanation could be that in Table 3 the eligibility rules were specified towards certain

groups of immigrants (e.g., immigrants who have stayed less than or over five years). But in the

decomposition analyses, we are comparing all foreign-born as a group and natives.

         Table 6 presents decomposition results for cash and near-cash assistance (panel 1) and for

the broader social safety net outcome (panel 2) separately for five periods. For brevity, we only

present the overall differences. 18 We highlight one main finding here: across periods immigrant

use of cash/near cash benefits would have been much lower, and certainly lower than natives if

they had the same endowments as natives. Likewise, across periods, if immigrants had the same


17
   We also estimated these models using county unemployment rate and county policies towards immigrants for the
observations where county information is available in the CPS and used state level variables for the rest of the state
for which we do not have county identifiers (see Appendix Table 6 and 7). In this analysis, the coefficient on
exclusionary policies is statistically insignificant.
18
   Detailed results for the difference on account of endowments and coefficients can be obtained from the authors.




                                                          27
responses to endowments as natives, immigrant cash/near cash benefits use would have been

much higher than that of natives.

Conclusion and Discussion

       We study the long-term trend in program participation among low-educated immigrant

and native households with children, during 1994-2017, covering a 24-year period encompassing

changes in welfare policy towards immigrants, local immigration measures, substantial economic

swings including the Great Recession and the post-recession recovery. Two diverse trends

emerge from our results. One, immigrant participation in cash and near-cash programs (TANF,

SSI, and SNAP) falls substantially below those of natives after the 1996 welfare reform and

remains so during economic upswings and downturns, a finding quite similar to previous studies

by Borjas (2011) and Bitler and Hoynes (2013). Two, with regard to Medicaid and SCHIP, the

rates of recipiency registered a steady increase for both immigrants and natives after the 1996

welfare reform, with immigrants showing higher participation rates. This could be due to ACA

and SCHIP reauthorization that covered a larger proportion of uninsured foreign-born families.

       An innovation of our research is the use of Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition analysis that

allows us to take a holistic approach to explain the native-immigrant welfare participation gap.

Our analysis leads to the following findings: first, if immigrants had the same characteristics as

natives their participation in means-tested programs would have been much less overall and

much below those of natives. This finding holds true across broader measures of welfare receipt

capturing cash/near cash programs and health insurance as well as five specific safety net

programs. It also holds true across specific periods of economic recessions and recovery. Our

finding is similar to previous research (Butcher and Hu, 2003; Bitler and Hoynes, 2013) and our




                                                 28
contribution is that we document the same phenomenon across five different welfare programs

and time periods spanning economic recessions and recoveries. Further, we advance knowledge

by not only studying how different characteristic lead to the immigrant-native welfare use gap

but also examining how responses to characteristics drive the welfare use gap. Overall, this

finding suggests that given the same endowments, immigrants would be more conservative in

participating in welfare programs compared to natives.

       Second, we find that immigrant participations in TANF, SNAP and SCHIP are more

sensitive to the business cycle than native participations, providing some evidence that

immigrant "dependence" on safety net programs is temporary and closely linked to the economy.

        Third, our analysis suggests that program eligibility explains only a modest proportion of

the overall immigrant-native gap in welfare use (even though specific policies that allowed

eligibility to immigrant groups generally succeeded in increasing participation of the targeted

immigrant groups). One possible explanation of this finding from the decomposition analysis is

that changes in eligibility rules have affected specific immigrant populations (e.g. certain new

immigrant groups in case of TANF and SNAP; immigrants who arrived after 1996 in case of

SSI) that comprised a small proportion of the overall foreign-born populations. This finding

offers an alternate perspective to supplement previous research that has found substantial impacts

of policy on welfare use. While welfare policy requirements can significantly influence welfare

use, prior studies did not directly compare the relative influence between welfare policy

requirements and other household and contextual characteristics. Our result indicates that welfare

policy rules are not as consequential as household characteristics in "explaining" the difference

in welfare participation of immigrant and native households.




                                                29
                                          References

Allen, C. D. (2018). Who loses public health insurance when states pass restrictive omnibus

       immigration-related laws? The moderating role of county Latino density. Health &

       place, 54, 20-28.

Allen, C. D., & McNeely, C. A. (2017). Do restrictive omnibus immigration laws reduce

       enrollment in public health insurance by Latino citizen children? A comparative

       interrupted time series study. Social Science & Medicine, 191, 19-29.

Alsan, M., & Yang, C. (2018). Fear and the safety net: evidence from secure communities (No.

       w24731). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Antecol, H., & Bedard, K. (2006). Unhealthy assimilation: why do immigrants converge to

       American health status levels?. Demography, 43(2), 337-360.

Bitler, M., & Hoynes, H. W. (2013). Immigrants, welfare reform, and the US safety net. In

       Immigration, Poverty, and Socioeconomic Inequality, D. Card and S. Raphael, eds. New

       York: Russell Sage, 2013.

Blank, R. M. (2002). Evaluating welfare reform in the United States. Journal of Economic

       Literature, 40(4), 1105-1166.

Borjas, G. J. (1995). The economic benefits from immigration. Journal of economic

       perspectives, 9(2), 3-22.

Borjas, G. J. (2003). Welfare reform, labor supply, and health insurance in the immigrant

       population. Journal of Health Economics, 22(6), 933-958.

Borjas, G. J. (2004). Food insecurity and public assistance. Journal of Public Economics, 88(7-8),

       1421-1443.




                                               30
Borjas, G. J. (2011). Poverty and program participation among immigrant children. The Future

       of Children, 247-266.

Borjas, G. J., & Hilton, L. (1996). Immigration and the welfare state: Immigrant participation in

       means-tested entitlement programs. The quarterly journal of economics, 111(2), 575-604.

Borjas, G. J., & Trejo, S. J. (1991). Immigrant participation in the welfare system. ILR

       Review, 44(2), 195-211.

Bruckmeier, K., Müller, G., & Riphahn, R. T. (2015). Survey misreporting of welfare receipt--

       Respondent, interviewer, and interview characteristics. Economics Letters, 129, 103-107.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), U.S. Department of Labor. (2018) Local Area Unemployment

       Statistics. Retrieved from: https://www.bls.gov/web/laus/laumstrk.htm

Butcher, K., & Hu, L. (2000). Use of means-tested transfer programs by immigrants, their

       children, and their children's children. Finding Jobs: Work and welfare reform, 465-506.

Burns, M., & Dague, L. (2017). The effect of expanding Medicaid eligibility on Supplemental

       Security Income program participation. Journal of Public Economics, 149, 20-34.

Camarota, S. A. (2015). Welfare Use by Immigrant and Native Households. Center for

       Immigration Studies, September, 10, 349-365.

Dodson, M. E. (2001). Welfare generosity and location choices among new United States

       immigrants. International Review of Law and Economics, 21(1), 47-67.

East, C. N. (2018). The effect of food stamps on children's health: Evidence from immigrants'

       changing eligibility. Journal of Human Resources, 0916-8197R2.




                                                31
Economic Research Service (ERS), U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). (2017). SNAP

       Policy Database, SNAP Policy Data Sets. Retrieved from: https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-

       products/snap-policy-data-sets/

Fix, M. E., Capps, R., & Kaushal, N. (2009). Immigrants and welfare: Overview. Immigrants

       and welfare: the impact of welfare reform on America's newcomers, 1-36.

Fix, M. E., & Passel, J. S. (1999). Trends in Citizens' and Noncitizens' Use of Public Benefits

       Following Welfare Reform, 1994­1997. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.

Fortuny, K., & Chaudry, A. (2012). Overview of immigrants' eligibility for SNAP, TANF,

       Medicaid, and CHIP. ASPE Issue Brief. Washington, DC: Office of the Assistant

       Secretary for Planning and Evaluation.

Haider, S. J., Schoeni, R. F., Bao, Y., & Danielson, C. (2004). Immigrants, welfare reform, and

       the economy. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 23(4), 745-764.

Heffernan, C., Goehring, B., Hecker, I., Giannarelli, L., and Minton, S., (2018). Welfare Rules

       Databook: State TANF Policies as of July 2017, OPRE Report 2018- 109, Washington,

       DC: Office of Planning, Research, and Evaluation, Administration for Children and

       Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Immigration Custom Enforcement (ICE), U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2009).

       Delegation of Immigration Authority Section 287(g) Immigration and Nationality Act.

       Washington, DC: ICE.

Immigration Custom Enforcement (ICE), U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2013). Fact

       Sheet: Delegation of Immigration Authority Section 287(g) Immigration and Nationality

       Act. Washington, DC: ICE.




                                                32
Immigration Custom Enforcement (ICE), U.S. Department of Homeland Security. (2018).

       Delegation of Immigration Authority Section 287(g) Immigration and Nationality Act.

       Washington, DC: ICE.

Jann, B. (2008). A Stata implementation of the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition. Stata

       journal, 8(4), 453-479.

Joyce, T., Bauer, T., Minkoff, H., & Kaestner, R. (2001). Welfare reform and the perinatal health

       and health care use of Latino women in California, New York City, and Texas. American

       Journal of Public Health, 91(11), 1857-1864.

Kaestner, R., & Kaushal, N. (2005). Immigrant and native responses to welfare reform. Journal

       of Population Economics, 18(1), 69-92.

Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). (2019). Medicaid/CHIP Coverage of Lawfully Residing

       Immigrant Children and Pregnant Women. Retrieved from: https://www.kff.org/health-

       reform/state-indicator/medicaid-chip-coverage-of-lawfully-residing-immigrant-children-

       and-pregnant-women/

Kaushal, N. (2011). Earning trajectories of highly educated immigrants: Does place of education

       matter?. ILR Review, 64(2), 323-340.

Kaushal, N., & Kaestner, R. (2005). Welfare reform and health insurance of immigrants. Health

       services research, 40(3), 697-722.

Kaushal, N., Waldfogel, J., & Wight, V. R. (2013). Food insecurity and SNAP participation in

       Mexican immigrant families: the impact of the outreach initiative. The BE journal of

       economic analysis & policy, 14(1), 203-240.




                                                33
Kaushal, N., Wang, J. S. H., & Huang, X. (2018). State dream acts and education, health and

       mental health of Mexican young adults in the US. Economics & Human Biology, 31, 138-

       149.

Kennedy, S., Kidd, M. P., McDonald, J. T., & Biddle, N. (2015). The healthy immigrant effect:

       patterns and evidence from four countries. Journal of International Migration and

       Integration, 16(2), 317-332.

Klerman, J. A., Ringel, J. S., & Roth, B. (2005). Under-reporting of Medicaid and welfare in the

       Current Population Survey.

Ku, L., & Matani, S. (2001). Left out: immigrants' access to health care and insurance. Health

       Affairs, 20(1), 247-256.

Meyer, B. D., Mok, W. K., & Sullivan, J. X. (2015). The under-reporting of transfers in

       household surveys: its nature and consequences. Harris Graduate School of Public Policy

       Studies, University of Chicago.

Mohanty, S. A., Woolhandler, S., Himmelstein, D. U., Pati, S., Carrasquillo, O., & Bor, D. H.

       (2005). Health care expenditures of immigrants in the United States: a nationally

       representative analysis. American journal of public health, 95(8), 1431-1438.

National Immigration Law Center (NILC). (2002). Guide to Immigrant Eligibility for Federal

       Benefits. 4th ed. Los Angeles, CA. Retrieved from:

       https://www.nilc.org/issues/economic-support/overview-immeligfedprograms/

National Conference of State Legislatures. (2015). States offering driver's licenses to immigrants.

       Retrieved from: http://www.ncsl.org/research/immigration/states-offering-driver-s-

       licenses-to-immigrants.aspx




                                                34
National Conference of State Legislatures. (2016). State E-Verify action. Retrieved from:

       http://www.ncsl.org/research/immigration/state-e-verify-action.aspx

National Immigration Law Center (NILC). (2017). Immigrant Eligibility for Health Care

       Programs in the United States. Los Angeles, CA. Retrieved from:

       http://www.ncsl.org/research/immigration/immigrant-eligibility-for-health-care-

       programs-in-the-united-states.aspx

Norris, L. (2019). Politics and practicality influence state decisions on control, implementation

       of health insurance exchanges. Health Insurance and Health Reform Authority. Retrieved

       from: https://www.healthinsurance.org/state-health-insurance-exchanges/

Orrenius, P. M., & Zavodny, M. (2010). Beside the golden door: US immigration reform in a

       new era of globalization. AEI Press.

Oaxaca, R. L., & Ransom, M. R. (1999). Identification in detailed wage decompositions. Review

       of Economics and Statistics, 81(1), 154-157.

Pedraza, F. I., Nichols, V. C., & LeBrón, A. M. (2017). Cautious citizenship: the deterring effect

       of immigration issue salience on health care use and bureaucratic interactions among

       Latino US citizens. Journal of health politics, policy and law, 42(5), 925-960.

Pedraza, F. I., & Zhu, L. (2015). `Immigration enforcement and the `chilling effect' on Latino

       Medicaid enrollment,''. The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Scholars in Health Policy

       Research Program.

Riosmena, F., Kuhn, R., & Jochem, W. C. (2017). Explaining the immigrant health advantage:

       Self-selection and protection in health-related factors among five major national-origin

       immigrant groups in the United States. Demography, 54(1), 175-200.




                                                35
Schoeni, R. F., & Blank, R. M. (2000). What has welfare reform accomplished? Impacts on

       welfare participation, employment, income, poverty, and family structure (No. w7627).

       National bureau of economic research.

Skinner, C. (2012). State immigration legislation and SNAP take-up among immigrant families

       with children. Journal of Economic Issues, 46(3), 661-682.

Social Security Administration (SSA). (2019). Understanding Supplemental Security Income SSI

       Eligibility Requirements, 2019 Edition. Retrieved from: https://www.ssa.gov/ssi/text-

       eligibility-ussi.htm

Sommers, B. D. (2013). Stuck between health and immigration reform--care for undocumented

       immigrants. New England Journal of Medicine.

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). (2018). Gross Domestic Product by State. Retrieved

       from: https://www.bea.gov/data/gdp/gdp-state

US Census Bureau (Census). (2018). County Population Totals and Components of Change.

       Retrieved from: https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-

       counties-total.html

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). (2019). Food and Nutrition Service annual reports on

       state options. Retrieved from: https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/waivers/state-options-report

Vargas, E. D. (2015). Immigration enforcement and mixed-status households: the effects of risk

       of deportation on Medicaid use. Children and youth services review, 57, 83-89.

Vargas Bustamante, A., Chen, J., Fang, H., Rizzo, J. A., & Ortega, A. N. (2014). Identifying

       health insurance predictors and the main reported reasons for being uninsured among US




                                               36
       immigrants by legal authorization status. The International journal of health planning

       and management, 29(1), e83-e96.

Vargas, E. D., & Pirog, M. A. (2016). MixedStatus Families and WIC Uptake: The Effects of

       Risk of Deportation on Program Use. Social science quarterly, 97(3), 555-572.

Wang, J. S. H., & Kaushal, N. (2018). Health and mental health effects of local immigration

       enforcement. International Migration Review, 0197918318791978.

Watson, T. (2013). Enforcement and immigrant location choice (No. w19626). National Bureau

       of Economic Research.

Watson, T. (2014). Inside the refrigerator: immigration enforcement and chilling effects in

       Medicaid participation. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(3), 313-38.

Weber, H. (2015). National and regional proportion of immigrants and perceived threat of

       immigration: A three-level analysis in Western Europe. International Journal of

       Comparative Sociology, 56(2), 116-140.

Ziliak, J. P. (Ed.). (2015). Welfare reform and its long-term consequences for America's poor.

Cambridge University Press, reprint edition.




                                               37
Figure 1. Trends of Program Participation from 1994 to 2017
Note: Data are from the March CPS 1995 to 2018 showing welfare use information from 1994 to 2017. The sample
is restricted to household heads with a high school degree or less and at least one child <18. Cash and near-cash
programs include TANF, SNAP and SSI. Safety net programs include cash and near-cash programs, Medicaid and
SCHIP.




                                                       38
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics: Low-Educated Households with Children

                                                    Native Households                Immigrant Households
                                                       n = 254,413                        n = 79,024
                                                          Mean                              Mean
 Age                                                      43.31                             42.57             *
 Female                                                    0.51                              0.47             *
 Completed High school                                     0.76                              0.42             *
 Race/Ethnicity
     Non-Hispanic White                                     0.68                              0.11            *
     Non-Hispanic Black                                     0.16                              0.05            *
     Hispanic                                               0.12                              0.73            *
     Other Races/Ethnicities                                0.04                              0.11            *
 Marital Status
     Married                                                0.64                              0.79            *
     Divorced                                               0.14                              0.07            *
     Widowed                                                0.07                              0.04            *
     Never Married                                          0.15                              0.10            *
 Household Size
     2 People                                               0.14                              0.07            *
     3 People                                               0.33                              0.23            *
     4 People                                               0.30                              0.30
     5 or More People                                       0.23                              0.40            *
 Number of Children in the Household
     1 Child                                                0.46                              0.33            *
     2 Children                                             0.33                              0.34            *
     3 or More Children                                     0.20                              0.33            *
 Number of Citizens in the Household
     All Members are Citizens                               0.98                              0.24            *
     At least One Citizen in the Household                  0.02                              0.63            *
     No Member is Citizen (all non-citizens)                0.00                              0.12            *

Note: Data are from the March CPS, 1995 to 2018. The sample is restricted to household heads with a high school or
less education and at least one child younger than 18.
* indicates that the means are statistically different between the two groups at 5% confidence interval.




                                                       39
Figure 2. Trends of Participation in Safety-net Program from 1994 to 2017
Note: Data are from the March CPS 1995 to 2018 showing welfare use information from 1994 to 2017. For TANF,
SNAP and SSI, the sample is restricted to household heads with a high school degree or less and at least one child
<18. For Medicaid, the sample is restricted to adults with a high school or less education. For CHIP, the sample is
restricted to children with high school or less education.




                                                         40
Figure 3. Adjusted Trends of Participation in Safety-net Program from 1994 to 2017
Note: The trends are adjusted for age, education, gender, marital status, and race. Data are from the March CPS
1995 to 2018 showing welfare use information from 1994 to 2017. For TANF, SNAP and SSI, the sample is
restricted to household heads with a high school degree or less and at least one child <18. For Medicaid, the sample
is restricted to adults with a high school or less education. For CHIP, the sample is restricted to children with high
school or less education.




                                                          41
Table 2. Association between State Welfare Policy Score and the Business Cycle and Program
Participation among Low-Educated Households with Children

                                                    Cash and Near-Cash                Social Safety Net
                                                    Assistance                        Programs
                                                    Model 1       Model 2             Model 1       Model 2

 State Welfare Policy Score                         0.913**          0.923**          1.016           1.027
                                                    (0.034)          (0.032)          (0.030)         (0.030)

 Foreign-Born x                                     1.128***         1.119***         1.123***        1.052*
 State Welfare Policy Score                         (0.036)          (0.044)          (0.023)         (0.028)

 Unemployment rate                                  1.094***         1.093***         1.043***        1.048***
                                                    (0.013)          (0.014)          (0.010)         (0.010)

 Foreign-born x                                     1.033***         1.033***         1.012           1.000
 Unemployment rate                                  (0.010)          (0.011)          (0.014)         (0.014)

 Foreign-born x Individual Characteristics          No               Yes              No              Yes
 Foreign-born x Household Characteristics           No               Yes              No              Yes
 Foreign-born x State Fixed Effects                 No               Yes              No              Yes

 N                                                  333422           333422           333422          333422

Note: Household data are from the March CPS 1995-2018 showing welfare use information from 1994 to 2017. The
sample is restricted to household heads with a high school or less education and at least one child <18. Cash and
near-cash programs include TANF, SNAP and SSI. Safety net programs include cash and near-cash programs,
Medicaid and SCHIP. All models control for state and year fixed effects, individual characteristics (household
heads' age, gender, education, race/ethnicity, and marital status), immigrant characteristics (household heads'
country of origin, cohort of immigration, year since immigration and citizenship status), household characteristics
(number of children in the household and household size), and state immigrant-related policies (state dream act,
driver's license, E-Verify, Section 287(g) of Immigration and Naturalization Act, and the Secure Communities
Program), and interaction terms between the foreign-born variable and state immigrant-related policy variables.
Model 2 are the fully interacted models which include interactions between whether the respondent is foreign-born
and all explanatory variables except for immigrant characteristics and year fixed effects. Coefficients in the table
show exponentiated coefficients (odds ratio) of logistic regression and robust standard errors clustered by state in
parenthesis.
* p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                         42
    Table 3. Association between Specific Safety Net Programs and Welfare Policies and the Business Cycle

                           TANF                                   SNAP                                SSI                                     Medicaid                                SCHIP

State TANF policy          1.175*     State SNAP policy           0.835***    State SSI policy        1.114***     State Medicaid policy      1.025       State CHIP policy           0.983
for post-enactment (PE)    (0.107)    for PE new immigrants       (0.054)     for PE immigrants3      (0.035)      for PE new immigrants      (0.041)     for PE new immigrants4      (0.042)
new immigrants1

State TANF policy          0.895      State SNAP policy           1.116                                            State Medicaid policy      1.009
for PE old immigrants2     (0.116)    For PE old immigrants       (0.079)                                          for PE old immigrants      (0.038)

PE new immigrants x        0.859      PE new immigrants x         1.117       PE immigrants x         1.009        PE new immigrants x        1.131**     PE new immigrants x         1.086
State TANF policy          (0.107)    State SNAP policy           (0.106)     State SSI policy        (0.082)      State Medicaid policy      (0.059)     State CHIP policy           (0.083)
for PE new immigrants                 for PE new immigrants                   for PE immigrants                    for PE new immigrants                  for PE new immigrants

PE old immigrants x        1.025      PE old immigrants x         1.338***                                         PE old immigrants x        1.416***
State TANF policy          (0.109)    State SNAP policy           (0.141)                                          State Medicaid policy      (0.074)
for PE old immigrants                 for PE old immigrants                                                        for PE old immigrants

Unemployment rate          1.045*     Unemployment rate           1.122***    Unemployment rate       1.006        Unemployment rate          1.015*      Unemployment rate           1.034***
                           (0.027)                                (0.014)                             (0.012)                                 (0.009)                                 (0.012)

Foreign-born x             1.027*     Foreign-born x              1.037***    Foreign-born x          1.011        Foreign-born x             1.007       Foreign-born x              1.043***
Unemployment rate          (0.016)    Unemployment rate           (0.014)     Unemployment rate       (0.015)      Unemployment rate          (0.011)     Unemployment rate           (0.013)

N                          333422     N                           333422      N                       333422       N                          1415132     N                           591812

    Note: 1. Post-enactment (PE) new immigrants refer to those who arrived after 1996 and have stayed in the US for less than five years. 2. PE old immigrants refer to those who
    arrived after 1996 and have stayed for over five years. 3. For SSI, the policy variable is defined as whether the state had SSI for immigrants who arrived after 1996 and is
    interacted with being an immigrant who arrived after 1996. 4. For CHIP, the policy variable is defined as whether the state had CHIP for immigrant children who arrived after
    1996 and have lived in the US for less than five years and is interacted with being a PE new immigrant. For TANF, SNAP and SSI, the samples are restricted to low-educated
    households (household heads with a high school or less education) and at least one child <18. For Medicaid, the sample is restricted to adults. For SCHIP, the sample is restricted
    to children from low-educated households. All models control for state and year fixed effects, individual characteristics (age, gender, education, race/ethnicity, and marital status),
    immigrant characteristics country of origin, cohort of immigration, year since immigration and citizenship status), household characteristics (number of children in the household
    and household size), and state immigrant-related policies (state dream act, driver's license, E-Verify, Section 287(g) of Immigration and Naturalization Act, and the Secure
    Communities Program). All models are fully interacted which include interactions between whether the respondent is foreign-born and all explanatory variables except for
    immigrant characteristics and year fixed effects. Coefficients in the table show exponentiated coefficients (odds ratio) of logistic regression and robust standard errors clustered by
    state in parenthesis. * p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01


                                                                                              43
Table 4. Decomposition Results for Program Participation Gap between Low-Educated Native and Immigrant Headed
Households with Children (Estimates from Linear Regression)

                                                           Cash and Near-Cash Assistance            Safety Net Programs
   Overall                                                   Coef.             SE                    Coef.            SE
   Panel 1
   Immigrants                                                 0.206    ***        0.008               0.479   ***      0.015
   Natives                                                    0.229    ***        0.006               0.382   ***      0.008
   Difference                                                -0.023    ***        0.008               0.096   ***      0.014
   Endowments (Explained)                                     0.050    ***        0.011               0.094   ***      0.012
   Coefficients (Unexplained)                                -0.073    ***        0.010               0.002            0.011
   Panel 2: Endowments (Explained)
   Reversed State Welfare Policy Score                       -0.002               0.002               0.004            0.003
   Education (Whether Completed High School)                  0.045    ***        0.004               0.049   ***      0.005
   Ethnicity/Race                                             0.023    **         0.011               0.049   ***      0.011
        Non-Hispanic White                                    0.038    ***        0.004               0.045   ***      0.004
        Non-Hispanic Black                                   -0.006    ***        0.002              -0.005   ***      0.001
        Hispanic                                             -0.011               0.008               0.009            0.006
        Other Races/Ethnicities                               0.002    **         0.001               0.001            0.001
   Other Individual/Household Characteristics                -0.009    ***        0.002              -0.003            0.003
   State Unemployment Rate                                    0.009    **         0.003               0.006   **       0.002
   Immigrant Inclusion Policies                              -0.002               0.001               0.002            0.002
   Immigrant Exclusion Policies                               0.000               0.001              -0.002   **       0.001
   State Fixed Effects                                       -0.017    **         0.007              -0.026   ***      0.008
   Year Fixed Effects                                         0.004    ***        0.001               0.016   ***      0.003
   Panel 3: Coefficients (Unexplained)
   Reversed State Welfare Policy Score                       -0.016    *          0.009              -0.042   ***      0.013
   Education                                                  0.002               0.003               0.001            0.002
        Did Not Complete High School                         -0.021    ***        0.002              -0.019   ***      0.002
        Completed High School                                 0.023    ***        0.002               0.020   ***      0.002
   Ethnicity/Race                                             0.013    **         0.006               0.022   ***      0.004
        Non-Hispanic White                                    0.009    ***        0.002               0.005   ***      0.002
        Non-Hispanic Black                                   -0.001               0.002              -0.001            0.001
        Hispanic                                              0.008               0.006               0.021   ***      0.004
        Other Races/Ethnicities                              -0.002               0.001              -0.003   *        0.001
   Other Individual/Household Characteristics                -0.025    ***        0.008              -0.033            0.022
   State Unemployment Rate                                   -0.016               0.018              -0.010            0.029
   Immigrant Inclusion Policies                              -0.004               0.003              -0.003            0.004
   Immigrant Exclusion Policies                              -0.004               0.003              -0.010   *        0.006
   State Fixed Effects                                        0.014    **         0.007               0.028   ***      0.010
   Year Fixed Effects                                         0.000               0.001               0.005   ***      0.002
   Constant                                                  -0.037               0.024               0.044            0.037

   Group 1: Immigrants. Number of Observations = 79,024
   Group 2: Natives. Number of Observations = 254,413

Note: The sample is restricted to household heads with a high school or less education and at least one child <18. Cash and near-cash
programs include TANF, SNAP and SSI. Safety net programs include cash and near-cash programs, Medicaid and SCHIP. "Other
individual/household characteristics" include household heads' age, gender, marital status, number of children in the household and
household size. * p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                  44
Table 5. Decomposition Results for Participation Gap in Specific Programs

                                                          TANF                   SNAP                             SSI                 Medicaid                   SCHIP
                    Overall                       Coef.           SE         Coef.               SE       Coef.           SE        Coef.           SE        Coef.           SE
Panel 1
Immigrants                                        0.040    ***   0.008        0.176   ***       0.009     0.147    ***   0.013       0.367   ***   0.023       0.441   ***   0.026
Natives                                           0.050    ***   0.004        0.191   ***       0.006     0.136    ***   0.005       0.252   ***   0.007       0.454   ***   0.012
Difference                                       -0.009          0.006       -0.014   *         0.008     0.011          0.011       0.114   ***   0.019      -0.014         0.018
Endowments (Explained)                            0.019    **    0.008        0.043   ***       0.010     0.040    ***   0.012       0.139   ***   0.015       0.028   ***   0.009
Coefficients (Unexplained)                       -0.029    ***   0.004       -0.058   ***       0.008    -0.029    ***   0.009      -0.024   **    0.011      -0.042   **    0.020

Panel 2: Endowments (Explained)
Reversed State Welfare Policy Score               0.000          0.001       -0.002             0.002     0.001          0.002       0.002         0.001       0.000         0.001
Education (Whether Completed High School)         0.012    ***   0.002        0.039   ***       0.004     0.015    ***   0.003       0.038   ***   0.004      -0.001   ***   0.000
Ethnicity/Race                                    0.006          0.005        0.022   **        0.010     0.026    **    0.010       0.039   ***   0.009       0.067   ***   0.009
     Non-Hispanic White                           0.013    ***   0.002        0.032   ***       0.003     0.021    ***   0.004       0.038   ***   0.004       0.059   ***   0.006
     Non-Hispanic Black                          -0.002    ***   0.001       -0.005   ***       0.001    -0.002          0.001      -0.005   ***   0.001      -0.007   ***   0.002
     Hispanic                                    -0.005          0.004       -0.007             0.007     0.004          0.008       0.005         0.005       0.015   ***   0.004
     Other Races/Ethnicities                      0.001    **    0.000        0.001   **        0.001     0.004    *     0.002       0.001         0.001       0.000         0.001
Other Individual/Household Characteristics       -0.003    ***   0.001       -0.007   ***       0.003    -0.003    *     0.002       0.055   ***   0.005      -0.017   ***   0.002
State Unemployment Rate                           0.002    *     0.001        0.009   **        0.004     0.002          0.002       0.002         0.001       0.001         0.001
Immigrant Inclusion Policies                     -0.002    **    0.001       -0.001             0.001    -0.005    **    0.003       0.002         0.002       0.001         0.001
Immigrant Exclusion Policies                      0.000          0.000       -0.001             0.001    -0.002          0.002       0.000         0.001       0.001         0.001
State Fixed Effects                               0.008          0.007       -0.019   **        0.009     0.003          0.008      -0.006         0.007      -0.014   **    0.006
Year Fixed Effects                               -0.004    ***   0.001        0.004   ***       0.001     0.003    **    0.001       0.009   ***   0.002      -0.009   **    0.004

Panel 3: Coefficients (Unexplained)
Reversed State Welfare Policy Score               0.012    **    0.005       -0.005             0.005    -0.012          0.016      -0.004         0.004      -0.001         0.006
Education                                         0.001          0.001        0.001             0.002    -0.002          0.002       0.001         0.002      -0.002         0.006
     Did Not Complete High School                -0.006    ***   0.001       -0.016   ***       0.002    -0.004          0.004      -0.016   ***   0.002      -0.002         0.007
     Completed High School                        0.006    ***   0.001        0.018   ***       0.002     0.003          0.003       0.017   ***   0.002       0.000         0.000
Ethnicity/Race                                    0.003          0.002        0.013   **        0.005     0.006          0.005       0.017   ***   0.003      -0.008         0.008
     Non-Hispanic White                           0.002    **    0.001        0.007   ***       0.002     0.009    **    0.004       0.007   ***   0.002       0.014   ***   0.003
     Non-Hispanic Black                          -0.001          0.001       -0.001             0.001    -0.002          0.003      -0.001         0.001      -0.007   ***   0.002
     Hispanic                                     0.001          0.002        0.009   *         0.005    -0.003          0.006       0.014   ***   0.004      -0.016   *     0.009
     Other Races/Ethnicities                     -0.001          0.001       -0.002             0.001     0.002          0.003      -0.002         0.002       0.000         0.002
Other Individual/Household Characteristics       -0.006    *     0.003       -0.017   **        0.008     0.057    ***   0.016      -0.032   ***   0.004       0.220   ***   0.056
State Unemployment Rate                           0.000          0.011       -0.032   *         0.019    -0.005          0.028       0.004         0.020       0.053   *     0.030
Immigrant Inclusion Policies                      0.001          0.002       -0.001             0.003    -0.019    *     0.011       0.003         0.003       0.004         0.007
Immigrant Exclusion Policies                      0.003    *     0.002       -0.003             0.003    -0.015          0.010      -0.008   *     0.004      -0.004         0.006
State Fixed Effects                               0.001          0.003        0.012   **        0.006     0.032    ***   0.011       0.030   ***   0.010       0.047   **    0.020
Year Fixed Effects                               -0.001          0.000        0.000             0.001     0.002          0.003       0.004   ***   0.001      -0.005   *     0.003
Constant                                         -0.043    ***   0.013       -0.025             0.022    -0.071    **    0.030      -0.040   *     0.021      -0.345   ***   0.064

Group 1: Immigrants Number of Observations       79,024                     79,024                       79,024                    287,413                   33,416
Group 2: Natives. Number of Observations        254,413                    254,413                      254,413                  1,127,719                  558,396

Note: For TANF, SNAP and SSI, the samples are restricted to low-educated households (household heads with a high school or less education) and at least one child <18. For
Medicaid, the sample is restricted to adults. For SCHIP, the sample is restricted to children from low-educated households. "Other individual/household characteristics" include
household heads' age, gender, marital status, number of children in the household and household size. * p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01


                                                                                           45
Table 6. Decomposition Results for Participation Gap across Time Periods (Overall and Explained Differences)

                                                       1994 - 1996               1997 - 2002              2003 - 2007             2008 - 2012              2013 - 2017
       Cash and Near-Cash Assistance               Coef.           SE        Coef.           SE        Coef.          SE         Coef.        SE          Coef.        SE
Panel 1
Immigrants                                         0.263   ***   0.015       0.154   ***   0.012       0.145   ***   0.009       0.249   ***   0.011      0.264   ***   0.007
Natives                                            0.230   ***   0.008       0.182   ***   0.007       0.204   ***   0.007       0.271   ***   0.007      0.296   ***   0.007
Difference                                         0.034   ***   0.012      -0.028   ***   0.010      -0.059   ***   0.009      -0.022   **    0.010     -0.032   ***   0.008
Endowments (Explained)                             0.100   ***   0.013       0.051   ***   0.012       0.025   **    0.011       0.037   ***   0.012      0.032   ***   0.012
Coefficients (Unexplained)                        -0.067   ***   0.014      -0.079   ***   0.011      -0.084   ***   0.010      -0.059   ***   0.010     -0.064   ***   0.012

          Social Safety Net Programs               Coef.           SE        Coef.           SE        Coef.          SE         Coef.          SE        Coef.          SE
Panel 2
Immigrants                                         0.387   ***   0.021       0.352   ***   0.022       0.433   ***   0.023       0.546   ***   0.014      0.624   ***   0.013
Natives                                            0.306   ***   0.009       0.302   ***   0.009       0.366   ***   0.009       0.446   ***   0.009      0.511   ***   0.009
Difference                                         0.081   ***   0.018       0.050   ***   0.019       0.067   ***   0.022       0.100   ***   0.013      0.112   ***   0.012
Endowments (Explained)                             0.129   ***   0.018       0.081   ***   0.016       0.073   ***   0.015       0.073   ***   0.011      0.065   ***   0.010
Coefficients (Unexplained)                        -0.047   ***   0.013      -0.030   **    0.014      -0.006         0.015       0.027   **    0.012      0.048   ***   0.011

Group 1: Immigrants. Number of Observations = 79,024
Group 2: Natives. Number of Observations = 254,413

Note: The sample is restricted to household heads with a high school or less education and at least one child <18. Cash and near-cash programs include TANF, SNAP and SSI.
Safety net programs include cash and near-cash programs, Medicaid and SCHIP. "Other individual/household characteristics" include household heads' age, gender, marital status,
number of children in the household and household size. * p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                                      46
Appendix Table 1. State Funded Safety Net Program Eligibility for Post-Enactment Immigrants
  States                 97   98   99   00   01   02   03   04   05       06   07   08   09   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17
  Alabama
  Alaska
  Arizona
  Arkansas
  California             S    TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS       TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS
  Colorado
  Connecticut            TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   S    TS   TS       TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS
  Delaware
  District of Columbia
  Florida                S
  Georgia                     T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T        T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T
  Hawaii                      T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T        T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T
  Idaho
  Illinois               S    S    S    S    S    S    S
  Indiana
  Iowa
  Kansas
  Kentucky
  Louisiana
  Maine                  TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   T    TS       TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   S    S    S    S    S    S
  Maryland               T    T    T    T    T    T    TS   T    T        T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T
  Massachusetts          TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS
  Michigan
  Minnesota              S    S    S    S    S    S    S    S    S        S    S    S    S    S    S              T    T    T    T
  Mississippi
  Missouri               S    T    T    T    T    T    T
  Montana
  Nebraska               S    TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS       TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   T         T
  Nevada
  New Hampshire                                                           S
  New Jersey             S    S    S    S    S    S    S
  New Mexico                  T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T        T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T
  New York               S    TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS       T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T
  North Carolina
  North Dakota
  Ohio                   S
  Oklahoma
  Oregon                 T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T        T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T
  Pennsylvania           T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T        T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T
  Rhode Island           TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   T    T        T    T    T    T    T    T    T
  South Carolina
  South Dakota
  Tennessee              T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T                                                     T
  Texas                  S    S    S    S    S    S    S
  Utah                   T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T        T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T
  Vermont                T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T        T    T              T    T    T    T
  Virginia
  Washington             S    TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS       TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS
  West Virginia
  Wisconsin              S    TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS       TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   TS   T    T    T    T    T    T
  Wyoming                     T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T        T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T    T

Note: "T" denotes states offered TANF benefit for post-enactment immigrants who stayed in the US for less than five years. "S"
denotes states offered SNAP benefit for post-enactment immigrants who stayed in the US for less than five years. Data on immigrant
eligibility to state-funded TANF from 1997 to 2017 are from the Welfare Rules Databook (Heffernan et al., 2018). Data on immigrant
eligibility to SNAP from 1997 to 2017 are from the United States Department of Agriculture's SNAP Policy Database (ERS, 2017)
and Food and Nutrition Service annual reports on state options (USDA, 2019).

Most of the states offered TANF to post-enactment immigrants who have been in the US over five years with the following exceptions:
Indiana, Mississippi, and Texas did not offer state-funded TANF to these immigrants during the time covered in our study. Arkansas
did not offer before 2008 and in 2013. Idaho did not offer before 2010. Montana only offered the program in 2000, 2001 and after
2008. North Dakota did not offer the program from 2004 to 2009. And Rhode Island did not offer the program before 2001.

Federal SNAP benefits to legal immigrants who have been in the US for five years were restored under the Farm Security and Rural
Investment Act of 2002. Before 2003, California, Connecticut, Illinois, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Jersey,
New York, Rhode Island, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin offered state-funded SNAP program to post-enactment immigrants who
have lived in the US for more than five years.

Only five states offered SSI benefit to post-enactment immigrants: California and Georgia offered SSI after 2001. Illinois offered after
2002. And Maine and New Hampshire offered SSI in all years.


                                                                     47
  Appendix Table 2. State-Funded Public Health Care Eligibility for Post-Enactment Immigrants

States                 97   98   99   00   01   02   03   04    05     06   07   08   09    10    11   12    13    14   15    16       17
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California             MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Colorado                                                                                     C    C     C    C    MC    MC   MC    MC
Connecticut            MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Delaware               M    M    M    M    M    M    M    M    M       M    M    M    MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
District of Columbia    C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Florida                 C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C    C       C    C    C    C     C    C     C    C     C     C   MC    MC
Georgia
Hawaii                 MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Idaho
Illinois               MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Indiana                                          C    C
Iowa                                                                                        C     C     C    C    MC    MC   MC    MC
Kansas
Kentucky                                                                                                           M    M    MC    MC
Louisiana
Maine                  MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Maryland               MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   M       M    MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Massachusetts          MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Michigan                                        M
Minnesota              MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana                                                                     M    M    M     MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Nebraska               MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey             C    C    C    C    C    MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
New Mexico                                                                                   C    C     C    C    MC    MC   MC    MC
New York               C    C    C    C    C    MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
North Carolina                                                                               C    C     C    C     C     C    C    MC
North Dakota
Ohio                                                                                                               M    M     M    MC
Oklahoma
Oregon                                                                                       C    C     C    C    MC    MC   MC    MC
Pennsylvania           MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Rhode Island           MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas                  C    C    C    C    C    MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Utah                                                                                                                         MC    MC
Vermont                                                                                                           M     M    M     MC
Virginia                                                                               C     C    C     C    C     C     C    C
Washington             MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC   MC      MC   MC   MC   MC    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
West Virginia                                                                                                     M     M    MC    MC
Wisconsin                                                                              M    MC   MC    MC   MC    MC    MC   MC    MC
Wyoming

  Note: "M" denotes states offered Medicaid benefit to post-enactment immigrants who stayed in the US for less than five years. "C"
  denotes states offered CHIP benefit to post-enactment immigrant children who have been in the US for less than five years. Data of
  immigrant eligibility to Medicaid and SCHIP are from the Medicaid.gov (2016), the National Immigration Law Center (NILC, 2017),
  the report from the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF, 2018), and the Health Insurance and Health Reform Authority (Norris, 2019).
  After 2002, Alabama, Arizona, Washington DC, Indiana, Mississippi, New Mexico, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Carolina, South
  Dakota, Texas, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, and Wyoming offered Medicaid to post-enactment immigrants have lived in the
  US over five years. Idaho did not offer Medicaid to these immigrants until 2005. All the other states offered Medicaid to these
  immigrants in all years.




                                                                  48
Appendix Table 3. State Welfare Policy Score based on Program Eligibility for Post-Enactment Immigrants in 2002


                         State had the following programs for   State had the following programs for         Total Welfare
                            immigrants during Five-Year Bar          immigrants after Five-Year Bar           Policy Score
                       TANF SNAP Medicaid             SCHIP         TANF          SNAP     Medicaid    SSI
Idaho                                                                                                                   0
Arkansas                                                                                       0.33                  0.33
Mississippi                                                                                    0.33                  0.33
Montana                                                                                        0.33                  0.33
Indiana                                                 0.33                                   0.33                  0.66
Alabama                                                               0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Alaska                                                                0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Arizona                                                               0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Colorado                                                              0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Iowa                                                                  0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Kansas                                                                0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Kentucky                                                              0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Louisiana                                                             0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Nevada                                                                0.5                      0.33                  0.83
North Carolina                                                        0.5                      0.33                  0.83
North Dakota                                                          0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Ohio                                                                  0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Oklahoma                                                              0.5                      0.33                  0.83
South Carolina                                                        0.5                      0.33                  0.83
South Dakota                                                          0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Virginia                                                              0.5                      0.33                  0.83
West Virginia                                                         0.5                      0.33                  0.83
Delaware                                      0.33                    0.5                      0.33                  1.16
District of Columbia                                    0.33          0.5                      0.33                  1.16
Florida                                                 0.33          0.5                      0.33                  1.16
Michigan                                      0.33                    0.5                      0.33                  1.16
Georgia                   0.5                                         0.5                      0.33                  1.33
Missouri                  0.5                                         0.5                      0.33                  1.33
New Mexico                0.5                                         0.5                      0.33                  1.33
Oregon                    0.5                                         0.5                      0.33                  1.33
Tennessee                 0.5                                         0.5                      0.33                  1.33
Utah                      0.5                                         0.5                      0.33                  1.33
Vermont                   0.5                                         0.5                      0.33                  1.33
Wyoming                   0.5                                         0.5                      0.33                  1.33
Texas                              0.5        0.33      0.33                      0.33         0.33                  1.82
New Hampshire                                                         0.5                      0.33     1            1.83
Maryland                  0.5                 0.33      0.33          0.5                      0.33                  1.99
Pennsylvania              0.5                 0.33      0.33          0.5                      0.33                  1.99
Wisconsin                 0.5      0.5                                0.5         0.33         0.33                  2.16
Illinois                           0.5        0.33      0.33          0.5         0.33         0.33                  2.32
Minnesota                          0.5        0.33      0.33          0.5         0.33         0.33                  2.32
New Jersey                         0.5        0.33      0.33          0.5         0.33         0.33                  2.32
Connecticut               0.5      0.5        0.33      0.33          0.5         0.33         0.33                  2.82
Massachusetts             0.5      0.5        0.33      0.33          0.5         0.33         0.33                  2.82
Nebraska                  0.5      0.5        0.33      0.33          0.5         0.33         0.33                  2.82
New York                  0.5      0.5        0.33      0.33          0.5         0.33         0.33                  2.82
Rhode Island              0.5      0.5        0.33      0.33          0.5         0.33         0.33                  2.82
Washington                0.5      0.5        0.33      0.33          0.5         0.33         0.33                  2.82
Hawaii                    0.5                 0.33      0.33          0.5                      0.33     1            2.99
California                0.5      0.5        0.33      0.33          0.5         0.33         0.33     1            3.82
Maine                     0.5      0.5        0.33      0.33          0.5         0.33         0.33     1            3.82




                                                                 49
Appendix Table 4. Welfare Participation among Households with Children in 2012: Comparison with Camarota 2012

                                                 Households with Children (CPS 2012)                            Households with Children (Camarota 2012 using SIPP)
                                                  Natives                Immigrants                                         Natives              Immigrants
                                              Using             95%         Using             95%                       Using             95%          Using              95%
 Program                                     Welfare           CI (±)      Welfare           CI (±)                    Welfare           CI (±)       Welfare            CI (±)

 Any Welfare                                   36.7%           0.57%          51.3%          1.20%                       52.4%            1.2%           75.9%             2.1%
 Any Welfare Excl. School Lunch                33.2%           0.56%          44.3%          1.19%                       45.4%            1.1%           64.7%             2.3%
 Cash                                           6.3%           0.29%           5.9%          0.56%                       12.8%            0.7%           10.9%             1.6%
     SSI                                        4.5%           0.25%           3.7%          0.45%                        7.7%            0.6%            5.9%             1.0%
     TANF                                       2.1%           0.17%           2.3%          0.36%                        4.3%            0.4%            3.6%             0.9%
 Food                                          24.5%           0.51%          36.7%          1.16%                       44.8%            1.2%           68.5%             2.3%
     School Lunch                              68.5%           1.02%          66.5%          1.85%                       37.8%            1.3%           61.8%             2.2%
     WIC                                       24.7%           0.61%          29.9%          1.34%                       12.6%            0.8%           22.0%             1.9%
     SNAP                                      15.9%           0.44%          17.7%          0.92%                       25.9%            1.0%           28.7%             2.4%
     SNAP or WIC                               17.1%           0.45%          19.9%          0.96%
 Medicaid                                      29.5%           0.54%          41.0%          1.18%                       42.1%            1.2%           61.6%             2.4%
 Housing                                        4.4%           0.25%           4.3%          0.49%                        7.7%            0.7%            5.0%             1.2%
     Public                                    34.0%           0.64%          49.1%          1.34%                        6.3%            0.6%            4.2%             1.1%
     Subsidized                                29.4%           0.58%          44.5%          1.26%                        2.4%            0.4%            1.1%             0.5%


 Sample Size                                   28,122                          6,938                                      6,239                           1,308

 Weighted n (millions)                            38.4                          10.0                                      32.01                            7.53

Note: The four columns on the left-side panel use data from the March CPS 2012. The sample is restricted to household heads with a high school or less education and at least one
child <18. The four columns on the right-side panel are copied from Camarota 2012's Table 3 for direct comparison.




                                                                                       50
    Appendix Table 5. Association between Specific Safety Net Programs and Welfare Policies and the Business Cycle

                           TANF                                    SNAP                                 SSI                                    Medicaid                                CHIP

State TANF policy          1.166*      State SNAP policy           0.825***     State SSI policy        1.057      State Medicaid policy       1.024       State CHIP policy           0.980
for post-enactment (PE)    (0.106)     for PE new immigrants       (0.057)      for PE immigrants3      (0.037)    for PE new immigrants       (0.040)     for PE new immigrants4      (0.042)
new immigrants1

State TANF policy          0.897       State SNAP policy           1.118                                           State Medicaid policy       1.011
for PE old immigrants2     (0.114)     For PE old immigrants       (0.088)                                         for PE old immigrants       (0.037)

PE new immigrants x        0.886       PE new immigrants x         1.235**      PE immigrants x         1.104      PE new immigrants x         1.280***    PE new immigrants x         1.388***
State TANF policy          (0.121)     State SNAP policy           (0.131)      State SSI policy        (0.087)    State Medicaid policy       (0.077)     State CHIP policy           (0.117)
for PE new immigrants                  for PE new immigrants                    for PE immigrants                  for PE new immigrants                   for PE new immigrants

PE old immigrants x        1.007       PE old immigrants x         1.459***                                        PE old immigrants x         1.556***
State TANF policy          (0.116)     State SNAP policy           (0.180)                                         State Medicaid policy       (0.086)
for PE old immigrants                  for PE old immigrants                                                       for PE old immigrants

Unemployment rate          1.039       Unemployment rate           1.122***     Unemployment rate       1.003      Unemployment rate           1.012       Unemployment rate           1.032***
                           (0.026)                                 (0.014)                              (0.013)                                (0.009)                                 (0.013)

Foreign-born x             1.050***    Foreign-born x              1.041***     Foreign-born x          1.029*     Foreign-born x              1.023***    Foreign-born x              1.078***
Unemployment rate          (0.016)     Unemployment rate           (0.010)      Unemployment rate       (0.016)    Unemployment rate           (0.006)     Unemployment rate           (0.024)

N                          333422      N                           333422       N                       333422     N                           1415132     N                           591812

    Note: 1. Post-enactment (PE) new immigrants refer to those who arrived after 1996 and have lived in the US for less than five years. 2. PE old immigrants refer to those who
    arrived after 1996 and have lived for over five years. 3. For SSI, the policy variable is defined as whether the state had SSI for immigrants who arrived after 1996 and is interacted
    with being an immigrant who arrived after 1996. 4. For CHIP, the policy variable is defined as whether the state had CHIP for immigrant children who arrived after 1996 and have
    lived in the US for less than five years and is interacted with being a PE new immigrant. For TANF, SNAP and SSI, the samples are restricted to low-educated households
    (household heads with a high school or less education) and at least one child <18. For Medicaid, the sample is restricted to low-educated adults. For CHIP, the sample is restricted
    to children from low-educated households. All models control for state and year fixed effects, individual characteristics (age, gender, education, race/ethnicity, and marital status),
    immigrant characteristics country of origin, cohort of immigration, year since immigration and citizenship status), household characteristics (number of children in the household
    and household size), state immigrant-related policies (state dream act, driver's license, E-Verify, Section 287(g) of Immigration and Naturalization Act, and the Secure
    Communities Program), and interaction terms between the foreign-born variable and state immigrant-related policy variables. Coefficients in the table are exponentiated
    coefficients (odds ratio) of logistic regression and robust standard errors clustered by state in parenthesis. * p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                                                                              51
Appendix Table 6. Robustness Check: Association between State Welfare Policy Score and the Business Cycle and
Program Participation among Low-Educated Households with Children (with County Variables)

                                                      Cash and Near-Cash                Social Safety Net
                                                      Assistance                        Programs
                                                      Model 1       Model 2             Model 1       Model 2

 State Welfare Policy Score                           0.899***          0.903***        1.011           1.019
                                                      (0.031)           (0.029)         (0.024)         (0.024)

 Foreign-Born x                                       1.129***          1.129***        1.123***        1.058**
 State Welfare Policy Score                           (0.043)           (0.048)         (0.027)         (0.025)

 County/State unemployment rate                       1.074***          1.074***        1.034***        1.038***
                                                      (0.011)           (0.010)         (0.008)         (0.008)

 Foreign-born x                                       1.034***          1.030***        1.017*          1.008
 County/State Unemployment rate                       (0.010)           (0.009)         (0.009)         (0.011)

 Foreign-born x Individual Characteristics            No                Yes             No              Yes
 Foreign-born x Household Characteristics             No                Yes             No              Yes
 Foreign-born x County/State Fixed Effects            No                Yes             No              Yes

 N                                                    333351            333000          333422          333330

Note: Household data are from the March CPS 1995-2018 showing welfare use information from 1994 to 2017. The sample is
restricted to household heads with a high school or less education and at least one child <18. Cash and near-cash programs include
TANF, SNAP and SSI. Safety net programs include cash and near-cash programs, Medicaid and SCHIP. All models control for
county (state fixed effects for those do not have county identifier) and year fixed effects, individual characteristics (household heads'
age, gender, education, race/ethnicity, and marital status), immigrant characteristics (household heads' country of origin, cohort of
immigration, year since immigration and citizenship status), household characteristics (number of children in the household and
household size), county unemployment rate county (state unemployment rate for those do not have county identifier), and county
immigrant-related policies (state dream act, driver's license, E-Verify, Section 287(g) of Immigration and Naturalization Act, and the
Secure Communities Program) (state level policies for those do not have county identifier), and interaction terms between the foreign-
born variable and state immigrant-related policy variables. Model 2 are the fully interacted models which include interactions between
whether the respondent is foreign-born and all explanatory variables except for immigrant characteristics and year fixed effects.
Coefficients in the table show exponentiated coefficients (odds ratio) of logistic regression and robust standard errors clustered by
state in parenthesis.
* p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                   52
Appendix Table 7. Robustness Check: Decomposition Results for Program Participation Gap between Low-Educated
Native and Immigrant Headed Households with Children (with County Variables)

                                                           Cash and Near-Cash Assistance            Safety Net Programs
   Overall                                                   Coef.             SE                    Coef.            SE
   Panel 1
   Immigrants                                                 0.206    ***        0.007               0.479   ***      0.010
   Natives                                                    0.229    ***        0.005               0.382   ***      0.007
   Difference                                                -0.023    ***        0.008               0.096   ***      0.010
   Endowments (Explained)                                     0.051    ***        0.008               0.098   ***      0.009
   Coefficients (Unexplained)                                -0.074    ***        0.006              -0.002            0.007
   Panel 2: Endowments (Explained)
   Reversed State Welfare Policy Score                       -0.003               0.002               0.004   *        0.002
   Education (Whether Completed High School)                  0.046    ***        0.003               0.052   ***      0.003
   Ethnicity/Race                                             0.018    ***        0.007               0.045   ***      0.007
       Non-Hispanic White                                     0.037    ***        0.003               0.044   ***      0.003
       Non-Hispanic Black                                    -0.007    ***        0.001              -0.006   ***      0.001
       Hispanic                                              -0.015    ***        0.005               0.005            0.004
       Other Races/Ethnicities                                0.002    ***        0.001               0.001   *        0.001
   Other Individual/Household Characteristics                -0.008    ***        0.002              -0.001            0.002
   County/State Unemployment Rate                             0.010    ***        0.002               0.006   ***      0.002
   Immigrant Inclusion Policies                              -0.002               0.001               0.002            0.002
   Immigrant Exclusion Policies                              -0.001               0.001              -0.002   **       0.001
   County/State Fixed Effects                                -0.015    ***        0.006              -0.023   ***      0.007
   Year Fixed Effects                                         0.004    ***        0.001               0.016   ***      0.003
   Panel 3: Coefficients (Unexplained)
   Reversed State Welfare Policy Score                       -0.012               0.008              -0.043   ***      0.010
   Education                                                  0.002               0.002               0.001            0.002
       Did Not Complete High School                          -0.022    ***        0.001              -0.022   ***      0.002
       Completed High School                                  0.024    ***        0.001               0.023   ***      0.002
   Ethnicity/Race                                             0.014    ***        0.004               0.023   ***      0.004
       Non-Hispanic White                                     0.010    ***        0.002               0.007   ***      0.002
       Non-Hispanic Black                                    -0.002               0.001              -0.002            0.001
       Hispanic                                               0.008    *          0.004               0.020   ***      0.004
       Other Races/Ethnicities                               -0.002    *          0.001              -0.003   **       0.001
   Other Individual/Household Characteristics                 0.007               0.011              -0.077   ***      0.012
   County/State Unemployment Rate                            -0.012               0.014               0.009            0.023
   Immigrant Inclusion Policies                              -0.003               0.003              -0.002            0.004
   Immigrant Exclusion Policies                              -0.003               0.003              -0.009            0.006
   County/State Fixed Effects                                -0.008               0.005              -0.008            0.007
   Year Fixed Effects                                         0.000               0.001               0.006   ***      0.002
   Constant                                                  -0.058    **         0.024               0.099   ***      0.025

   Group 1: Immigrants. Number of Observations = 79,024
   Group 2: Natives. Number of Observations = 254,413

Note: The sample is restricted to household heads with a high school or less education and at least one child <18. Cash and near-cash
programs include TANF, SNAP and SSI. Safety net programs include cash and near-cash programs, Medicaid and SCHIP. "Other
individual/household characteristics" include household heads' age, gender, marital status, number of children in the household and
household size. * p<0.1, **p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                                  53
