                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         MONETARY POLICY SURPRISES AND EXCHANGE RATE BEHAVIOR

                                      Refet S. Gürkaynak
                                        A. Hakan Kara
                                      Burçin Kisacikolu
                                        Sang Seok Lee

                                      Working Paper 27819
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27819


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We are grateful to Mark Gertler and Vania Stavrakeva for their discussions and seminar
participants at ISOM 2020 and Bank of Canada for comments. Gürkaynak's research was
supported by funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement No 726400). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Refet S. Gürkaynak, A. Hakan Kara, Burçin Kisacikolu, and Sang Seok Lee. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy Surprises and Exchange Rate Behavior
Refet S. Gürkaynak, A. Hakan Kara, Burçin Kisacikolu, and Sang Seok Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 27819
September 2020
JEL No. E43,E44,E52,E58,G14

                                          ABSTRACT

Central banks unexpectedly tightening policy rates often observe the exchange value of their
currency depreciate, rather than appreciate as predicted by standard models. We document this
for Fed and ECB policy days using event-studies and ask whether an information effect, where
the public attributes the policy surprise to an unobserved state of the economy that the central
bank is signaling by its policy may explain the abnormality. It turns out that many informational
assumptions make a standard two-country New Keynesian model match this behavior. To
identify the particular mechanism, we condition on multiple asset prices in the event-study and
model implications for these. We find that there is heterogeneity in this dimension in the event-
study and no model with a single regime can match the evidence. Further, even after conditioning
on possible information effects driving longer term interest rates, there appear to be other drivers
of exchange rates. Our results show that existing models have a long way to go in reconciling
event-study analysis with model-based mechanisms of asset pricing.

Refet S. Gürkaynak                               Burçin Kisacikolu
Bilkent University                               Bilkent University
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
06800 Ankara, Turkey                             06800 Ankara, Turkey
refet@bilkent.edu.tr                             bkisacikoglu@bilkent.edu.tr

A. Hakan Kara                                    Sang Seok Lee
Bilkent University                               Bilkent University
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
06800 Ankara                                     06800, Ankara
Turkey                                           Turkey
hkara@bilkent.edu.tr                             sang.lee@bilkent.edu.tr
1 Introduction
We have become adept at measuring asset price responses to monetary policy surprises, and

indeed, measuring those surprises themselves using changes in asset prices.      This is due to

increased data availability and conceptual advances that led to better empirical methodology.

These monetary policy eventstudies are useful in themselves, helping relate changes in a broad

array of nancial markets to policy actions and announcements; and are also useful in VAR

identication where the surprises are used as instruments.

   In a large and expanding literature, a recent strand is focusing on asymmetries in nancial

market responses to policy surprises, when an asset price moves in an unexpected direction

given the policy event. This may be stock prices or breakeven ination rates increasing when

there is a surprise tightening, or long-term forward interest rates decreasing in response to the

same. Unexpected in this context is based on the canonical model of monetary policy, where

tighter policy decreases stock prices and ination, and leaves long-term forward interest rates

unchanged. The observed eects require a deviation from the canonical model, and that is often

found in relaxing the informational assumptions. If the central bank has a dierent information

set than market participants, policy surprises may also signal this private information, without

precluding genuine policy shocks.

   Our focus in this paper is on the behavior of exchange rates on policy dates. We rst show

that similar unexpected behavior is prevalent in exchange rate reactions to monetary policy

surprises as well, and then discuss why this may be so. In presenting the discussion we will

make use of a standard two country open economy model taking into account implications for

yield curves, which allows jointly analyzing policy surprises' eects on the exchange rate and

the shapes of the home and foreign yield curves simultaneously.

   Our study helps accomplish several goals. We are quickly able to show that looking at one

moment, such as the covariance of the shortest end of the yield curvethe policy surpriseand

the exchange rate, does not uniquely identify the possible mechanism.        There are multiple

informational assumptions that are consistent with a single moment condition.        Second, we

can then argue that bringing in other moments, such as covariances with changes in longer-

term points on the yield curve, may narrow down the set of plausible models.         We discuss

several noteworthy policy dates where this becomes apparent.

   Using estimated versions of models with dierent informational assumptions, we then ask

which model ts the observed macro-nance data best, on average.            On average is very

consequential here as information asymmetries inherently include regime switching where in-




                                               1
formation of one or another kind may be received by the public on any policy date. But tting

a regime switching model to the data is not possible because each period may be in a dierent

regime, this is not a slowly regime switching world. Thus, only the model that ts best on

average can be chosen and that is certainly a misspecied model. The exercise we carry out

allows us to discuss these issues and relay what we learn from the best tting model, which is

an imperfect information model.

   We conclude by observing that given the canonical model we are employing, the two country

open economy Clarida et al. (2002) [CGG] model, there exist a set of policy dates where no

variant of the model matches the signs of all asset price changes. In that regard, this paper is

a call for action on open economy macro-nance modeling.




2 What We Build On
This paper is motivated by high frequency eventstudies. This methodology studies asset prices,

which are forward looking jump variables, at times of arrival of news to achieve identied eects

of news on asset prices.   This literature goes back to Fama et al. (1969) but the strand we

belong to, monetary policy event studies, date to the 1989 paper of Cook and Hahn. A seminal

paper is the work of Kuttner (2001) who recognized that conditioning on days of monetary

policy announcements and changes in policy rates imparts considerable measurement error as

market participants at least partly anticipate policy decisions and therefore these by themselves

do not constitute news. Kuttner spearheaded the use of Federal Funds Futures contracts in

measuring policy news.

   Gürkaynak et al. (2005a) then showed that monetary policy announcements are perceived

to be multi-dimensional, with one factor capturing the surprise in the policy action (target)

and another the surprise in the policy communication (path).       The monetary policy event-

study literature took o, with a large number of papers that we will not survey here using

these surprise measures as independent variables and studying the responses of a wide variety

of asset prices.

   More recently, the eventstudy literature, with its measure of policy surprises, met the VAR

literature, with its measure of shocks. High frequency eventstudy surprises are innovations in

market participants' information sets, whereas lower frequency VAR shocks are innovations

conditional on the actual state of the economy.     These two measures would overlap under

full information (Gürkaynak and Wright, 2013) but even under partial information surprises

may be a good instrument for identied shocks in VARs, where identication is notoriously




                                               2
dicult. Faust et al. (2004) took the rst step in formally identifying monetary VARs using

eventstudy data and Gertler and Karadi (2015) introduced the use of monetary policy surprises

as instruments for shocks in a proxy VAR.

   As noted by Gertler and Karadi and discussed in detail by Ramey (2016), some of the

ndings of Gertler and Karadi are consistent with the eventstudy surprise not satisfying the

exclusion restriction. For example, if the central bank correctly forecasts output to go down

and cuts interest rates for this reason and the forecast is private to the central bank, the rate

cut will be surprise in the eventstudy sense (market participants received new information) but

not a shock in the VAR sense (the policy rule was followed exactly given the state). Central

banks may indeed have superior information on some aspects of macroeconomic processes, as

argued by Romer and Romer (2000) and Peek et al. (1999).         This observation has led to a

growing literature in central bank information eects.

   Eventstudies are again the starting point, as some asset price reaction will look abnormal

under the presence of asymmetric information. Abnormality is, of course, in the eye of the

beholder and the beholder is the model one has in mind. For example, Gürkaynak et al. (2005b)

have argued that the reaction of the long-end of the yield curve is not consistent with models

of xed steady states and instead proposed a model where the ination target is time-varying

and unknown to the public, as was the case in the US before 2012. This is a case where the

information asymmetry is about the preferences of the central bank, as in the theoretical work

of Ellingsen and Soderstrom (2001).

   The inuential paper of Campbell et al. (2012) provided the nomenclature of information

eects, with Delphic forward guidance providing signals about the central bank's forecast

itself and Odyssean forward guidance being about the future path of interest rates given the

macroeconomic forecast. More recently, eventstudy papers focusing on the long-end of the yield

curve (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018), stock prices (Jaroci«ski and Karadi, 2020; Lunsford,

2020; Kerssenscher, 2019), break-even ination rates (Andrade and Ferroni, 2016) have found

similar puzzling behavior from the perspective of standard models and have proposed central

bank information-based explanations. These papers suggest central banks may have superior

information on the steady state growth rate of output or the current state of the business

cycle and use asset price behavior to disentangle standard monetary policy surprises from

information surprises.

   Two papers that stand out in this literature are Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco (2017)

and Bauer and Swanson (2020). The former paper conditions on Greenbook forecasts of the

Fed (which are released with a ve year delay) to see whether the contemporaneous market-



                                               3
based surprise correlates with the internal forecast. In essence, this paper asks whether there

was actually information the Fed had, rather than the market participants behaving as if

it did.   There is evidence of information eects but only a small proportion of the surprise

is attributable to Greenbook forecasts.    The latter paper asks this question outright in a

survey, which nds that market participants do not think the Fed has consistently superior

information about cyclical dynamics. Bauer and Swanson note that central bank preferences,

as in Gürkaynak et al. (2005b) are likely candidates for information eects.

   There is also a large literature on exchange rate reactions to monetary policy. The relevant

strand for our purposes goes back to Engel and Frankel (1984) who observed the unexpected

behavior of exchange rates in response to monetary policy actions, with the local currency

depreciating when policy is tightened. Their explanation rested on policy reversals. As relevant

are works that focus on non-monetary policy data releases and exchange rate reactions, relating

these to monetary policy rules. In particular, Clarida and Waldman (2008) and Clarida (2009)

nicely argue that ination surprises (ination higher than expected) may lead to local currency

appreciations if ination is a persistent process and monetary policy is suciently attuned to

ination stabilization. Clarida (2009) employs the Clarida et al. (2002) model to make that

point and is the rare paper that provides a formal model to make an argument based on

eventstudy evidence.

   More recently, Stavrakeva and Tang (2018) note the appreciation of the dollar in response to

easings in Fed policy during the Great Recession. They propose a combination of information

(Delphic forward guidance) and exorbitant duty a la Gourinchas et al. (2018) as an explanation.

Taking a similar path in eventstudies, we will show that this behavior was not limited to the

dollar and was also not limited to the Great Recession period. Another immediately relevant

paper is that of Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019), who do not focus on exchange rates but do take

into account multiple moments in the eventstudy, in their case the joint behavior of the stock

prices, policy action surprise, and the long-end of the yield curve. We will focus on exchange

rates and yield curves in two economies, as well as bringing in a formal model to frame the

interpretation.

   This overview of the state of the literature helps place our contribution in context. Eventstud-

ies have long been used to inform models and models form the baseline against which eventstudy

ndings are seen as expected or abnormal. We study the exchange rate behavior on policy days

in response to Fed and ECB surprises. From the perspective of the CGG model, abnormal

behavior is rampant.

   If monetary policy is informative about some other, unobserved realization in the economy,



                                               4
then asset price reactions to monetary policy in the incomplete information setting will be

the asset price reactions to that realization in the complete information setting. We therefore

ask which shock in the full information model generates the observed abnormal covariance of

exchange rate and the short rate. The answer turns out to be several shocks and combinations

of shocks.   This lack of identication is important.    Asset price reactions contrary to the

standard model predictions suggest something may be unobserved and signaled by the central

bank but they may not uniquely pin down what.

   We therefore bring in more asset prices and have a larger set of moment conditions from

the eventstudy to discipline the information structure of the model. The main body of the

paper is carrying out these exercises. But before we go there an important caveat is in order.

   The model is limited to information asymmetries for the variables it employs. We therefore

do not speak to the Rogers et al. (2014) saving the euro eect where easier than expected

monetary policy announcements during the European debt crisis sometimes led to apprecia-

tions of the euro as these were seen as signs that the ECB was determined to hold the euro area

together. This has no counterpart in the model and we cannot analyze its eects, although

we believe the eect was present. We also do not speak to market participants slowly learning

about the reaction function of the ECB (i.e. the relative weights of ination) in the early part

of our sample as pointed out by Goldberg and Klein (2011). The solution algorithm used for

the partial information model (applicable only to linearized models and the local approxima-

tions at the steady state where ination and output gaps are zero) makes time-varying eects

of policy smoothing parameter and relative weights of ination versus output gap stabilization

vanish. This is an important caveat, as potentially changing preferences of policy makers is

a natural source of information asymmetry.     The development of algorithms that allow for

changing policy preferences in partial information models will lead to fruitful research in both

closed and open economy macroeconomics and the study of changing preferences other than

the ination target will have to be taken up in future work using those methods.

   Despite the caveats, we are able to oer the most complete model-based assessment of

eventstudy evidence in the presence of potential information eects and speak clearly about

the dimensions in which the standard workhorse open economy macroeconomic model does

and does not help explain the nancial market data we observe.




                                               5
3 Eventstudy: First pass
We will study the USD/EUR exchange rate reaction to ECB and Fed policy surprises. The

exchange rate,   e, is always dened as dollars per euro, hence e going up in response to surprise
ECB tightening is an appreciation of the euro (as expected) but the same happening in response

to a surprise Fed tightening is a depreciation of the dollar (and is contrary to the standard

model prediction).

   Our data comes from the Euro Area Monetary Policy Eventstudy Database (Altavilla et al.,

2019) and an updated version of the data used in Gürkaynak et al. (2005a). The monetary

policy surprise measure is the standard one, often called target surprise, backed out using a

short dated interest rate contract, Federal Funds Futures for the US, and Overnight Indexed

Swap for the euro area.

   Using these surprise measures, we run event study regressions for the US and the euro

area to identify the eects of monetary policy surprises on the exchange rate. For the US, we

use the percentage change in USD/EUR exchange rate in the 30-minute window around the

Fed announcements and the target surprises in the same window. For the euro area, we use

intraday changes in 1-month OIS as the target surprise and percentage change in USD/EUR

exchange rate around the monetary event window, which covers both the press release by the

ECB and the press conference by the ECB president. Sample periods for the event studies are

1994-2018 for the US and 1999-2018 for the euro area.

   The estimates of basic event study regressions are given in Table 1. Surprise tightening

in the US appreciates the dollar against euro, whereas surprise tightening in the euro area

appreciates euro against the dollar (although the eect is not statistically signicant in this

sample). This is as expected. However, even when the responses are statistically signicant,

explanatory power of these regressions are very low.       Scatter plots presented in Figures 1

and 2 explain why.     In these gures, we plot monetary policy action surprises (target) and

the associated percentage change in exchange rates. Green dots show the policy dates with

the expected sign derived from the event study regression:       surprise tightening causing an

appreciation of the domestic currency. Even though most policy dates have this covariance,

there are many days with the opposite sign:      surprise tightening depreciating the domestic

currency, which are depicted by red dots. 35 out of 83 days for the US and 61 out of 146 days

for the euro area are days where the sign of the covariance is opposite of what event study

regressions imply. We call these information days.

   Figures 1 and 2 show the monetary policy surprises and the exchange rate reactions for




                                                6
the Fed and the ECB in the full sample. Our full sample, also used in the regressions, is still a

subset of all policy dates, where we only consider dates where the exchange rate has changed

by at least 0.2% and either the immediate policy surprise or the change in year-ahead rates

(fourth eurodollar contract-implied rate for the US and one-year OIS rate for the euro area)

has changed by at least two basis points. We trim the dates where either the monetary policy

surprise or the exchange rate reaction was minuscule because we will count days with normal

and abnormal behavior and do not want to classify dates where nothing really happened.

Including these dates would not have changed our analysis but would have cluttered gures

and added noise to the count of days with probable information eects.

   The number of abnormal days, where the exchange rate moves in the wrong direction is

what motivated Engel and Frankel (1984), and we replicate that nding with           21st   century

data and using interest rate surprises as the monetary policy stance measure. Figures 3 and

4 display this information in a time series format, making it clear that responses of exchange

rates in both directions to the same surprise were present in policy dates before 2009, when

the Global Financial Crisis began and policy rates moved to the eective lower bound (ELB),

and after the crisis was over as well.   The abnormal behavior of exchange rates was not an

artifact of the crisis and its immediate aftermath.

   This is the type of evidence that leads economists to study central bank information eects.

Indeed, one can easily think of a setting where aggregate supply shocks are better known by the

central bank and policy surprises are informative to the public about that latent variable. In

that case, higher than expected policy rates may signal higher ination and cause a depreciation

of currency. While the mechanism is plausible, assessing whether it can arise in an internally

consistent model requires using such a model.




4 The Model
To study the extent to which exchange rate behavior is a puzzle on some policy days and why

this may be so, we will use what is now a standard model in open economy macroeconomics.

The Clarida et al. (2002) model is the two country open economy variant of Clarida et al.

(1999) and is a well studied, canonical framework. We rst provide a very brief overview of

the model in its standard full information form, emphasizing the aspects that are important

for the discussion to follow. Partial information version of the same model will be discussed

in this section as well.




                                                7
4.1     Model Under Full Information


This is a two-country open economy New Keynesian model where, in contrast to small open

economy models such as Gali and Monacelli (2005), countries' decisions have eects on global

variables. We use this setting to model the EU and the US, with possible spillover eects of

policy decisions.

   The model, the way we employ it, has producer currency pricing and complete pass-through

of exchange rates to domestic prices. Calvo pricing generates nominal price rigidities in both

countries and the law of one price holds, implying purchasing power parity (PPP). On the

nancial side, there are complete markets (i.e., a complete set of Arrow-Debreu securities),

which brings perfect international consumption risk-sharing (Ct           = Ct for all t where * indicates
a foreign variable or parameter). Complete markets also make uncovered interest parity (UIP)

hold. Labor, which is the sole input for intermediate goods production, is immobile across two

countries.

   It is useful to remember that this model is built on the closed economy New Keynesian

model of Clarida et al. (1999) so insights from that well known closed economy model continue

to apply.    CGG themselves used this open economy variant to study optimal discretionary

monetary policy with and without international cooperation. Our interest is elsewhere and we

will not be asking optimal policy questions. We refer to the two countries as domestic (US)

and foreign (EA) and use the model to study the two economies jointly.

   The model, after the optimization problem of households and rms are solved, market

clearing conditions are imposed on the rst order conditions, and the resulting equations are

linearized, consists of two structural equations and a monetary policy rule. Of the structural

equations, the IS curve is obtained from the utility maximization of households, and the

Phillips curve from the prot maximization of rms.

   The IS relationship is



                                                    1
                                   y       ~t+1 -
                                   ~t = Et y          [rt - Et {t+1 } - rr
                                                                        ¯ t]                          (1)
                                                    0

where   ~
        y   is output gap,   r   is the nominal interest rate,      is domestic price ination, and   ¯
                                                                                                     rr   is

the natural rate of interest given by




                                                                   
                                    ¯ t =  0 Et { y
                                    rr            ¯t+1 } + 0 Et { yt +1 },                            (2)




                                                       8
with    y     the foreign output level and          y
                                                    ¯ the   natural level of output of the form



                                                       1                
                                                y
                                                ¯t =     [(1 + )at - 0 yt ],                                               (3)
                                                       

and    a   the aggregate productivity that follows




                                                     at = a at-1 + a
                                                                   t.                                                      (4)




a    is a white noise productivity shock with variance
                                                                       2
                                                                       a . 0 =  - 0            where   0 =  ( - 1),
1/     is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of consumption, and                   [0, 1] is the country
size. We assume that the countries are of equal size (                    = 0.5).   Finally,      is the inverse Frisch

elasticity of labor supply and            =  +  - 0 .
      Note that the IS equation has a knife-edge property:                     governs the existence and direction

of international spillovers and if            = 1,      international spillovers disappear from the equation

(because       0 = 0    and    0 =  )   and we are back to the closed economy IS equation.

      The New Keynesian Phillips Curve is




                                                             ~t + 
                                             t = Et {t+1 } + y    t                                                        (5)




where          is a white noise ination shock with variance
                                                                       2
                                                                         ,     is the time discount factor,           = 
with     = (1 - )(1 - )/,              and      is the Calvo pricing parameter. Note that when                      = 1,   the

slope is identical to that of the closed economy New Keynesian Phillips curve.

      Note also that the exchange rate is not part of these equations. Clarida et al. (2002) show

that the nominal exchange rate can be derived using the consumer price index, the goods

market clearing conditions, and the purchasing power parity.                          Using these conditions, the

                                                1
nominal exchange rate is given by:




                                                    et = st + pH,t - pF,t                                                  (6)



     1 This
         equation is derived from the terms of trade: St = PH,t
                                                             F,t      P
                                                                 where PF,t is foreign goods price level in
domestic currency. Using the zero trade balance condition, we have PH,t Yt = Pt Ct and PF,t
                                                                                              Yt = Pt Ct 
                                                                                                          .
                                                                                         PH,t Yt
Using the perfect risk sharing condition (Ct = Ct ) and the PPP (Pt = Et Pt ), we have P  Y  = Et and
                                                                            
                                                                                                         F,t   t
        
      PF,t Et        PF,t
Yt
Yt = P   H,t
                 =   PH,t   = St . Using the last equality we derive the terms of trade as St =        Yt ,
                                                                                                       Yt
                                                                                                              implying that
        P
           .
Et = St PH,t
          F,t




                                                               9
where   st   is the terms of trade:



                                                         
                                              st = yt - yt                                              (7)




and domestic and foreign goods' price levels are given by:




                                           pH,t = pH,t-1 + t                                            (8)


                                            p               
                                             F,t = pF,t-1 + t                                           (9)




   The nominal exchange is non-stationary in this model under the interest rate rule we will

use. To back out model implications for the nominal exchange rate, we solve the linear model

for home and foreign variables.        Then, using the model solution we back out the eects of

structural shocks on the nominal exchange rate, employing the relationships presented above.

   One option for ensuring stationarity of the nominal exchange rate is optimal monetary

policy under commitment which links the domestic price ination to the change in output

gap over time. This form of stabilization also makes the domestic price level and the nominal

exchange rate stationary but we estimate the policy rule under asymmetric information and

cannot impose the optimal rule. Another option, which is rather trivial, is a xed exchange

rate, which would not have helped the model match the eventstudy evidence had we assumed

it. Hence, we let the model exchange rate be non-stationary.

   The monetary policy rule closes the model. We will introduce partial information to the

model by making various subsets of the variables on the right-hand-side of the interest rate

rule unobservable. The rule is of the form




                      rt = r rt-1 + (1 - r )(rr
                                             ¯t+¯t +  (t -         ~y
                                                           ¯ t ) + y ~t ) + r
                                                                            t                         (10)




where   r    is a white noise interest rate shock with variance
                                                                  2
                                                                  r   and   ¯t
                                                                                 is the ination target that

follows




                                      ¯t = (1 - 
                                                    + 
                                                ¯ )¯  ¯¯t-1 + ¯
                                                              t                                       (11)




with
       ¯
             is a white noise ination target shock with the variance             2
                                                                                 ¯.   We set the long-run

ination target     ¯=0     to avoid a further complication by trend ination.

   We have an analogous set of equations for the foreign economy whose variables and param-

                        
eters are indexed by       , not shown here in the interest of space. Obviously, given the symmetry,




                                                   10
it is irrelevant which country is home and which is foreign.

   The monetary policy rule is a convenient vehicle for the discussion of policy shocks and

surprises.   The monetary policy shock is          r
                                                   t   whereas the surprise is   rt - E [rt |Itp ],   with   Itp
the information set of the public before the announcement of the policy decision. Under full

information,   rt - E [rt |Itp ] = r
                                   t,   the monetary policy surprise and the monetary policy shock

overlap and in such models surprise and shock may be used interchangeably. Under asymmetric

information, the policy surprise becomes also informative about shocks and variables other than

the monetary policy, and the surprise and policy shock become two distinct quantities.

   Note that the full information model described above is equivalently a model where one

state variable (or equivalently a shock in case of exogenous state variable) is not currently

observed by the private sector. Because the endogenous variables on the right-hand-side of the

interest rate rule are functions of all state variables, it is always possible to back out a single

missing state variable by inverting the interest rate rule conditional on the nominal interest

rate and the observed state variables. This assumes that the information set of the central

bank is at least as large as that of the private sector's and contains all relevant variables

required for the unique inversion.         Ellingsen and Soderstrom (2001) and Lee (forthcoming)

elaborate on this idea.

   We are used to thinking of the unobserved variable as the monetary policy shock, which

is revealed when the interest rate is observed. Under full information, this is the eventstudy

monetary policy surprise, and is also the VAR monetary policy shock.                  However, one can

equivalently think of a world where the monetary policy shock is known (or is known to be

zero at all times) but, say, the ination shock is not observed by the public.                 Then, when

monetary policy is announced, we will still observe a surprise in the eventstudy sense, but the

information revealed is not     r
                                t   but   t.   In the model/VAR interpretation, market participants

have learned the realization of the ination shock and asset prices will respond accordingly.

   This concludes the description of the model. Two important notes are in order. The rst

concerns the nominal exchange rate.            It is worth repeating that the exchange rate is non-

stationary in this setting. It therefore does not enter the system of equations to be solved but

can be backed out using the consumer price index, the goods market clearing conditions, and

the purchasing power parity.

   The second has to do with the yield curve.               We can, and do, also back out longer-term

interest rates and a full yield curve assuming expectations hypothesis. We will be interested

in changes in yield curves in response to shocks hence need to assume only a weak form of

the expectations hypothesis, allowing maturity-specic term premia but will assume away



                                                       11
time-varying prices of risk.

   Next, we move to the description of the model under asymmetric information.




4.2        The Model Under Asymmetric Information


The model under full information is the proper starting point to think of a particular case of

information asymmetry. As discussed above, if only one variable is not observed by the public

and known to the central bank, monetary policy will reveal that variable exactly. Hence, the

asset price        response on the day of policy announcement will be the response to that variable.

If only the monetary policy shock were unknown, the response will be to monetary policy.

But if there is no genuine monetary policy shock, the only driver of the policy surprise can

be the latent (from the public's perspective) variable, which will enter the public information

set by the realization of the policy rate. Thus, studying the contemporaneous responses of the

short rate and exchange rate to shocks to                 other   variables provides guidance on which variable's

unobservability to the public may create the puzzling covariances we nd in the eventstudies.

   Before moving further with the analysis, we have to properly dene what unobservability

in the asymmetric information context means.                          Here we assume that the central banks in

both countries have full information about the state, where the information set at time                      t   is

given by        Itf .    However the public will solve a signal extraction problem since it has partial

information about the state of the economy.                       We denote private sector's information set at

time   t   as   Itp ,   which is a subset of   Itf .   In this setup monetary policy actions reveal information

to the public about the state of the economy. Private sector forms expectations conditional on

their information set,          Etp [.] = E [.|Itp ], whereas the central bank forms expectations conditional
on full information,           Etf [.] = E [.|Itf ].   We assume that private sectors in both countries have

identical information sets. Note that if                 Itp = Itf   we are in the full information world.

   Solving DSGE models with asymmetric information is a nontrivial task. To solve the model

under partial information, we use the solution method of Pearlman et al. (1986). The method

adopts the Kalman lter to model expectations formation under partial information. As Svens-

son and Woodford (2003, 2004) note, the signal extraction problem in a forward-looking model

like ours is complicated by the circularity where current forward-looking variables depend on

their future expectations, which in turn depend on the estimates of unobservables. But the

estimates are dependent on the current forward-looking variables whether they are observed or

not. For a linear(ized) model, it is possible to overcome this issue and obtain a unique stable

solution. Because we use a Taylor rule to model monetary policy, Pearlman et al.'s method is

readily applicable to our setting where the central bank has a larger information set than the


                                                                12
private sector. Lee (forthcoming) provides details.

    The solution method requires that the private sector information set is introduced to the

model through a measurement/observation equation of the form




                                                  Zt = DXt + t                                                    (12)




where   Zt   is the vector of observable variables such as ination and interest rates,                        D   is a

loading matrix,        Xt   is the vector of state variables, and   t   is the vector of measurement errors.

To make this point clearly, let us consider a setting where the private sector has the following

information set:




                                       Itp = {rs , rs
                                                            
                                                      , s , s , D, V, ~ |s  t}.                                   (13)




with the observation equation:

                                                       
                                                       r
                                                       t
                                                       
                                                 rt    rt 
                                                       
                                                       
                                                 rt    
                                                  = D  t  + t                                                     (14)
                                                       
                                                 t     t 
                                                       
                                                       
                                                t     z~
                                                       t
                                                       x
                                                       ~t

where   V    is the variance-covariance matrix of measurement errors                     t   (equal to zero for the

models we study in the paper),              ~
                                                is the vector of model parameters,              z
                                                                                                ~t   is the vector of

unobservable exogenous variables, and             x
                                                  ~t   is the vector of unobservable endogenous variables.

D   is the selection matrix that consists of 0's and 1's with the following form:

                                                                        
                                             1         0 0 0 0z
                                                              ~ 0x
                                                                 ~
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                             0         1 0 0 0z
                                                              ~       0x
                                                                       ~
                                           D=
                                                                         
                                                                                                                  (15)
                                             0         0 1 0 0z
                                                              ~       0x
                                                                       ~
                                                                         
                                             0         0 0 1 0z
                                                              ~       0x
                                                                       ~


with   0z
        ~   and   0x
                   ~   zero vectors corresponding to the sizes of         ~
                                                                          z   and   x
                                                                                    ~,   respectively.    All partial

information models that we consider in the paper can be cast in this form.

    It is important to underline that although the model has many variables, its internal

consistency limits the combinations of possible unobservable variables.                        If the histories and




                                                          13
current values of all eight (four in each country) shocks in the model are observable, other

model variables will necessarily be known as these can be expressed as functions of the shocks.

And if all model variables are observable, these imply the realizations of the shocks. In the

nal analysis, it is various combinations of these shocks that may need to be inferred, which

require shocks and some variables to be unobservable.




5 Discussion
5.1    Full Information


To parameterize the model under full and partial information, we estimate 26 parameters using

27 moments of quarterly EA and US real GDP, short-term interest rate, and CPI from 1998

to 2008 using GMM. All moments we use for estimation can be computed analytically for the

perfect (full) information model as well as the partial (asymmetric) information models.

   Table 2 shows the moments in the data and the estimated moments, as well as the parameter

estimates for the full information model.    Note the dierence between the estimates of the

elasticity of substitution between the US and the euro area. We will see that these being on

either side of unity is a result of the full information assumption we impose on the model and

that the best tting model, with partial information, will have elasticities of substitution that

are closer and impulse responses more similarly behaved.

   With these parameters in hand, Figure 5 shows the standard set of impulse-response func-

tions to monetary policy surprises (recall that policy surprise and policy shock are the same

under full information) by the ECB and the Fed. These are all as expected, importantly with

the exchange rate appreciating in response to a positive policy rate shock.

   To complement these, we provide yield curve responses on impact (with the horizontal

axis being maturity rather than response horizon) and the impulse-response function for the

nominal exchange rate under dierent one standard deviation shocks, shown in Figure 6. The

yield curves are obtained via expectations hypothesis. The rst gure is for the EU shocks and

the second for the US ones. We observe asymmetries in the yield curve responses to monetary

policy shocks: whereas a positive shock in the EU raises yield curves in both the EU and

the US, a positive shock in the US raises only the US yield curve and shifts down the EU

yield curve (the third rows). This is also the case for ination shock (the rst rows). These

results are driven by the estimates of the inverse elasticity of intertemporal substitution which

determine the coecients of the structural equations presented above (         = 3.29   for the US




                                               14
and     = 0.15   for the EU).

   Armed with the parameter estimates for the full information model, we continue by study-

ing the responses of interest rates in the US and euro area, as well as the exchange rate to

model dened shocks. If one of these has the desired contemporaneous covariance, consistent

with an information eect, we may then ask which information structure in the model may

give rise to inference about that shock as a result of monetary policy announcements. The

responses of interest rates and the exchange rate to various shocks were shown in Figure 6,

hence we turn there again.

   Our quest to nd model dened shocks that, when realized, produce the abnormal covari-

ances we are after, produces good and bad news. The good news is that the eort is successful,

we nd in the model contemporaneous correlations that would be abnormal had they taken

place on monetary policy days.    The bad news is that the answer is not unique, there are

several variables that produce this result.   We will also nd below that the non-uniqueness

comes in other avors as well.

   This observation is salient.   We nd that ination and ination target shocks are both

candidates to match the abnormal behavior of exchange rates in their own right. The con-

temporaneous covariance produces one moment condition and matching that in a reasonably

rich model is possible with a variety of mechanisms. This is an issue for a large part of the

literature on central bank information eects, most of which is concerned with a particular

contemporaneous covariance, based on eventstudies.

   We will not dwell on the longer horizons in the IRFs, our focus will be on the contempora-

neous relationships. Under full information, the eventstudy captures the moment the shock is

realized and we observe the contemporaneous covariances of variables that react immediately.

Those jump variables are the asset prices, in this model the exchange rate and interest rates at

various maturities, including the short (policy) rate. This makes it clear why some exchange

rate-policy surprise correlations are puzzling from the lens of the model, where the covariance

should always have the same sign, a tightening policy shock should always lead to an exchange

rate appreciation. In the data, we have seen many policy days where the covariance has the

opposite sign. This is where we ask whether changing the information structure in the model

helps pin down the mechanism that generates the data we observed.




5.2     Asymmetric Information


Estimated parameters of a model with asymmetric information are not the same as the pa-

rameters estimated assuming full information and then changing the information partition.


                                               15
Hence, we re-estimate the model under dierent assumptions about the information structure.

This exercise is interesting when multiple variables are unobserved so that there is an inference

problem to be solved by the public. We estimate the same parameters, using the same moment

conditions as the full information case.

   Table 3 gives the t of various partial information models relative to the perfect information

benchmark. We classify the models by which model dened variables are observable, with the

other variables and the eight shocks unobservable. Moments and estimated parameter values

for the best tting model and some of the close competitors are presented in Tables 4 and 5.

We nd that the best-tting partial information model (where only       r,  ,   and   ¯   are observed)

ts better than the best-tting perfect information model.

   Using this model, we rst ask whether the monetary policy shock alone delivers the abnor-

mal correlation between the nominal interest rate and the nominal exchange rate that we take

to be an indication of information eect. It does not, as Figure 7 shows. That is, even in the

best tting partial information model, the monetary policy surprise is informative primarily

of the monetary policy shock, not of other latent model variables.

   We can still ask whether there is any shock that delivers the puzzling exchange rate behav-

ior. The answer is armative. The Figures 8 and 9 show that the ination shock does indeed

produce that behavior, as well as the ination target shock. The nding about the ination

target has a counterpart in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2018) who nd that a permanent in-

terest rate shock generates similar behavior. Their permanent interest rate shock is a credible

change in the ination target. Hence, if the monetary policy shock were informative about ei-

ther ination or its target, we would have seen the abnormal exchange rate behavior generated

by the model. One is then tempted to conclude that days of monetary policy announcements

where the exchange rate moved in the wrong direction must have led the market participants

to update their beliefs about something related to ination, either ination itself or its target.

That conclusion would be premature.

   Market participants need not be inferring information about a single shock or variable.

Figure 10 shows that joint interest rate and productivity shocks also do the trick.          As long

as shocks have dierential eects on the short rate and the exchange rate, regardless of the

direction, there exist combinations of shocks that generate any covariance of the short rate

and exchange rate, including the abnormal behavior we are studying. Hence, within the best-

tting model with asymmetric information, there is a wide set of belief updating by the public

that can generate the same exchange rate behavior in response to policy surprises.

   Two notes are in order. First is that this model, based on estimated parameters, suggests



                                               16
that market participants are   not   updating their beliefs about unobservables in response to

monetary policy realizations to an extent that the abnormal behavior arises. If it did generate

that behavior, the other (currently normal) dates would turn into puzzles. The model has

one covariance structure and the data has at least two.

   Second, even if one allows for dierent signals to be inferred from the same policy surprise

over time, lack of identication on what that information is about runs deeper than the discus-

sion above suggests. We have shown that dierent shocks and shock combinations deliver the

same sign of exchange rate response within the best tting model. That is lack of identication

within the model.

   There is also lack of identication across models. Models with dierent information struc-

tures also imply similar contemporaneous covariances between the short rate and the exchange

rate. Figure 11 shows this for a set of models. Models that are similar to the best tting one

but having dierent informational asymmetries also produce the abnormal eects we observe

in the data, in response to some model-dened shocks.

   We therefore conclude that (a) no model in this family generates the information eect in

response to the monetary policy surprise but perhaps they should not anyway as these are the

average eects and the standard monetary policy shock may well dominate on average, and

(b) neither within nor across models is there identication of the information structure or the

shocks that may be generating the abnormal behavior.

   The former point has to do with having models with a single regime.         Monetary policy

cannot sometimes generate one eect and sometimes another in these.            But estimating a

regime switching model across regimes that are not smoothly transitioning is likely unfeasible.

Thus, we may have to be satised with asking whether there is any shock in an asymmetric

information model that may be generating the abnormal behavior. In that case we are faced

with lack of identication.   One moment (one stylized fact) is too easy for these models to

match and several models, as well as several (combinations of ) shocks within models, indeed

do so.

   We therefore ask whether we can bring in further moments to discipline the model.




6 Eventstudies: A Deeper Look
This time, rather than only studying the covariance of the policy rate surprise with the ex-

change rate, we pay attention to covariances of some other asset price reactions as well. In

particular, we study the behavior of longer-term interest rates. It is, of course, conceivable to




                                               17
study other asset prices, such as multiple exchange rates, indexed-bonds, stock prices, options,

etc. But these do not have ready model counterparts. Note that the model implies a pricing

kernel and a law of motion of model variables. Thus, all other asset prices are implied by the

model (the model prices a complete set of Arrow-Debreu securities on all dates) but explicitly

introducing these into the model and solving and estimating a model with those features has

not yet been done. That would be a most welcome exercise.

    In the monetary policy eventstudy, along with the exchange rate, we now focus on the

behavior of the policy setting surprise (target) and the forward guidance (path) surprise,

measured by orthogonalizing the change in one-year rate with target and taking the residual.

We also have data and model implications on ve-year and ten-year interest rates but the

mapping between the data and the model here should be taken with a handful of salt, as the

model prices longer-term securities with expectations hypothesis and at those maturities term

                                       2
premia variance is not negligible.

    The exercise we are now doing is in the spirit of Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019), who in a

paper written for the International Seminar on Macroeconomics, classify policy surprises by

the behavior of short rates, long rates, and stock prices. That is a rare paper using multiple

asset prices. The multi-asset structure is similar but here we focus on a dierent set of assets,

bringing in the exchange rate and, importantly, try to reconcile the eventstudy with structural

model implications.

    The variety of monetary policy responses may be due to intrinsic multi-dimensionality

in monetary policy announcements.             We therefore use the target-path decomposition and

condition on both types of policy surprises. Table 6 and Figures 12 and 13 show the result

and make it clear that the path surprise is responsible for most of the policy-related signals in

this sample, as well as driving the exchange rate responses. The binding ELB and associated

forward guidance is one reason but even before that, policy makers had become skilled at

signaling the forthcoming policy action and genuine target surprises were few and far between.

Path surprises were always prevalent in this period, as shown by Figures 14 and 15.

    An important nding is that most of the abnormal exchange rate responses agged based on

the target surprise are no longer abnormal for the US when conditioning on the path surprise.

The number of abnormal exchange rate reaction dates decline by a half and the remaining

ones are days of smaller asset price movements.             In the euro area, the number of abnormal


   2 This is not a major issue for shorter-term interest rates as both the average size and the variance of term
premia decrease as maturity decreases. The way Federal Funds Futures are used in calculating the policy
surprise implicitly assumes that the term premium for the spot one-month contract does not change at all
around the policy announcements.


                                                      18
reaction dates decline a little.

   The dierence between the US and EA is likely due to at least two reasons.           First, as

Goldberg and Klein (2011) show, market perceptions of the ECB's reaction to ination in the

early part of our sample were changing as market participants slowly learned the relative weight

of ination in the ECB's reaction function. ECB, with no history, had more scope to signal

its preferences. Second reason is the saving the euro eect. Policy instances when the ECB

signaled easier than expected monetary conditions going forward (negative path surprises)

which were interpreted as commitments to hold the euro area together during the crisis, led to

appreciations of the euro. There is no counterpart of the saving the euro phenomenon in the

US and it is natural to nd more abnormal dates, even after conditioning on path surprises,

in the euro area. A proper analysis of these possible channels, including whether these should

be thought of as an information eects is work that we leave for future.

   An interesting observation is the presence of days when neither the target nor the path

surprise correlate in the expected sign with the exchange rate reaction, both in the US and in

the euro area. Whatever information eects there may be, they do not manifest themselves

completely in the perceived forward guidance. This is consistent with Cieslak and Schrimpf

(2019), who found a separate role for stock prices after controlling for the short and long-ends

of the yield curve.

   We will look more carefully into a few selected dates to give a sense of the policy commu-

nication and nancial press interpretation, but before doing so should highlight an important

point.   From an information asymmetry perspective, path surprises themselves are possibly

results of central bank information revelation (Delphic surprises) and nding exchange rate

correlations with these that accord with standard full information models do not constitute

evidence against asymmetric information. That nding perhaps puts more discipline on the

nature of the information structure and the source of shocks, as the year-out interest rates and

exchange rates should be moved in opposite directions (for the US), as in the data. We will

return to this issue below.




6.1      Selected days of abnormal exchange rate behavior


Some of the dates with abnormal exchange rate reactions stand out in the gures we have

displayed so far. We look at a few of those closely and relay the market commentary associated

with the observed exchange rate reactions. We choose days that have the wrong covariance of

the surprise and exchange rate response when the surprise is measured by the target factor and

discuss dates when the path factor explains the exchange rate (although path itself may be


                                              19
an artifact of information revelation) and dates when the exchange rate movement is abnormal

regardless of which measure of policy surprise is used. Note that such dates are very rare in

the US.



6.1.1     Discussion of Selected US Information Days


   ·    June 30, 1999 (Target: -3 bps, Path: -9.5 bps, dollar appreciates 0.3%)


        The exchange rate response on this date is inconsistent with both the target and the path

        surprises. The FOMC raised interest rates by 25 basis points, which was largely expected

        by the market participants (small target surprise). But the central bank indicated its

        tiny quarter point increase may be all that is needed to keep ination under control...

        The Fed said in a statement that it felt the need to be `especially alert to the emergence,

        or potential emergence, of inationary forces that could undermine economic growth.'

        But at the same time, the Fed indicated that it was moving its policy directive, which

        signals the future course of interest rates, back to neutral... `The message from the Fed is

        that they are not in any big hurry nor particularly worried that quick action is necessary

        on ination front. The markets are relieved because the central bank could have been a

        lot tougher.'  (Fed. Reserve Raises Interest Rates, Bloomberg, June 30, 1999).


        Fed's statement about neutral rates implied a negative path surprise since the investors

        were expecting higher interest rates in the future due to inationary forces. According to

        the commentary [Fed] removed its tilt, or bias, toward higher rates. That bias change

        was a surprise to most investors and gives the market room to rally. (U.S. Bonds Surge

        as Fed Hints at Limited Rate Rises (Update1), Bloomberg, June 30, 1999).


        Appreciation of the dollar is unexpected, given the jointly negative target and path

        surprises.


   ·    March 20, 2001 (Target: 7 bps, Path: -11 bps, dollar depreciates 0.8%)


        The Fed cuts policy rates by 50 basis points and signals another rate cut could come

        in an intermeeting move. In the statement, policy makers cited falling stocks, a slump

        in manufacturing and `weakness in global economic conditions' as the reasons for their

        decisions to lower rates by 50 basis points. Fed adds in its statement that In these cir-

        cumstances, when the economic situation could be evolving rapidly, the Federal Reserve

        will need to monitor developments closely.     The last comment made analysts forecast

        another cut in the next meeting, or even before then, if need be. This reads like they

        are more scared than they have been willing to admit, and that they are ready to cut


                                                 20
        rates further  maybe soon. (U.S. Bonds Rise After Fed Cuts Rates a Half-Point to 5

        Percent, Bloomberg, March 20, 2001).


        This is a good example of an exchange rate reaction, although unexpected when judged

        by the positive target surprise, being consistent with the path surprise; but the path

        surprise itself likely stemming from Delphic forward guidance. It is likely that the same

        signal about outlook or preferences moved both path and the exchange value of the

        dollar.



   ·    January 27, 2010 (Target: -0.5 bps, Path: 7.4 bps, dollar appreciates 0.3%)


        This is a policy date with a negligible target surprise, but a large path surprise. The

        FOMC did not change the policy rate, with one member of the committee dissenting

        on the decision.   The statement read With substantial resource slack continuing to

        restrain cost pressures with long-term ination expectations stable, ination is likely to

        be subdued for some time. Kansas City Fed President Hoenig believed that economic

        and nancial conditions had changed suciently that the expectation of exceptionally

        low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period was no longer warranted. The

        dissent was of particular interest to the market participants. The dissent from Hoenig

        was a big boost for dollar.   There is a good chance there are other ocials who are

        less dovish as well.   (Dollar Climbs to Six-Month High Against Euro on Fed Dissent,

        Bloomberg, January 27, 2010).


        It is important to note that dovishness/hawkishness pertains to policymaker preferences

        more than anything else.    Again, the same signal is moving the path factor and the

        exchange rate.



6.1.2     Discussion of Selected Euro Area Information Days


   ·    October 7, 1999 (Target: -17 bps, Path: 5 bps, euro appreciates 0.2%)


        The ECB kept the policy rate unchanged, however Euro appreciated on speculation the

        ECB might raise its benchmark lending soon. ECB president said at the news conference

        that with the economic outlook improving we have to adopt and to have a monetary

        policy stance which is conducive to sustainable, non-inationary growth.       People are

        more optimistic on European growth prospects going into 2000. Eventually the ECB is

        going to push to start raising rates. The euro has found and held support. (Euro Gains

        on Speculation ECB May Raise Rates in Months Ahead, Bloomberg, October 7, 1999).




                                                21
    Despite the negative and large target surprise, the euro appreciates, consistent with the

    positive path surprise.



·   April 11, 2001 (Target= 17 bps, Path= 5.3 bps, euro depreciates 0.9%)


    This is an example of a policy date where the exchange rate movements cannot be

    reconciled either with the target surprise or the path surprise.   This was a day of no

    policy rate change.


    Even though the ECB was projecting itself for a no change, some people were positioning

    themselves for a cut and when it didn't go through, the euro had a pretty sharp reaction.

    I think the market is pretty bearish in the short term as every one wanted ECB to cut,

    which would have helped (the euro) (Euro Falls Then Recovers, Bloomberg, April 11,

    2001). For them to not even cut rates amid this global slowdown is seen as disappoint-

    ing.     The ECB once again disappointed the markets, so the euro went down.       Right

    now, the market favors those currencies whose central banks have shown a willingness

    to cut rates and spur growth. (Euro Falls vs Dollar, Yen After ECB Leaves Key Rate

    Unchanged, Bloomberg, April 11, 2001).



·   December 6, 2001 (Target: -1.3 bps, Path: 6.2 bps, euro appreciates 0.2%)


    The ECB left its benchmark interest rate unchanged, which was largely expected by

    the market (small target surprise). The central bank has been trying to bring ination

    below its 2 percent ceiling, and the failure to cut may be taken by some investors as

    evidence the ECB isn't doing enough to bolster the region's economy. `The euro may

    come o as the ECB will be perceived as being anti-growth,' `The press conference did

    not give the impression a new rate cut is just around the corner.'  (Euro Little Changed

    After ECB Leaves Benchmark Rate Unchanged, Bloomberg, December 6, 2001).


    Again, the path surprise justies the exchange rate reaction but whether one should

    attribute the path surprise itself to Odyssean (rate cut is [not] around the corner) or

    Delphic in the preference sense (ECB will be perceived as being anti-growth) is not

    clear.


    This is a clear example of some information eect in play, but whether this has to do with

    the fundamental soundness of the euro area, the growth prospects, or ECB preferences

    is not obvious.



·   June 5, 2008 (Target: -0.1 bps, Path: 20 bps, euro appreciates 0.9%)




                                            22
     The ECB left interest rates unchanged, but Trichet said an interest rate increase in the

     next meeting is `possible'  and said policy makers are in a state of hightened alertness

     over ination.  `Trichet's comments were interpreted as more hawkish than expected.

     We don't expect the Fed to hike anytime soon, so there's still a substantial interest-rate

     advantage for the euro.' The ECB has cited accelerating ination as a reason for not

     cutting rates as the US economic slowdown spread to Europe. (Euro Rises After Trichet

     Says July Rate Increase is `Possible', Bloomberg, June 5, 2008).


     This episode once again raises the good question of whether hawkishness is a function

     of central bank preferences or forecast. Market participants have received information

     that led them to update their beliefs about the policy path, and the exchange rate along

     with that, but the nature of information is unclear.



   This in depth look at some of the events, the central bank statements, and associated

nancial press write ups shows that there are many shades of possible information eects.

It is particularly dicult to distinguish between Delphic and Odyssean forward guidance by

reading the central bank statements, and the nancial press mostly focuses on rationalizing

the asset price reactions. Nonetheless, it is clear that, when it comes to asset price movements

that are not explained by the target surprise, a signicant share of these are explained by

the path surprise, which suggests the same information revelation by the central bank aects

dierent markets similarly. But path by itself is still not sucient to capture all the dierent

ways exchange rates move in response to monetary policy surprises, especially in the euro area.




7 Reections on the Model
An important observation to make on the data and discussion presented in section 5, relevant

for monetary policy in open economies, is that inference market participants make change

from event to event. No model with a single regime will match that. This, of course, is an

issue for all models of central bank information: nancial market responses are indicative of

information eects only on some dates. But this becomes even more of an issue when multiple

asset prices and covariances are studied.

   Focusing only on dates where the target surprise and the exchange rate covary in the

wrong direction, the following two points become pertinent.       The rst point of note, very

importantly, is that for most dates in the US and many dates in the EA (the dierence likely

being due to the saving the euro eect or the market participants learning about the ECB)




                                              23
the path surprise has the correct covariance with the exchange rate.                    But this, in itself,

is a problem for the model.        For any shock, the model always implies the same yield curve

response. That is, in the IRF year-ahead rates contain the same information as instantaneous

                                                                 3
rates. There are no separate target and path surprises.

    This brings to mind Odyssean forward guidance, which will trivially make target and path

surprises dier. In that case the fact that these are Odyssean not Delphic surprises imply that

information-based stories will have to be put aside.            It may be possible to relate Odyssean

forward guidance to central banker preferences, which would be a fruitful avenue of research.

    There is a further complication when target and path surprises dier in sign.                    It is not

obvious which should dominate in determining the exchange rate response. This will depend

on their relative sizes and the persistence of the forward guidance shock, also discussed by Gali

(2020).

    The eort in estimating these models with rich information structures is not in vain, how-

ever.   As Figure 16 shows, although the monetary policy surprise does not generate the re-

sponses seen in the eventstudies, dierent shocks in that model do generate various aspects

of the responses.     For example, a combination of a positive ination shock and a (smaller)

negative monetary policy shock depreciates the dollar and inverts the yield curve (in changes)

at the same time. This suggests that joint inference about these shocks may help explain some

of the eventstudy ndings, including path surprises which may have opposite signs of target

surprises. The literature has not focused on inference about multiple shocks at all. Doing so

increases the degrees of freedom in the model and obviously helps t the moments better but

also worsens the identication problem.

    The second point of note is that there remain the dates where neither the target nor the

path surprise explain the exchange rate reaction. That dynamic requires a separate study.

Those dates are dicult to make sense of even when the discipline of the model is not imposed

on the yield curve and one only looks for some policy signal that is consistent with the exchange

rate behavior.

    Hence, although the central bank information literature is built on our theoretical under-

standing of how asset prices should respond to monetary policy and other shocks, the family

of models we employed neither uniquely nor completely t the eventstudies we have looked

at. In making this assessment, it is important to remember that a particularly pertinent type


   3 Private central bank information that would make the policymaker signal tighter policy in the future would
also make her tighten policy now and the relationship does not change. Hence, target and path are not two
distinct elements, except at the ZLB not studied here which necessarily changes the covariance structure.



                                                      24
of information asymmetry is not present here, that of central bank preferences.                  The only

preference that can be unobserved by the public and would have repercussions on asset prices

in the model is the ination target.         This is an artifact of the solution algorithm that uses

local approximations at the steady state, which makes the policy smoothing parameter and

relative weights of ination versus output gap stabilization vanish. Bringing those in for open

economy models is clearly a fruitful avenue of further research.

   We do not see our ndings as negative results. No one will be surprised that we are having

                                                          4
diculty understanding exchange rate movements,                in any window, conditional on any event.

We also know that the world is more complicated than any one model can and should be.

But the model we employed, a canonical open economy model, helped us put exchange rate

responses to monetary policy in perspective and see which lines of argument are internally

consistent, which are identied, and where we are falling short.




8 Conclusion
We nd that asset price anomalies, from the perspective of standard models, that arise in

eventstudies and motivate the literature on central bank information eects are present in

exchange rates as well. These exchange rate abnormalities are common. They are also easy to

explain with asymmetric information models, where the public infers the realization of some

variables from the central bank's policy decision. In fact, tting that one moment, the wrong

covariance of exchange rate changes and monetary policy surprises turns out to be too easy,

with many information structures producing the same eect.

   Bringing in more moments from eventstudies, we nd that target and path surprises and

exchange rate responses to these surprises are heterogeneous, and no model with a single

regime can match the data. More importantly, there is no information structure that makes

any of the candidate models t the constellation of moments multiple assets produce, even if

one only focuses on the dates that have the problematic response judged by the target and

exchange rate covariance.

   The literature on central bank information eects oer information-based explanations with

reference to standard models, often without specifying those models, seldom asking whether the

information story being presented is the only one that is consistent with the data even within


   4 The model prices the exchange rate using UIP, which does not nd much favor in the data. But it is worth
noting that UIP does not prevent the model from tting remarkably well to the macro data. Non-UIP-based
exchange rate mechanisms are good candidates for future research, but will not by themselves address the
information-related diculties in generating target and path surprises with opposite signs.


                                                    25
a particular model, and even more seldom asking what the implications for other asset prices

may be. Macroeconomic models are helpful when they are properly specied and confronted

with ample moments in the data. The literature has moved in that direction for the purpose

of analyzing real macroeconomic variables, with the CGG model analyzed here a pioneering

example of that. It is time that we do the same for nancial variables.

   The best tting model to the macro data is an asymmetric information model. But the

model implied asset price responses to monetary policy surprises in the open economy are not

those that are observed in the eventstudies. Estimating a two country open economy model

with information asymmetries that helps analyze exchange rates and yield curves is a major

undertaking.   Having done this, we nd that with a single moment from the eventstudy to

match, the model is under-identied and with multiple moments nding a model that ts all

moments simultaneously is not easy. We do have a way to go in reconciling eventstudy data

for monetary policy with model-based mechanisms of asset pricing based on macroeconomic

dynamics.




                                             26
References
Altavilla, C., Brugnolini, L., Gürkaynak, R. S., Motto, R., and Ragusa, G. (2019). Measuring

  euro area monetary policy.     Journal of Monetary Economics, 108(C):162179.

Andrade, P. and Ferroni, F. (2016). Delphic and odyssean monetary policy shocks: Evidence

  from the euro-area.    Discussion Papers in Economics, University of Surrey.

Bauer, M. D. and Swanson, E. T. (2020). The fed's response to economic news explains the

  "fed information eect. Nber working papers, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.


Campbell, J. R., Evans, C. L., Fisher, J. D., and Justiniano, A. (2012). Macroeconomic eects

  of federal reserve forward guidance.   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2012(1):180.

Cieslak, A. and Schrimpf, A. (2019).      Non-monetary news in central bank communication.

  Journal of International Economics, 118(C):293315.

Clarida, R., Gali, J., and Gertler, M. (1999). The science of monetary policy: A new keynesian

  perspective.   Journal of Economic Literature, 37:16611707.

Clarida, R., Gali, J., and Gertler, M. (2002). A simple framework for international monetary

  policy analysis.   Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(5):879904.

Clarida, R. H. (2009).   Reections on Monetary Policy in the Open Economy, pages 121141.
  University of Chicago Press.


Clarida, R. H. and Waldman, D. (2008).        Is bad news about ination good news for the

  exchange rate? and, if so, can that tell us anything about the conduct of monetary policy?

  pages 371396.


Cook, T. and Hahn, T. (1989). The eect of changes in the federal funds rate target on market

  interest rates in the 1970s.   Journal of Monetary Economics, 24(3):331351.

Ellingsen, T. and Soderstrom, U. (2001). Monetary policy and market interest rates.   American
  Economic Review, 91(5):15941607.

Engel, C. and Frankel, J. A. (1984). Why interest rates react to money announcements: An

  explanation from the foreign exchange market.     Journal of Monetary Economics, 13(1):31 
  39.


Fama, E. F., Fisher, L., Jensen, M. C., and Roll, R. (1969). The adjustment of stock prices

  to new information.    International Economic Review, 10(1):121.

                                               27
Faust, J., Swanson, E., and Wright, J. (2004). Identifying vars based on high frequency futures

  data.   Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(6):11071131.

Gali, J. (2020). Uncovered interest parity, forward guidance, and the exchange rate.      NBER
  Working Paper.

Gali, J. and Monacelli, T. (2005).   Monetary policy and exchange rate volatility in a small

  open economy.    The Review of Economic Studies, 72(3):707734.

Gertler, M. and Karadi, P. (2015).    Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic

  activity.   American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1):4476.

Goldberg, L. S. and Klein, M. W. (2011).     Evolving perceptions of central bank credibility:

  The european central bank experience. In   NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics,
  volume 7, pages 153182.



Gourinchas, P.-O., Rey, H., and Govillot, N. (2018). Exorbitant privilege and exorbitant duty.

  Working paper.



Gürkaynak, R. S., Sack, B., and Swanson, E. T. (2005a). Do actions speak louder than words?

  the response of asset prices to monetary policy actions and statements.   International Journal
  of Central Banking, 1:5593.

Gürkaynak, R. S., Sack, B., and Swanson, E. T. (2005b).       The sensitivity of long-term in-

  terest rates to economic news: Evidence and implications for macroeconomic models.         The
  American Economic Review, 95:425436.

Gürkaynak, R. S. and Wright, J. H. (2013). Identication and inference using event studies.

  The Manchester School, 81:4865.

Jaroci«ski, M. and Karadi, P. (2020). Deconstructing monetary policy surprises - the role of

  information shocks.   American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 12(2):143.

Kerssenscher, M. (2019).    Information eects of euro area monetary policy: New evidence

  from high-frequency futures data. Discussion Papers 07/2019, Deutsche Bundesbank.



Kuttner, K. N. (2001). Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the Fed

  funds futures market.   Journal of Monetary Economics, 47(3):523544.

Lee, S. S. (2019). Information value of the interest rate and the zero lower bound.    Macroeco-
  nomic Dynamics (forthcoming).

                                              28
Lunsford, K. G. (2020). Policy Language and Information Eects in the EarlyDays of Federal

  Reserve Forward Guidance.     American Economic Review (forthcoming).

Miranda-Agrippino, S. and Ricco, G. (2017).      The transmission of monetary policy shocks.

  Bank of England Working Paper, No. 657.

Nakamura, E. and Steinsson, J. (2018).       High frequency identication of monetary non-

  neutrality: The information eect.   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3):12831330.

Pearlman, J., Currie, D., and Levine, P. (1986). Rational expectations models with partial

  information.   Economic Modelling, 3(2):90105.

Peek, J., Rosengren, E. S., and Tootell, G. M. B. (1999). Is bank supervision central to central

  banking?   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2):629653.

Ramey, V. (2016). Macroeconomic shocks and their propagation. 2:71162.



Rogers, J. H., Scotti, C., and Wright, J. H. (2014). Evaluating asset-market eects of uncon-

  ventional monetary policy: A multi-country review.     Economic Policy, 29(80):749799.

Romer, D. H. and Romer, C. D. (2000).        Federal reserve information and the behavior of

  interest rates.   American Economic Review, 90(3):429457.

Schmitt-Grohe, S. and Uribe, M. (2018). Exchange rates and uncovered interest dierentials:

  The role of permanent monetary shocks.     Columbia University Working Paper.

Stavrakeva, V. and Tang, J. (2018).     The dollar during the global recession: Us monetary

  policy and the exorbitant duty. Working Papers 18-10, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.



Svensson, L. E. O. and Woodford, M. (2003). Indicator variables for optimal policy.     Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 50(3):691720.

Svensson, L. E. O. and Woodford, M. (2004).        Indicator variables for optimal policy under

  asymmetric information.    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 28(4):661690.




                                              29
Tables and Figures
                                                  USD/EUR        USD/EUR
                                                              
                          Target Surp. (US)         -0.02
                                                     (0.007)
                          Target Surp. (EA)                          0.01
                                                                    (0.01)
                          R2                            0.1          0.01
                          N                             83            146


Table 1: Event study regressions for the US and the euro area. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
Sample for the US is 1994-2018 and for the euro area 1999-2018.




                                                   30
                Moments                     Data Moments   Model Moments   Parameters          Explanations              Values

        SD of Interest Rate (EA)               0.009           0.003                       Discount Factor (US)          0.999
         SD of Interest Rate (US)              0.018           0.001                      Inv. Elast. of Sub. (US)       3.291
            SD of RGDP (EA)                    0.009           0.009                      Inv. Frisch Elast. (US)        5.000
            SD of RGDP (US)                    0.009           0.011                     Calvo Pricing Fric. (US)        0.698
           SD of Ination (EA)                  0.004           0.004          a             Pers. of TFP (US)            0.999
           SD of Ination (US)                  0.008           0.009          r          Coef. on Lagged Int. (US)       0.841
     Corr of EA and US Interest Rate           0.519           0.136                        Coef. on Inf. (US)           2.500
   Corr of EU Interest Rate and RGDP           0.764           -0.073         y
                                                                              ~             Coef. on OG (US)             0.788
  Corr of EA Interest Rate and US RGDP         0.140           0.096          ¯           Pers. of Inf. Targ. (US)       0.602
  Corr of EA Interest Rate and Ination         0.347           0.355              
                                                                                           Discount Factor (EA)          0.988
 Corr of EA Interest Rate and US Ination       0.173           0.170              
                                                                                         Inv. Elast. of Sub. (EA)        0.150
  Corr of US Interest Rate and EU RGDP         0.439           -0.054                     Inv. Frisch Elast. (EA)        1.272
   Corr of US Interest Rate and RGDP           0.681           0.075                     Calvo Pricing Fric. (EA)        0.479
 Corr of US Interest Rate and EU Ination       -0.198          -0.182         a             Pers. of TFP (EA)            0.999
  Corr of US Interest Rate and Ination         0.223           0.281          r         Coef. on Lagged Int. (EA)        0.136
        Corr of EA and US RGDP                 0.391           0.146                        Coef. on Inf. (EA)           2.266
     Corr of EA RGDP and Ination               0.176           0.190          y
                                                                              ~             Coef. on OG (EA)             1.493
    Corr of EA RGDP and US Ination             0.087           0.112          ¯           Pers. of Inf. Targ. (EA)       0.908
    Corr of US RGDP and EA Ination             -0.104          -0.045                      SD of PC Shock (US)        1.138 × 10-6

     Corr of US RGDP and Ination               0.365           0.396          a           SD of TFP Shock (US)        6.590 × 10-4

       Corr of EA and US Ination               0.612           -0.001         r            SD of Int. Shock (US)      1.854 × 10-3

 First Order Autocorr of EA Interest Rate      0.944           0.693          ¯         SD of Inf. Targ. Shock (US)      0.013
 First Order Autocorr of US Interest Rate      0.952           0.527                       SD of PC Shock (EA)        2.188 × 10-4

    First Order Autocorr of EA RGDP            0.884           0.931          a           SD of TFP Shock (EA)        1.624 × 10-4

    First Order Autocorr of US RGDP            0.825           0.920          r           SD of Int. Shock (EA)       9.679 × 10-3

   First Order Autocorr of EA Ination          0.669           0.541          ¯         SD of Inf. Targ. Shock (EA)   1.585 × 10-3

   First Order Autocorr of US Ination          0.485           0.553                       Relative Country Size          0.5
                                                                               ¯         Long-run Inf. Target (US)         0
                                                                              ¯   
                                                                                        Long-run Inf. Target (EA)          0


Table 2: Data moments and perfect information model moments and parameters. The last three parameters
are xed.




                                                              31
     Observable       r     r,     r, , ¯    r,  , rr
                                                   ¯     r,  ,     ¯
                                                               ¯ , rr   r,  , rr
                                                                              ¯, y
                                                                                 ~   Perfect Info
        Ratio       1.18    0.98     0.88      0.96         1.06           1.03            1

Table 3: Fit of the model to the data (relative to the perfect information model). The variables in the
columns of the rst row (from the second to the last one) apply to both the euro area and the US. For
instance, the second column is an information structure where policy rates in both countries are observed
by the private sectors in both economies.




                                                   32
 Param           Explanation              Perfect             r              r,             r, , ¯           r, , rr
                                                                                                                   ¯         r, , ¯ , rr
                                                                                                                                       ¯     r, , rr,
                                                                                                                                                   ¯ y~

            Discount Factor (US)          0.999             0.980           0.980           0.980            0.999             0.980           0.999
           Inv. Elast. of Sub. (US)       3.291             2.136           3.273           0.747            0.200             3.321           2.496
           Inv. Frisch Elast. (US)        5.000             5.000           5.000           5.000            0.200             5.000           5.000
          Calvo Pricing Fric. (US)        0.698             0.159           0.650           0.858            0.380             0.662           0.686
  a          Pers. of TFP (US)            0.999             0.955           0.999           0.999            0.999             0.999           0.999
  r       Coef. on Lagged Int. (US)       0.841             0.846           0.873           0.996            0.984             0.906           0.938
             Coef. on Inf. (US)           2.500             1.091           2.500           1.554            1.876             2.500           2.400
  y
  ~          Coef. on OG (US)             0.788             1.063           0.015           1.500         8.956 × 10   -3
                                                                                                                               1.492           0.676
  ¯        Pers. of Inf. Targ. (US)       0.602             0.978           0.781           0.869            0.902             0.813           0.817
      
            Discount Factor (EA)          0.988             0.999           0.981           0.988            0.980             0.991           0.999
      
          Inv. Elast. of Sub. (EA)        0.150             1.056           0.150           0.183            0.357             0.153           0.154
           Inv. Frisch Elast. (EA)        1.272             5.000           0.746           2.450            4.989             0.871           1.026
          Calvo Pricing Fric. (EA)        0.479             0.773           0.483           0.565            0.493             0.481           0.536
  a          Pers. of TFP (EA)            0.999             0.998           0.998           0.977            0.975             0.993           0.992
  r      Coef. on Lagged Int. (EA)        0.136             0.813           0.192           0.687            0.941             0.014           0.614
             Coef. on Inf. (EA)           2.266             2.500           2.496           1.000            1.054             2.320           1.530
  y
  ~          Coef. on OG (EA)             1.493             0.091           1.499           0.667            0.992             0.099           1.500
  ¯        Pers. of Inf. Targ. (EA)       0.908             0.794           0.968           0.999            0.963             0.848           0.949
            SD of PC Shock (US)        1.138 × 10-6      2.166 × 10-4    4.854 × 10-5    5.958 × 10-3     1.466 × 10-5      5.031 × 10-9    7.887 × 10-8

  a        SD of TFP Shock (US)        6.590 × 10-4      2.606 × 10-3    9.805 × 10-5    2.766 × 10-4     1.046 × 10-4      4.169 × 10-7    3.030 × 10-4

  r         SD of Int. Shock (US)      1.854 × 10   -3
                                                         9.043 × 10 -4
                                                                         2.194 × 10 -3
                                                                                         5.139 × 10  -5
                                                                                                          4.332 × 10   -5
                                                                                                                            2.784 × 10 -3
                                                                                                                                            1.021 × 10-3

  ¯      SD of Inf. Targ. Shock (US)      0.013          5.223 × 10-3    6.001 × 10-3       0.012         2.642 × 10-3      5.737 × 10-3    5.441 × 10-3

            SD of PC Shock (EA)        2.188 × 10-4      3.204 × 10-3    6.203 × 10-4    1.069 × 10-3     8.430 × 10-5      2.593 × 10-8    8.559 × 10-6

  a        SD of TFP Shock (EA)        1.624 × 10   -4
                                                         6.991 × 10 -4
                                                                         3.729 × 10 -4
                                                                                         1.414 × 10  -3
                                                                                                          1.392 × 10   -3
                                                                                                                            7.670 × 10 -4
                                                                                                                                            1.003 × 10-3

  r        SD of Int. Shock (EA)       9.679 × 10-3      6.500 × 10-4    9.588 × 10-3    1.799 × 10-3     1.996 × 10-5      7.140 × 10-3    3.903 × 10-3

  ¯      SD of Inf. Targ. Shock (EA)   1.585 × 10-3      3.061 × 10-3    9.723 × 10-4    1.246 × 10-3     3.610 × 10-3      2.070 × 10-3    1.825 × 10-3

            Relative Country Size           0.5              0.5             0.5             0.5               0.5              0.5             0.5
   ¯      Long-run Inf. Target (US)         0                 0               0               0                0                 0               0
  ¯
      
         Long-run Inf. Target (EA)          0                 0               0               0                0                 0               0


Table 4: Estimated parameters. The top row indicates observables corresponding to dierent models. The
last three parameters are xed.




                                                                   33
                 Moment                     Data     Perfect     r       r,         r, , ¯        r, , rr
                                                                                                        ¯      r, , ¯ , rr
                                                                                                                         ¯   r, , rr,
                                                                                                                                   ¯ y~

        SD of Interest Rate (EA)            0.009    0.003     0.001    0.003       0.002       7.099 × 10-4     0.003         0.002
         SD of Interest Rate (US)           0.018    0.001     0.001    0.002    3.392 × 10-4   4.923 × 10-4     0.003         0.001
            SD of RGDP (EA)                 0.009    0.009     0.012    0.009       0.008          0.007         0.009         0.011
            SD of RGDP (US)                 0.009    0.011     0.008    0.010       0.013          0.012         0.010         0.010
           SD of Ination (EA)               0.004    0.004     0.004    0.004       0.004          0.003         0.004         0.004
           SD of Ination (US)               0.008    0.009     0.006    0.010       0.007          0.008         0.009         0.009
     Corr of EA and US Interest Rate        0.519    0.136     0.004    0.072       0.048          0.065         0.024         0.020
   Corr of EA Interest Rate and RGDP        0.764    -0.073    -0.046   -0.082      -0.073         0.089         -0.096       -0.058
  Corr of EA Interest Rate and US RGDP      0.140    0.096     0.086    0.088       0.170          0.144         0.085         0.089
  Corr of EA Interest Rate and Ination      0.347    0.355     0.386    0.359       0.417          0.410         0.371         0.376
 Corr of EA Interest Rate and US Ination    0.173    0.170     0.175    0.169       0.120          0.171         0.143         0.190
  Corr of US Interest Rate and EA RGDP      0.439    -0.054    0.217    -0.037      0.343          0.261         -0.020        0.001
   Corr of US Interest Rate and RGDP        0.681    0.075     0.328    0.070       0.331          0.205         0.020         0.074
 Corr of US Interest Rate and EA Ination    -0.198   -0.182    -0.158   -1.161      -0.071         -0.115        -0.071       -0.118
  Corr of US Interest Rate and Ination      0.223    0.281     0.260    0.271       0.324          0.294         0.264         0.277
        Corr of EA and US RGDP              0.391    0.146     -0.166   0.181       0.280          0.394         0.176         0.145
     Corr of EA RGDP and Ination            0.176    0.190     0.254    0.213       0.179          0.142         0.219         0.236
    Corr of EA RGDP and US Ination          0.087    0.112     0.092    0.110       0.085          0.092         0.104         0.112
    Corr of US RGDP and EA Ination          -0.104   -0.045    -0.013   -0.055      -0.106         -0.074        -0.057       -0.056
     Corr of US RGDP and Ination            0.365    0.396     0.202    0.335       0.473          0.556         0.331         0.399
       Corr of EA and US Ination            0.612    -0.001    0.161    0.001       -0.093         -0.237        -0.006       -0.011
 First Order Autocorr of EA Interest Rate   0.944    0.693     0.513    0.734       0.929          0.957         0.586         0.835
 First Order Autocorr of US Interest Rate   0.952    0.527     0.916    0.651       0.967          0.899         0.757         0.712
    First Order Autocorr of EA RGDP         0.884    0.931     0.924    0.919       0.908          0.955         0.910         0.926
    First Order Autocorr of US RGDP         0.825    0.920     0.954    0.931       0.759          0.788         0.930         0.917
   First Order Autocorr of EA Ination       0.669    0.541     0.534    0.591       0.528          0.341         0.575         0.569
   First Order Autocorr of US Ination       0.485    0.553     0.291    0.523       0.265          0.360         0.547         0.540


Table 5: Moments. The top row indicates observables corresponding to dierent models.




                                                                 34
                                                   USD/EUR        USD/EUR
                          Target Surp. (US)         -0.02
                                                     (0.004)
                          Target Surp. (EA)                           0.01
                                                                    (0.008)
                          Path Surp. (US)           -0.05
                                                     (0.005)
                          Path Surp. (EA)                           0.06
                                                                    (0.009)
                              2
                          R                             0.43          0.19
                          N                             83            146


Table 6: Event study regressions with target and path surprises for the US and euro area. Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. Sample for the US is 1994-2018 and for the euro area 1999-2018. Construction of
path surprises are described in text.




                                                   35
                           2
                           1
                 USD/EUR
                           0
                           -1




                                -50   -40   -30   -20    -10     0       10    20   30       40   50
                                                        Target Surprise (US)

                                                  Information Days    Non-Information Days
                                                  Regression Line




Figure 1: Scatter plot of target surprises and associated changes in USD/EUR exchange rate for the US.
The dashed line is the regression line tted to the data presented in the scatter plot. Sample is 1994-2018.




                                                              36
                   3
                   2
                USD/EUR
                   0
                   -11




                          -40   -30   -20     -10       0        10     20      30   40
                                               Target Surprise (EA)

                                        Information Days     Non-Information Days
                                        Regression Line




Figure 2: Scatter plot of target surprises and associated changes in USD/EUR exchange rate for the euro
area. The dashed line is the regression line tted to the data presented in the scatter plot. Sample is
1999-2018.




                                                    37
            20
            10
            0
            -20 -10




                      1994                                                         2007
                                      Target Surprise (US)    USD/EUR
            20
            0
            -20
            -40




                      2008                                                        2018
                                      Target Surprise (US)    USD/EUR




Figure 3: Bar plot for target surprises and associated changes in USD/EUR exchange rate for the US.
Upper panel is for the sample 1994-2007 and lower panel is for the sample 2008-2018.




                                                   38
             20
             0
             -20
             -40




                       1999                                                         2008
                                       Target Surprise (EA)    USD/EUR
             30
             20
             10
             0
             -20 -10




                       2008                                                         2018
                                       Target Surprise (EA)    USD/EUR




Figure 4: Bar plot for target surprises and associated changes in USD/EUR exchange rate for the euro
area. Upper panel is for the sample 1999-2007 and lower panel is for the sample 2008-2018.




                                                    39
Figure 5: IRFs for one standard deviation monetary policy shock in the EA (upper) and the US (lower).




                                                 40
Figure 6: Yield curve responses on impact and IRFs for nominal exchange rate.The shocks are as follows:
Upper: rst row - EA ination; second row - EA productivity; third row - EA interest rate; fourth row -
EA ination target. Lower: rst row - US ination; second row - US productivity; third row - US interest
rate; fourth row - US ination target. The horizontal axis for the rst two columns gives bond maturities in
months. The horizontal axis for the third column is horizons in quarters.




                                                   41
Figure 7: IRFs for one standard deviation monetary policy shock in the EA (upper) and in the US (lower)




                                                  42
Figure 8: IRFs for one standard deviation ination shock in the EA (upper) and in the US (lower).




                                                 43
Figure 9: Yield curve responses on impact and IRFs for nominal exchange rate. Upper: rst row - EA
ination; second row - EA productivity; third row - EA interest rate; fourth row - EA ination target. Lower:
rst row - US ination; second row - US productivity; third row - US interest rate; fourth row - US ination
target. The horizontal axis for the rst two columns gives bond maturities in months. The horizontal axis
for the third column is horizons in quarters.




                                                    44
Figure 10: Positive productivity and monetary policy shocks in the US. First three rows: IRFs for positive
productivity and interest rate shocks. Last row: Yield curve responses on impact and IRF for nominal
exchange rate. The sub-gures for the nominal exchange rate are magnied.




                                                   45
Figure 11: Yield curve responses on impact and IRF for nominal exchange rate. Shock: US ination.
Models: rst row - r and  observable; second row - r,  , and        ¯ observable; third row - rr
                                                                                              ¯ , r, and 
observable. The horizontal axis for the rst two columns is bond maturities in months. The horizontal axis
for the third column is horizons in quarters. To preserve comparability, the models are evaluated at the
parameter values of the best-tting partial information model (the second row), but the implications are the
same if we use the best-tting parameter values for the respective models.




                                                    46
                         2
                         1
               USD/EUR
                         0
                         -1




                              -10        -5               0                5               10
                                                   Target Surprise (US)

                                    Wrong Sign (Target and Path)     Correct Sign (Path)




Figure 12: Scatter plot of information days conditional on the target surprise for the US. Green dots are
the policy dates where the exchange rate movements can be explained by the path surprise. Red dots are
the policy dates where the exchange rate movements cannot be explained either by the target surprise or by
the path surprise. The sample is 1994-2018.




                                                        47
                   1
                   .5 0
                USD/EUR
               -.5 -1
                   -1.5




                          -40   -30     -20     -10       0        10      20       30    40
                                                 Target Surprise (EA)

                                  Wrong Sign (Target and Path)     Correct Sign (Path)




Figure 13: Scatter plot of information days conditional on the target surprise for the euro area. Green dots
are the policy dates where the exchange rate movements can be explained by the path surprise. Red dots
are the policy dates where the exchange rate movements cannot be explained either by the target surprise
or by the path surprise. The sample is 1999-2018.




                                                      48
              30
              20
              10
              0
              -20 -10



                        1994                                                    2007
                                       Path Surprise (US)   USD/EUR
              20
              10
              0
              -20 -10




                        2008                                                    2018
                                       Path Surprise (US)   USD/EUR




Figure 14: Bar plot for path surprises and associated changes in USD/EUR exchange rate for the US.
Upper panel is for the sample 1994-2007 and lower panel is for the sample 2008-2018.




                                                   49
              10
              5
              0
              -5
              -10




                        1999                                                     2008
                                       Path Surprise (EA)    USD/EUR
              30
              20
              10
              0
              -20 -10




                        2008                                                     2018
                                       Path Surprise (EA)    USD/EUR




Figure 15: Bar plot for path surprises and associated changes in USD/EUR exchange rate for the euro
area. Upper panel is for the sample 1999-2007 and lower panel is for the sample 2008-2018.




                                                   50
Figure 16: Response to positive ination shock and negative monetary policy shock in the US based on
the best tting model. Yield curve responses on impact in the US and impulse response graph for nominal
exchange rate.




                                                 51
