                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   LIQUIDITY TRANSFORMATION AND FRAGILITY IN THE US BANKING SECTOR

                                           Qi Chen
                                        Itay Goldstein
                                        Zeqiong Huang
                                       Rahul Vashishtha

                                      Working Paper 27815
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27815


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We benefited from comments by participants at Columbia Burton Conference, Dartmouth
Summer Conference, the 2nd Sun Yat-Sen University and Geneva Finance Research Institute
Finance International Conference, and Yale Accounting Summer Conference. Itay Goldstein has
been retained by a law firm as an expert on a case involving a liquidity crisis and government
intervention in a European bank. This case has not influenced the research in this paper, and the
research in this paper has not influenced the case. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Qi Chen, Itay Goldstein, Zeqiong Huang, and Rahul Vashishtha. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity Transformation and Fragility in the US Banking Sector
Qi Chen, Itay Goldstein, Zeqiong Huang, and Rahul Vashishtha
NBER Working Paper No. 27815
September 2020
JEL No. E02,G01,G21

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper provides, for the first time, large-scale evidence that liquidity transformation by banks
creates fragility, as their uninsured depositors face an incentive to withdraw their money before
others (a so-called panic run). Such fragility manifests itself in stronger sensitivity of deposit
flows to bank performance. A deterioration in the aggregate conditions in the banking system
makes the fragility within each bank stronger. We run multiple tests to show that depositors'
motives are not driven purely by fundamentals, but rather that the element of panic, leading them
to think about what other depositors will do, is important in the data. We analyze the tradeoff
banks face when setting their level of liquidity transformation, and show how they use deposit
insurance to mitigate some of its negative effects.

Qi Chen                                          Zeqiong Huang
Duke University                                  Yale University
qc2@duke.edu                                     165 Whitney Avenue
                                                 New Haven, CT 06511
Itay Goldstein                                   zeqiong.huang@yale.edu
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania                       Rahul Vashishtha
3620 Locust Walk                                 Duke University
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           100 Fuqua Drive
and NBER                                         Durham, NC 27708
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu                          rahul.vashishtha@duke.edu
1. Introduction

       One of the key functions of banks is liquidity transformation. Banks hold illiquid assets, such

as loans and illiquid securities, and finance themselves with highly liquid liabilities, such as demand

deposits and other forms of short-term debt. This liquidity transformation is thought to play a critical

role in the economy, allowing the financing of long-term illiquid investments, while satisfying the

demand for liquid money-like assets by investors. At the same time, such liquidity transformation

can make banks inherently fragile: they do not hold sufficient liquid assets at all times to meet the

immediate withdrawal demands by all depositors. This fragility can lead to runs, whereby depositors

rush to withdraw their money from the bank only because they fear others will do the same and the

bank will run out of resources. Such fears can then become self-fulfilling outcomes, so called panic-

based runs.

       The possibility of panic-based runs has been the foundation behind government policies

enacted to alleviate banking fragility over the years, and shaping the banking industry to this day,

such as deposit insurance or lender of last resort. The classic view goes back to Bagehot (1873) and

has been thoroughly analyzed in recent years by Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Rochet and Vives

(2004), Keister (2016), and Allen, Carletti, Goldstein, and Leonello (2018), among others. Yet,

despite the long-lasting impact of these ideas on government policies, empirical evidence that clearly

links depositors' behavior to panic is hard to find in the literature. The goal of this paper is to provide

such empirical evidence. We do that using a large sample of U.S. commercial banks over the period

1993-2016.

       Our empirical analysis is guided by theories linking the degree of liquidity mismatch on banks'

balance sheet to depositors' withdrawals through the channel of panic-based runs (e.g., Goldstein and

Pauzner, 2005; Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang, 2010; Vives, 2014). In these theories, banks' liquidity

                                                    1
mismatch creates strategic complementarities in depositors' payoffs which increase depositors'

incentive to withdraw when they expect that other depositors will withdraw. Depositors make

decisions based on signals they receive about the bank's fundamental strength. Due to strategic

complementarities, these signals affect depositors' behavior not only because they update about the

fundamentals of the bank, but also because they update about what other depositors know and what

they are going to do. The key prediction that we take to the data is that the sensitivity of depositors'

flows to news about bank performance will be stronger when the bank has a greater liquidity

mismatch on its balance sheet and so depositors face stronger strategic complementarities.

         It is important to stress that such analysis provides a unique test of the panic-based-run

channel.1 If withdrawals were purely based on fundamentals with no element of panic (as in theories

of fundamental-based runs, e.g., Chari and Jagannathan, 1988; Jacklin and Bhattacharya, 1988; Allen

and Gale, 1998), there would be no reason for the sensitivity of deposit flows to bank performance to

increase in the level of liquidity mismatch (we address a key concern below). The panic manifests

itself by increasing the sensitivity of flows to performance, due to the added element of depositors

using the performance to form expectations about what other depositors will do. This type of analysis

has been conducted before for equity mutual funds in Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2010), and a variant

of the model they provide applies to our setting. It has been followed later in the context of money-

market mutual funds in Schmidt, Timmerman, and Wermers (2016), corporate-bond mutual funds in

Goldstein, Jiang, and Ng (2017), and Life-Insurance industry in Foley-Fisher, Narajabad, and Verani




1
  Since the word "panic" may mean different things to different people, we note that its meaning here reflects the way it
has been used in the bank-run literature, which often distinguishes between "panic-based" runs and "fundamentals-based"
runs (see, e.g., Goldstein, 2013). Hence, panic does not reflect anything irrational, but rather it is group behavior leading
to an inferior outcome, which is not fully justified by fundamentals, and is attributed to a coordination failure.

                                                             2
(2019). We are the first to conduct such analysis for banks, which is arguably where fragility has been

most prominent over the years, and where it affected government policies most strongly.

         We start our analysis with a basic diagnostic of the relation between uninsured deposit flows

and bank performance (measured by the return on equity, ROE), and find that they are positively

related. Interestingly, the relation appears to be non-linear, with uninsured deposits responding

strongly to ROE for much of the range of the ROE distribution, but weakly for either very high or

very low realizations of ROE. This S-shaped relation is consistent with the Goldstein and Pauzner

(2005) model of bank runs that combines fundamentals and panics as sources of runs and guides our

analysis. Specifically, when the fundamentals are very high or very low, they are sufficient to

determine the fate of the bank regardless of depositors' behavior. Hence, only in the intermediate

range, where depositors' behavior is critical for determining the fate of the bank, the sensitivity of

flows to performance is amplified through the channel of using bank performance as a signal on what

other depositors will do.

         We then move to our main analysis of the panic-run channel, inspecting the impact of bank

liquidity mismatch on depositors' response to bank performance. We build on the liquidity mismatch

measure (CatFat) from Berger and Bouwman (2009). The CatFat measure is designed to capture the

extent to which banks employ short-term liquid funding sources to invest in illiquid long-term assets.

We provide a detailed description of this measure and its use in our analysis in Section 2.2 Our main

result is to show large differences in depositors' response to bank performance across banks with

different levels of liquidity mismatch. Quantitatively, a one standard deviation increase in liquidity




2
  An alternative recent measure that builds on CatFat is the LMIRisk measure form Bai et al. (2018). This measure differs
from CatFat by incorporating changes that happen over time in the liquidity of assets and liabilities based on changes in
market conditions. As we discuss in detail in the paper, this measure is problematic for our purpose, because the same
forces that change the liquidity conditions in the market can both affect and be affected by depositors' behaviors.

                                                           3
mismatch would increase the sensitivity of uninsured deposit flows to an average bank's ROE by

20%. As mentioned above, these results indicate an element of panic in uninsured depositors' flows:

depositors respond to bank performance not just because of its direct implications but also because

of how it might affect the behavior of other depositors. Interestingly, we see these patterns in small,

medium, and large banks.

       An important dimension of the analysis involves the difference between insured and

uninsured deposit flows. As deposit insurance is known to be one of the key tools used against panic

runs, one would not expect insured depositors to care about the degree of liquidity mismatch on the

bank's balance sheet. Indeed, we find that the results above are unique to uninsured deposit flows,

and do not hold for insured deposit flows. But, our results go beyond that to establish stark differences

between insured and uninsured deposits. Recent evidence suggests that banks attempt to deal with

the fragility of their uninsured depositor base by actively attracting insured depositors in times of

poor performance (Martin, Puri, and Ufier, 2018; Chen, Goldstein, Huang, and Vashishtha, 2020).

Consistent with this, we find that the sensitivity of insured deposit flows to bank performance is in fact

negatively related to the extent of liquidity mismatch. Hence, banks are actively utilizing deposit

insurance to manage volatility in uninsured deposits caused by liquidity mismatch.

       A key concern about our main result is that uninsured depositors respond more strongly to

performance signals when liquidity mismatch is high, not because of the implications for the behavior

of other uninsured depositors, but because high liquidity mismatch is correlated with the

informativeness of the performance signal. In particular, this would be the case if banks with greater

liquidity mismatch invested in assets with greater performance persistence, and so, for them, a given

shock in ROE would lead to a larger revision in perceived value of bank assets. We address this

concern with two different analyses. First, we show that our results do not significantly change after


                                                    4
we control for the persistence of the bank's ROE. Second, we show that the effect of asset illiquidity

on the sensitivity of deposit flow to performance gets stronger as the bank is financed with a higher

fraction of uninsured deposits or when a higher fraction of the liabilities can be more easily and less

costly withdrawn.3 This analysis speaks directly to the strategic complementarity and panic elements

in uninsured depositors' behavior: They care about asset illiquidity when they know that more of the

other liabilities might be withdrawn either because they are uninsured or because they carry lower

incentives to stay in the bank.

           When thinking about bank fragility, the worry, heightened by the events of the 2008-2009

financial crisis, is mostly about the systemic fragility. Linking to the analysis conducted in our paper,

it is thus important to ask whether deposit flows respond mostly to idiosyncratic or systematic shocks

and to what extent strategic complementarities within a bank are magnified by systematic weaknesses.

Decomposing banks' ROE into a systematic component and an idiosyncratic component, we show

that uninsured deposits are more sensitive to the former than the latter. Furthermore, the sensitivity

to ROE at banks with high liquidity mismatch is coming mostly from the systematic ROE. Moreover,

we use the financial crisis of 2008 as a laboratory to observe the performance and response of banks

with different levels of liquidity mismatch during an unexpected crisis episode. We find that during

the crisis, banks with greater liquidity mismatch exhibit a greater erosion in their deposit base despite

offering higher rates, lower growth in credit, and higher failure rates. Together, these results

demonstrate how strategic complementarities within a bank are amplified by poor aggregate

conditions; a feature shown in a recent model by Goldstein, Kopytov, Shen, and Xiang (2020). The

incentive to run before others would be greater when depositors know that the bank will have greater

difficulty in meeting short-term spikes in deposit withdrawals by accessing interbank markets and/or


3
    Here, we follow the Berger and Bouwman (2009) measure of liability side liquidity creation.

                                                            5
by liquidating assets. When the entire industry is experiencing poor performance, assets sell at a

higher fire-sale discount (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992) and banks are less likely to lend to others (Liu,

2016).4

          Finally, we provide some basic tests to explore the implications of the above findings for

different bank outcomes. Conditional on experiencing outflows, banks with greater liquidity

mismatch see greater decline in future performance. This is consistent with the basic mechanism

behind the panic run, as outflows are more damaging when the bank provides more liquidity

transformation. We also find that unconditionally, liquidity mismatch is associated with stronger

future performance after controlling for bank risk. This is consistent with the view that banks overall

create value by performing liquidity transformation. Yet, liquidity mismatch comes with significant

risks. In particular, it has strong predictive power for future bank failure. An interquartile increase in

bank's liquidity mismatch is associated with a 6% increase in failure chance over the next 3 years.

Collectively, these results highlight that liquidity transformation is a double-edged sword in that it

allows banks to earn higher profits at the cost of heightened fragility and failure risk.

          Our paper is related to prior empirical work on bank runs. Many early studies focused on

establishing a strong negative association between bank performance and consequent banking crises

to argue that bank runs seem to be driven by fundamentals and not by panic (see, e.g., Gorton, 1988;

Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache, 1998, 2002; Schumacher, 2000). However, as argued by Goldstein

(2013), this interpretation is problematic, since panic manifests itself empirically as a multiplier effect

by amplifying depositors' response to bad news about bank fundamentals when strategic




4
 The sample used in this version ends in 2016, and so does not cover the more recent Covid-19 crisis. We intend to
extend the sample and include this episode as well. However, emerging accounts of this crisis seem to suggest that the
banking sector did not experience much turmoil so far, as the turmoil centered in the non-bank sectors.

                                                          6
complementarities are strong. In this paper, we use exactly this insight to identify the effect of panic

on bank deposit withdrawals.

       There are several recent papers attempting to evaluate the forces behind bank runs empirically.

Among them, Iyer and Puri (2012), Iyer et al. (2016), Egan et al. (2017), and Artavanis et al. (2019)

are perhaps the most related. Iyer and Puri (2012) and Iyer et al. (2016) explore depositor responses

in a case study of one bank run in India that arguably was triggered by panic. Similarly, Artavanis et

al. (2019) document presence of panic in depositor behavior using micro-data from one large bank in

Greece. Egan et al. (2017) study a sample of the 16 largest US retail banks and find that uninsured

deposit elasticity to bank distress is sufficiently high to make banks fragile. Unlike our study, however,

these studies do not separately link the fragility to liquidity mismatch to isolate the effect of panic.

Overall, to the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to provide large sample empirical evidence

supporting the long-held belief that liquidity mismatch can give rise to panic-like behavior by

depositors in the commercial banking industry.

2. Measurement of liquidity mismatch

       Consistent with the conceptual notion of liquidity mismatch outlined in Brunnermeier, Gorton,

and Krishnamurthy (2013), we are interested in measuring the extent to which a bank can satisfy the

contractually promised cash available to its counterparties at short notice. A fundamentally solvent

bank can be liquidity mismatched if the short-term liquidation value of its assets (due to fire sale

discount) is less than the immediate cash promised to its depositors and other counterparties. Such a

bank would operate without disruption under normal cash withdrawal patterns but would fail in the

presence of a panic based run.

       To illustrate, consider two banks A and B both holding $100 dollars of assets with $20 in

treasury bills and $80 in loans. They differ in their sources of funding: bank A funds its assets with

                                                    7
$100 of demand deposits and bank B with $20 of demand deposits and $80 of equity. Assuming that

the liquidation value of loans is less than $80, bank A in this example is liquidity mismatched as it

would fail if all of its depositors demanded money immediately. In contrast, bank B is not liquidity

mismatched as it can meet any demand for deposit withdrawals (a maximum of $20) by liquidating

treasury securities.

        Our main measure of liquidity mismatch is the CatFat measure from Berger and Bouwman

(2009). To calculate CatFat, Berger and Bouwman first classify each category of bank activity (both

on and off-balance sheet) into liquid, semi-liquid, or illiquid, and then assign a weight to each. They

assign a weight of 1/2 to each dollar of illiquid assets (e.g., commercial loans) and liquid liabilities

(e.g., demand deposits), zero to semi-liquid assets (e.g., residential loans) and liabilities (e.g., time

deposits), and -1/2 to liquid assets (cash) and illiquid liabilities (debt) and equities. Banks's liquidity

creation or CatFat is the weighted sum of all the items. The idea is that a bank creates liquidity (i.e.,

exposes itself to liquidity mismatch) when it transforms liquid liability into illiquid loans, and

destroys liquidity when it uses illiquid funding to purchase liquid assets.

        Figure 1 provides a simple illustration of the Berger and Bouwman liquidity creation score

for three hypothetical banks of the same size (total assets of $300). It shows that bank A invests more

in illiquid loans and less in cash than bank B, so it creates more liquidity on the asset sides ($100 vs.

$50). At the same time, both banks have the same funding structure and thus create the same amount

of liquidity at $50 on the liability side. In total, bank A creates more liquidity (at $150) than bank B

(at $100) and therefore is more liquidity mismatched, which is reflected by its higher CatFat per unit

of total asset (0.5 vs. 0.33). Similarly, between bank B and C, while bank C holds the same assets as

bank A and therefore creates more liquidity on the asset side than bank B, it relies on more stable,




                                                    8
illiquid equity funding than bank B such that its CatFat score is lower than that of bank B (0.17 vs.

0.33), indicating that it is less liquidity mismatched than bank B.

           We obtain the data on CatFat at bank-quarter level from Christa Bouwman's website, and use

CatFat per unit of total gross asset as our main measure of liquidity mismatch.5 Table 1, Panel A

presents the summary statistics. The mean of CatFat is 0.33, indicating that an average bank creates

$0.33 of liquidity with $1 of gross assets. CatFat exhibits significant variation with a standard

deviation at 0.17. Figure 2, Panel A plots changes in CatFat during our full sample which spans 1994

to 2016. CatFat on average increased from 1994, peaked around the financial crisis period, and

followed by a decline. This pattern holds for different percentiles of CatFat, suggesting that a

significant portion of the sample variations in CatFat is driven by cross-bank differences. In fact, in

untabulated analysis, we find that bank fixed effects explain 78% of the variations in CatFat whereas

quarter fixed effects explain only about 6.7%. Panel B plots the average CatFat for the subsamples

of banks by total asset size. Consistent with Berger and Bouwman (2009), large banks (with larger

than 3 billion assets in 2000 dollar terms) create more liquidity per dollar of asset than medium banks

(with assets between 0.5 and 3 billion) and small banks throughout most of the sample period.

           We also considered an alternative measure of liquidity mismatch (LMI) developed in Bai et

al. (2018). Conceptually, like CatFat, LMI also measures the extent to which banks can satisfy the

contractually promised availability of cash at short notice to its counterparties using its assets. The

key difference between the two measures is that, unlike CatFat, LMI takes into account over time

changes in the liquidity of the balance sheet items based on changes in the market conditions. While

this makes LMI more accurate in identifying periods of more vs less liquidity stress in the banking

system, it makes LMI conceptually problematic for detecting depositor panic using our regressions.


5
    https://sites.google.com/a/tamu.edu/bouwman/data.

                                                        9
This is because deterioration in the liquidity of the markets for banks' assets itself can often be a

result of panic among investors including depositors. Specifically, when panic ensues, there is less

capital available to fund asset purchases, resulting in larger fire sale-discounts or increased hair-cuts

on collateral assets, which would manifest in deteriorations in LMI. This suggests that panic-based

deposit outflows and deteriorations in LMI may be affected by the same factors, 6 and the former may

even precede the latter rather than the other way round. If so, LMI may not significantly predict future

deposit flows, even if panic is an important aspect of depositor behavior. Overall, it is not clear if we

can use LMI to assess whether it results in depositor panic when it itself might be affected by panic.

The CatFat measure on the other hand poses no such interpretational difficulties as it does not take

market changes in liquidity into account. While we also report results using the LMI measure in

additional analyses, these results should be interpreted with caution.

3. Empirical Specification and sample

3.1 Conceptual underpinnings of the specifications

        Our specifications are guided by a simple model of depositor behavior used in prior studies

(Egan et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020). Banks attract greater deposit flows when they offer greater

utility to depositors (compared to competing banks) and when there is greater aggregate demand for

holding deposits. A depositor's utility from a bank depends on her perception of bank's default risk,

the deposit rate offered, and service quality. Depositors update their views about default risk as they

receive information about bank performance. Thus, deposit growth at a bank can be summarized as

function of the following four factors:




6
 Consistent with this conjecture, Figure A2 in the Appendix plots the average deposit growth and LMIRisk around the
2007-2008 Financial Crisis period and shows that uninsured deposits started to decline around the same time when
LMIRisk started to deteriorate.

                                                         10
                       , ,  ,                                                                         1

        Under the above framework, strategic complementarities affect deposit flows by affecting the

way depositors update their beliefs about default risk from bank performance. Theory works

(Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005; Vives, 2014) show that, in the presence of strategic complementarities,

information about bank fundamentals updates a depositor's view not only about banks' asset-payoffs

(i.e., fundamental news), but also about the actions of other depositors. This in turn results in a larger

sensitivity of deposit flows to the fundamental information than one would expect in the absence of

strategic complementarities. This is the central prediction we take to the data by examining how the

sensitivity of uninsured deposit growth to bank performance is affected by the extent of strategic

complementarities among a bank's depositors as measured by CATFAT.

        The key measure of performance we use is accounting earnings scaled by lagged equity (ROE).

Accounting earnings are the key summary performance measure widely used by investors as well as

regulators to assess the health of financial institutions. In robustness tests reported later, we find that

our inferences are robust to the use of several other measures of performance. Following Chen et al

(2020), we measure deposit flows over the two quarters following the end of quarter t-1 for which

bank performance is measured. This is because banks typically file call reports with a delay of 30

days after the calendar quarter ending (Badertscher et al., 2018) and because the literature on post-

earnings announcement drift suggests that investors respond to quarterly accounting reports with a

delay of up to a quarter following the announcement (Bernard and Thomas, 1989).

        A potential concern one may have is that uninsured depositors are implicitly insured by the

government, and therefore they may not be responsive to bank performance. Benston and Kaufman

(1997), however, note that FDICA effectively ended the FDIC's policy of protecting uninsured

depositors and they report evidence of increased incidence of FDIC leaving uninsured depositors

                                                    11
unprotected in bank failures after 1991. Furthermore, even if uninsured depositors eventually recover

their money in case of a bank failure, they are likely to incur significant loss of liquidity as it may

take some time before they get their money back. For example, the FDIC on its website notes:

"Payments of uninsured funds only, called dividends, depend on the net recovered proceeds from the

liquidation of the bank's assets and the payment of bank liabilities according to federal statute. While

fully insured deposits are paid promptly after the failure of the bank, the disbursements of uninsured

funds may take place over several years based on the timing in the liquidation of the failed bank

assets."7

3.2. Control variables

         Our specification includes a variety of controls to account for the effect of the three factors

other than bank performance (rate, service quality, and aggregate deposit demand) that can affect

deposit growth. Because Call reports do not separately report the interest expenses on insured and

uninsured deposits, we follow Acharya and Mora (2015) and use the core deposit rate to proxy the

rates offered on insured deposits and the rate on large time deposit to proxy the rates on uninsured

deposits. We believe this is a reasonable approximation because core (large time) deposits are most

likely to be insured (uninsured). We measure these rates as the quarterly interest expense on the

deposits divided by the average quarterly deposits over the same period.

         We use bank fixed effects in most analyses to eliminate any time-invariant differences across

banks in service quality, and include several time-varying characteristics (e.g., bank size) to take into

account the time-varying component of service quality. Following prior work (e.g., Acharya and



7
  See https://www.fdic.gov/consumers/banking/facts/priority.html. To mitigate loss of liquidity to uninsured depositors,
FDIC sometimes provides advance payments based on estimates of recovered amounts. Kaufman (2004), however
finds that over the period 1992 to 2002, FDIC offered such advance payments only in 36% of the bank failure
resolutions.

                                                          12
Mora, 2015; Chen et al., 2020), we control for the following bank characteristics: (i) the logarithm of

asset size (Ln(Assets), (ii) real estate loan share calculated as the amount of loans secured by real

estate divided by total loans (RealEstate_Loans), (iii) capital ratio defined as book value of capital

scaled by total assets (Capital Ratio), (iii) wholesale funding scaled by total assets (Wholesale

Funding), and (v) the standard deviation of ROE over the preceding 12 quarters.

        Our final set of controls relate to aggregate demand for deposits, which can, for example, shift

if alternative asset classes offer better returns. Dreschler et al. (2017) and Lin (2020) find that deposits

flow out of the banking system when treasury securities and stock markets offer better returns. We

include contemporaneous and lagged fed funds rates and the value-weighted market returns to control

for these opportunity costs of holding bank deposits.

        While including time dummies can fully soak the effect of such aggregate demand shifts, it is

not our preferred specification because it precludes a study of the depositor response to changes in

bank performance that result from common macroeconomic shocks. This is problematic not only

because many significant performance swings in the cyclical banking industry are systematic, but

also because we expect the incentive to run before other depositors to be greater when the entire

industry is experiencing a performance decline than when the performance decline is idiosyncratic

(Liu, 2016; Goldstein et al., 2020). In Section 4.4, we use this differential prediction for response to

systematic versus idiosyncratic performance to provide an additional test of the presence of strategic

complementarities and find that depositors are nearly 8 times more responsive to systematic

performance than to idiosyncratic performance shocks. For completeness, we also present our main

results after including time dummies where the identification comes primarily from idiosyncratic

performance shifts. We find our inferences hold but, as expected, with smaller economic magnitudes.




                                                    13
        Following prior work (Egan et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020), we also contrast the results for

uninsured and insured depositors for two purposes. The first is to allay any residual concerns about

imperfect controls. The idea is that while insured depositors care less about default risk and bank

performance, they still are affected by service quality and any aggregate trends that affect the demand

for holding deposits (e.g., attractiveness of competing asset classes that might satisfy their

liquidity/investment needs). If our specifications are simply reflecting the effect of these factors

instead of panic from concerns about bank default, we should find similar results for uninsured and

insured deposits. However, as we show later, we find the opposite to be the case.

        Furthermore, from a policy standpoint, the analysis on insured deposits can also provide

evidence on the extent to which banks use deposit insurance to manage the fragility in their uninsured

deposit base due to liquidity mismatch. Deposit insurance is one of the key tools to guard against

panic runs. Recent evidence indeed suggests that banks actively attract insured deposits in times of

poor performance to compensate for their loss of uninsured deposits. Thus, evidence on how banks'

liquidity mismatch affects the sensitivity of insured deposit flows to bank performance can shed light

on the effectiveness of deposit insurance in helping banks manage panic-driven runs from uninsured

deposits.

3.3. Data and sample

         Our sample is constructed at commercial bank-quarter level. We obtain most of our bank-

level variables from U.S. Call Reports as disseminated by the Wharton Research Data Services

(WRDS). 8 Call reports contain quarterly data on all commercial banks' income statements and

balance sheets. The Appendix provides all variable definitions and details how specific call report



8
 Since the coverage of Call reports at WRDS is incomplete after 2014, we supplement the post-2014 data using S&P's
SNL financial database.

                                                        14
items are used to measure these variables. To avoid the impact of mergers and acquisitions, we

exclude bank-quarter observations with quarterly asset growth greater than 10%. We also exclude

bank quarters with total assets smaller than 100 million and winsorize all continuous variables at 1%

and 99%. These sample-selection and cleaning procedures are commonly used in prior work (e.g.,

Gatev and Strahan, 2006; Acharya and Mora, 2015). Our final sample spans January 1994 to

December 2016 (the last quarter where the CatFat variable is available from Christa Bouwman's

website) and contains a maximum of 287,018 bank-quarter observations representing 8,153 unique

commercial banks.

        Descriptive statistics in Table 1, Panel A show that the average (median) annualized ROE is

10.36% (11.05%) with a standard deviation of 10.37%. The average annualized growth in uninsured

(insured) deposits is 2.11% (2.78%) of assets. Table 1, Panel B shows that the correlation between

uninsured deposit flows and lagged ROE is much higher (at 0.17) than that between insured deposit

flows and ROE (at 0.05), suggesting that uninsured deposit flows are more sensitive to bank

performance. Furthermore, uninsured and insured deposit growth exhibit a strong negative correlation

of -0.47, consistent with banks substituting for loss of uninsured deposits by insured deposits.

4. Liquidity mismatch and deposit flow-performance sensitivity

4.1 Semi-parametric analyses

        We begin by estimating semi-parametric regressions of deposit flows on bank-performance,

which allow for a flexible relation between deposit flows and performance. This approach allows us

to explore any non-linearities in the relation that are predicted by the theory (Goldstein and Pauzner,

2005) in the presence of strategic complementarities. The specification takes the following general

form:

                                                                           2


                                                  15
where  represents deposit flows,  ,                           is the bank's Return on Equity that depositors

observe at the end of quarter t-1, and                      represents the set of time-varying control variables

explained earlier. Following prior studies (e.g., Chevalier and Ellison, 1997; Chen et al., 2010;

Goldstein et al., 2017) that estimate such flow-performance relations semi-parametrically in the

context of equity and bond mutual funds, we use the method from Robinson (1988) for estimation.

         Figure 3, Panel A presents the semi-parametric plots of deposit flows as a function of ROE

for the full sample. As expected, it shows that insured deposit flows are significantly less sensitive to

ROE than uninsured deposit flows. More interestingly, uninsured deposit flows exhibit an S-shaped

relation with ROE, wherein they respond strongly for much of the range of ROE distribution, but

much less so for very high or low realizations of ROE. The S-shaped relation is consistent with the

three regions of fundamentals identified in Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) where depositors are

expected to behave differently. When fundamentals are extremely bad, bank assets cannot generate

enough cash to repay all depositors even in the long run, making it rational for all depositors to run,

regardless of other depositors' behavior, resulting in a fundamental run characterized by a flat flow-

performance relation.9 When fundamentals are really good, banks' assets can generate enough cash

to pay all depositors even in short-term, minimizing running incentives by depositors, again resulting

in a flat flow-performance relation. Thus, fundamentals fully determine the behavior of depositors

for very high or very low realizations of performance signals. It is only when the fundamentals are in

the intermediate range, the potential for panic based runs kicks in. The fundamentals in this region



9
  Although in the model all depositors demand money in this region, we do not expect this to result in a deposit growth
of -100% in data. Banks typically suspend convertibility of deposits when they face significant withdrawal pressure or
they may be placed into receivership by the regulators during which access to uninsured deposits is restricted until a
resolution is reached. Moreover, as modelled in Chen et al. (2010), some depositors may not run simply because they
are not paying attention. Consistent with attention and awareness playing a role, in their case study of a bank run in
India, Iyer and Puri (2012) and Iyer, Puri, and Ryan (2016) find that depositors are more likely to run when they are
part of a social network. In the plot in this region, the uninsured deposit growth is around -3%, which falls within the
bottom quartile of the uninsured deposit growth in our sample.

                                                           16
are strong enough to repay all depositors if they behave patiently, but not if they demand funds

immediately and the bank needs to liquidate assets at a discount. Thus, in this region depositors use

performance signals to infer what other depositors will do. A poorer signal makes a depositor believe

that a larger portion of other depositors will run. This results in greater deposit outflows as the

performance signal worsens, i.e., a positive flow-performance sensitivity.

       To more directly examine whether the flow-performance sensitivity in the intermediate region

reflects panic, we turn to our main prediction that the flow-performance sensitivity should increase

with the extent of strategic complementarities. We do so in Panel B of Figure 3 by providing separate

plots for banks with above and below sample median CatFat. While the flow-performance relation

is flat when ROE is very high or very low for both subsamples of banks, the relation is significantly

steeper in the intermediate range for the subsample of banks with above median CatFat. Thus, for

the same decline in performance in this range, banks with more liquidity mismatch experience

stronger outflows in uninsured deposits than banks with less liquidity mismatch. Overall, the evidence

of an S-shaped relation, which becomes steeper in the intermediate range of ROE, for banks that

engage in more liquidity transformation, maps well into the theoretical predictions about depositor

behavior in the presence of strategic complementarities.

4.2 Linear Regression Analyses

       To formally test the effects of liquidity mismatch on flow-performance sensitivity, we follow

prior literature and estimate various versions of the following regression in the subsequent analyses:

                              ,                          ,                                , (3)


where  represents fixed effect for bank i and other variables are as defined before. We estimate this

equation using ordinary least-squares (OLS) and obtain standard errors after clustering at the bank-



                                                 17
level. We use the demeaned version of CatFat (i.e., CatFat minus sample mean), so that the

coefficient  captures the flow-performance sensitivity for a bank with average CatFat.10

        Table 2, Panel A presents the estimates. Since a significant portion of the variation in CatFat

is cross-sectional, we first present estimates without including bank fixed effects in Columns (1) ­

(3). Estimates in column (1) for the model of uninsured deposit flows show that coefficients for both

ROE (coef=0.101) and for its interactive term with CatFat (coef = 0.120) are positive and statistically

significant at less than 1% level. Consistent with our non-parametric analyses, these results indicate

that the flow-performance sensitivity of uninsured deposits increases with a bank's liquidity

mismatch. The magnitudes imply that one standard deviation increase in liquidity mismatch (0.17)

from the sample average is associated with a 20% (=0.17*0.120/0.101) increase in flow-performance

sensitivity of uninsured deposits.

        Column (2) models insured deposit flows. As expected and consistent with the non-parametric

analyses, we find that on average the flow-performance sensitivity of insured deposits (coef on ROE

= 0.024; p-value<0.01) is less than a quarter of the sensitivity of uninsured deposits. More

interestingly, the coefficient on ROE×CatFat is negative and significant (coef = -0.218; p-

value<0.01), which suggests that high CatFat banks manage the additional loss of their uninsured

depositors in times of poor performance by attracting insured depositors. That poorly performing

banks make-up for their loss of uninsured deposits by attracting insured deposits has also been

documented in prior work (e.g., Martin et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020). Estimates in column (3) for

total deposit (both uninsured and insured) flows suggest that the substitution is quite successful as the

coefficient on the interactive term between ROE and CatFat is no longer positive and in fact turns




10
  Throughout the paper, we use demeaned value of a variable when it is interacted with ROE so that  continues to
represent the sensitivity for the average bank.

                                                        18
negative; our next set of estimates, however, show that the significant, negative coefficient on

interaction term is sensitive to inclusion of bank fixed effects and turns insignificant in their presence.

Overall, the above results not only shed light on how liquidity mismatch makes uninsured depositors

fragile, but also highlight the efficacy of deposit insurance as a tool in mitigating the effect of panic.

       Columns (4)-(6) present the estimates after including bank fixed effects. We continue to find

our inferences to be robust both in terms of statistical significance and economic magnitudes.

Estimates imply that a one standard deviation increase in CatFat is associated with a 38% increase

in the flow-performance sensitivity of uninsured deposits. We also continue to find a negative

coefficient on ROE×CatFat when we model insured deposit flows. Finally, we find an insignificant

coefficient estimate on ROE×CatFat when we model total deposit flows, suggesting that high CatFat

banks are largely able to offset the additional sensitivity of their uninsured depositors by attracting

insured depositors. Given the robustness of our results to inclusion of bank fixed effects, in the rest

of the paper we only present specifications that include bank fixed effects.

       Next, for completeness, we present the robustness of our results to use of time dummies

instead of macroeconomic-controls (fed-fund rate and stock returns) to absorb the effect of any

secular trends in deposit growth in columns (7) ­ (9). As discussed in detail in Section 3.2, this is not

our preferred specification because it does not allow us to study the depositor response to systematic

industry-wide declines in performance, which is when we expect the incentive for panic based

running to be greater. Later in Section 4.4, we explore this differential prediction for response to

systematic and idiosyncratic performance to provide an additional test of the presence of strategic

complementarities. It can be seen that all of our inferences continue to hold but with smaller economic

magnitudes. As an example, the flow-performance sensitivity of uninsured deposits at a bank with

average CatFat in these specifications is nearly 40% lower than that documented in column (1). The


                                                    19
smaller magnitude is as expected as including time dummies restricts the identification to come

primarily from idiosyncratic performance shifts.

         Finally, Panel B of Table 2 presents the results separately for subsamples of small, medium,

and large banks, as defined earlier. First, the results show that uninsured deposit flows are

significantly sensitive to bank performance across all three subsamples of banks, with the largest

magnitude for large banks (coefficient on ROE=0.138 compared to those of 0.113 and 0.081 for

medium and small banks). This result is particularly interesting because one might have expected the

"too-big-to-fail" effect to have muted the sensitivity for large banks; this finding likely reflects the

greater liquidity mismatch of large banks ­ the mean CatFat for large banks is 0.43 compared to 0.39

and 0.31 for medium and small banks. Furthermore, we continue to find that CatFat amplifies the

uninsured deposit sensitivity to ROE with economically large magnitudes across the three subsamples,

although the amplification is not statistically significant for large banks. Given the large economic

magnitude, however, (one standard deviation increase in CatFat amplifies the average sensitivity for

large banks by 11%), the lack of statistical significance is likely an artifact of low sample size for

large banks: the sample of small (medium) banks is nearly 20 (3.7) times the size as that for large

banks. Finally, we also find evidence of substitution between uninsured and insured deposits across

the three subsamples with a negative and significant coefficient on CatFat×ROE for insured deposit

flows.

4.3 Could the results reflect differences in fundamental information content of ROE?

         A potential concern is that a unit of ROE for high CatFat banks may contain greater news

about intrinsic value of banks' assets. If this is the case, a one dollar change in ROE at a high liquidity

mismatch bank would result in a larger revision in depositors' perceived value of bank assets, and

consequently larger deposit flows. Thus, our results may be reflecting the response to the larger

                                                    20
magnitude of fundamental news in earnings of high CatFat banks instead of the effect of panic. Such

differences in informational properties of ROE can arise because banks with different CATFAT invest

in different types of assets, which may generate a sequence of profits with different statistical

properties. Below, we describe the findings from two different analyses that address this concern.

4.3.1 Controlling for differences in informational properties

        We first use the historical realizations of ROE to measure these potential differences in

statistical properties across banks and then control for these differences. A unit increase in ROE can

result in a larger upward revision of beliefs about asset values if it is more persistent (i.e., more likely

to repeat in future) and/or if it measures changes in asset values with greater precision. The latter

follows from the Bayesian updating rule based on which depositors put more weight on more precise

signals to update their priors about asset values.

        We measure earnings persistence (Persistence) for each bank-quarter as the coefficient 

from the following AR(1) regression estimated over the previous 12 quarters:

                                                                               4


Our measure of earnings precision (Informativeness) is based on Chen et al. (2020) which captures

the ability of earnings and its components to predict future write-offs, as assessed by the R-squared

of the prediction regressions estimated over the previous 12 quarters. 11 We refer readers to the

Appendix of this paper and to Chen et al. (2020) for greater details on methodology. Chen et al.

(2020) find that uninsured deposit flows are indeed more responsive to earnings of bank with greater

Informativeness.



11
  In untabulated analyses, we explore measures of persistence from up to fourth order auto-regressive models and find
our inferences to be unchanged.

                                                         21
       Table 3 presents the results after including controls for the above informational properties and

their interactions with ROE. The effect of CatFat in these regressions is identified by comparing

banks that are observationally similar in terms of informational properties of ROE. Because the

additional data requirements for this analysis reduces the sample size to 231,728, we first reproduce

the estimates for the flow-performance sensitivity of uninsured deposits in column (1) for comparison

purposes: Coefficients on ROE and ROE×CatFat are 0.081 and 0.203, compared to coefficients of

0.094 and 0.211 for the same specification in Table 2. Estimates in columns (2) ­ (3) show that, as

expected, uninsured deposits exhibit greater sensitivity to performance for banks with greater

persistence and informativeness. More importantly, our inference about the effect of CatFat remains

robust as the coefficient on CatFat×ROE exhibits little change in statistical significance and

magnitude.


       One may also wonder if high CatFat banks are more risky and if somehow the greater flow-

performance sensitivity to ROE reflects the greater volatility of ROE at such banks. To the extent

depositors put a greater discount on a volatile sequence of profits, we would expect a unit change in

ROE to result in smaller change in perceived value of future asset payoffs (and consequently smaller

flows) at banks with greater volatility. This suggests that, if anything, a positive correlation between

CatFat and riskiness should only bias us against finding our results. Standard deviation of ROE

(Std(ROE)) ­ measured over a rolling 12-quarter window ­ exhibits a modest but positive correlation

of 0.07 in our sample, which mitigates concerns about the confounding effect of ROE volatility.

Nevertheless, in column (4) we also include Std(ROE) and its interaction with ROE. First, as

conjectured, we indeed find that uninsured deposit flows are less sensitive to performance in banks

with greater volatility of ROE. More relevant to us, the addition of this control results in virtually no




                                                   22
change in coefficient estimate on CatFat×ROE (coef.=0.198 in column (4) compared to 0.203 in

column (1)).


4.3.2 Exploiting variation in strategic complementarities on the liability side

       One may still be concerned that high CatFat banks may invest in systematically different kind

of assets (more illiquid and longer maturity assets) that generates a sequence of profits and cash flows

with different informational properties not fully controlled for by our measures of earnings

persistence, informativeness, and volatility. To address this concern, we next exploit variation in

strategic complementarities that is unlikely to be associated with differences in informational

properties of earnings. The basic idea is to compare depositor behavior at two banks that are similar

on the asset side (from a liquidity creation perspective), but still provide different running incentives

due to differences on the liability side. That is, we compare the incentives to withdraw by uninsured

depositors in Bank A and Bank C in Figure 1 (recall both have identical assets). This comparison can

provide evidence that should not be affected by differences in earnings properties. The rich variation

in the source and extent of liquidity creation in our sample allows us to make such comparisons.

       We exploit two sources of variation in strategic complementarities that result purely from

differences in the structure of banks' liability side. The first is the composition of insured vs.

uninsured deposits, as measured by the percentage of uninsured deposits (PctUninsured). All else

equal, an uninsured depositor would have less incentive to withdraw when she knows that a large

fraction of other depositors are insured and therefore have little or no incentive to run. The second

variable measures differences across banks in the ease and cost with which customers can obtain

funds from their bank. For example, while consumers holding transaction and savings deposits can

withdraw money anytime without penalty, those holding time deposits need to pay a penalty for early

withdrawal, and those holding equity cannot demand funds from the bank at all. Holding the asset

                                                   23
side constant, a depositor has less incentive to run earlier for strategic reasons when she knows that

a larger fraction of the remaining customers cannot withdraw funds easily from the bank. We use the

measure of liquidity creation on the liability side (LiqCreation_Liab) from Berger and Bouwman

(2009) to capture this aspect of strategic complementarities.12 Recall that liquidity creation on asset

and liability side together determine CatFat, which is our main measure of liquidity mismatch.

         We estimate deposit flow regressions using a specification that allows all coefficient estimates

to vary across the three subsamples of observations corresponding to the top, middle, and bottom

terciles of PctUninsured or LiqCreation_Liab. 13 We replace CatFat by the measure of liquidity

creation on the asset side (LiqCreation_Asset) in these regressions. A comparison of depositor

behavior across the three-subsamples allows us to explore how, for a given asset liquidity profile, the

depositor response depends on differences in the liability side.

         Columns (1) ­ (3) of Table 4, Panel A present the estimates for the three terciles of

PctUninsured. We first compare the uninsured deposit sensitivity across the three terciles of

PctUninsured for banks with average level of liquidity creation on the asset side. This is captured by

coefficient on ROE because, as before, we use the demeaned version of LiqCreation_Asset. It can be

seen that the sensitivity of uninsured deposits increases monotonically from the bottom to the top

tercile of PctUninsured, with the sensitivity in the top-tercile being nearly 3 times that of the

sensitivity for the bottom tercile. Put another way, compare the average uninsured depositor at three

banks that all have the same (sample average) level of asset illiquidity (as measured by

LiqCreation_Asset) and experience the same unit of decline in ROE. The coefficient estimates


12
   In the example discussed in Section 2.1 for the Berger and Bouwman measure, this is equivalent to comparing the
flow-to-performance sensitivity between bank A and bank C. Both banks hold the same assets, but it is harder for
investors at bank C to take their money out.
13
   We form the portfolios based on the average values of PctUninsured or LiqCreation_Liab over the preceding three
years instead of the preceding quarter so that the uninsured deposit flows in this quarter is not simply reflecting any
recent trend in the sorting variable.

                                                           24
indicate that the depositor at the top tercile bank (with highest proportion of uninsured deposit funding)

would withdraw almost 3 times more than the depositor at the bottom tercile bank.

       We also expect the differences in the deposit sensitivity across terciles to get magnified as we

compare banks with increasingly illiquid assets. Intuitively, when the assets are perfectly liquid, there

is no incentive for a depositor to run before other depositors regardless of the composition of the

liability side: because assets can be liquidated at their intrinsic value at any time, a solvent bank can

pay all claim holders regardless of when they demand money. It is when assets need to be liquidated

at a discount, the potential for panic based running kicks in with the incentives for running higher

when liability side has higher PctUninsured. Consistent with this expectation, we find that the

coefficient on ROE×LiqCreation_Asset also increases monotonically across the PctUninsured

terciles, with the magnitude at the top tercile being nearly 3 times that at the bottom tercile.

       As seen in columns (4) ­ (6), we obtain similar inferences when we use LiqCreation_Liab as

the measure of strategic complementarities on the liability side, although with relatively smaller

economic magnitudes. The coefficient on ROE (ROE×LiqCreation_Asset) for the top tercile is higher

than the coefficient for the bottom tercile, and significantly so for the coefficient for ROE. However,

in both cases, the magnitudes of the difference are not as large as those for portfolios sorted by

PctUninsured. The large magnitude differences between the results from PctUninsured and those

from LiqCreation_Liab are to be expected: Because deposit insurance completely immunizes an

insured depositor against losses, it should be much more effective in dampening the incentives to run

than any costs imposed by banks on deposit withdrawals. Thus, PctUninsured provides a more

powerful way to detect differences in strategic complementarities across banks than

LiqCreation_Liab.




                                                   25
        A concern is that the above effects could still reflect differences in asset side liquidity (and

thus differences in earnings properties) across the different terciles of PctUninsured and

LiqCreation_Liab. This could occur if banks systematically adjust asset side liquidity based on their

liability side liquidity or vice-versa. For example, a bank with significant liquid claims on the liability

side might create less liquidity on the asset side to manage liquidity mismatch risk. In our sample, the

asset side liquidity creation (LiqCreation_Asset) has a correlation of 0.16 with PctUninsured and -

0.16 with LiqCreation_Liab.

        To mitigate this concern, we conduct this analysis on a matched sample in which we explicitly

eliminate any observable differences in asset side liquidity creation. For this analysis, we include the

top and the bottom terciles of PctUninsured and LiqCreation_Liab to focus on subsamples with the

largest differences in the liability side. We then propensity-score match the top and the bottom terciles

on LiqCreation_Asset. We implement this using nearest neighbor matching without replacement

using a caliper of 0.005 and require common support for the propensity scores across the two groups.

The matching is quite successful: on the matched sample, mean values of LiqCreation_Asset for the

top and bottom terciles of PctUninsured (LiqCreation_Liab) are 0.071 and 0.070 (0.071 and 0.075),

respectively, and the difference is not statistically significant.

        Table 4, Panel B, presents the results for the matched sample from estimating similar

specifications as in Panel B. As before, we find that uninsured depositors of a bank with average asset

side liquidity are significantly more sensitive (at about 2.75 times) at the top tercile of PctUninsured

than at the bottom tercile. The differences in sensitivity are further magnified as one compares banks

with more illiquid assets, as the coefficient for ROE×LiqCreation_Asset is about 1.6 times higher in

the top tercile than in the bottom tercile. Similar results are shown for subsamples formed based on




                                                    26
LiqCreation_Liab, where the coefficients for ROE and ROE*LiqCreation_Asset are significantly

larger in the top tercile than in the bottom tercile.

        Overall, the above analyses illustrate how specific differences in the liability side structure

contribute to depositor fragility; more importantly, these analyses mitigate concerns that our main

results simply reflect differences in earnings properties of assets with different liquidity profile.

4.4 Systematic and idiosyncratic earnings

        In this section we examine whether strategic complementarities in depositors' behavior are

amplified by poor aggregate conditions, as modelled in Goldstein, Kopytov, Shen, and Xiang (2020).

The motivation is to assess to what extent strategic complementarities within a bank can amplify the

effect of any systemic weaknesses and, consequently, contribute to a systemic crisis. Holding the

magnitude of the performance shock constant, we expect the depositors' incentive to run before others

to be stronger in response to a systematic performance shock (i.e., when the entire industry is

suffering) than when the shock is idiosyncratic. When the entire industry is experiencing poor

performance, assets sell at a higher fire-sale discount (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992) and banks are less

likely to lend to other banks (Liu, 2016). Therefore, depositors know that in periods of systematic

distress the bank will have greater difficulty in meeting short-term spikes in deposit withdrawals by

accessing interbank markets and/or by liquidating assets.

        To test this prediction, for each bank, we decompose its ROEi,t for every period t into a

systematic (ROE_Syst) and an idiosyncratic (ROE_Idioi,t) component. ROE_Syst is calculated as the

average ROE for the entire banking sector for quarter t and ROE_Idioi,t is the difference between

ROEi,t and ROE_Syst. We then estimate our deposit flow regressions after including the two

components of ROE separately.



                                                    27
       Table 5 presents the results. It can be seen that the coefficients on both ROE_Sys and

ROE_Idio are positive and significant, with the magnitude much larger for ROE_Sys (0.561 vs. 0.060).

The difference in magnitudes is striking: for a bank with average CatFat, a systematic earnings

decline results in 9 times larger the amount of uninsured-deposit outflows than that if the same

earnings decline is idiosyncratic. We also expect the differential sensitivity to ROE_Sys and

ROE_Idio to be magnified as banks' liquidity mismatch increases. This is because the adverse effect

of a systematic performance decline should be stronger for such banks­ their (more illiquid) assets

will command an even larger fire-sale discount in the event of a liquidation; and, because of a larger

liquid claimholder-base, their claimholders would have a greater incentive to run before others.

Consistent with this prediction, we find that the coefficient on ROE_Sys×CatFat is nearly 5 times the

coefficient on ROE_Idio×CatFat.

4.5 Liquidity mismatch and the 2007-2009 Financial Crisis

       To further demonstrate the role of strategic complementarities in times of systematic shock,

we next use the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009 as a laboratory to explore how liquidity mismatched

banks perform and respond to an extreme systemic shock. We do so by estimating various versions

of the following specification:

       Y                                                                                   6

where  represents an outcome variable for bank  at time  and  is an indicator variable for

the financial crisis period of 2007Q3 to 2009Q2. We examine three categories of outcomes: deposit

flows, deposit rates, and loan decisions. The estimation is done on the full sample we use for our

main analyses before.

       Table 6 presents the results. Columns (1) ­ (3) use uninsured, insured, and total deposit flows

as the dependent variables. Coefficient estimates on CatFatit-1 × Crisis in these columns show that

                                                 28
banks with higher liquidity mismatch experience larger uninsured deposit outflows during the crisis,

which they are unable to make up for using insured deposits flows, resulting in lower total deposit

flows compared to banks with less liquidity mismatch. Columns (4) and (5) model banks' deposit

rate response and the estimates show that banks with greater liquidity mismatch offer higher rates

during the crisis. Together the above results imply that banks with higher CatFat experience adverse

deposit flow outcomes during the crisis despite offering higher rates.

        Lastly, in columns (6) and (7) we model growth in loans and credit commitments to examine

whether the funding pressure faced by high CatFat banks manifests in adverse lending outcomes.

The coefficient on Crisis is positive and significant in both columns, consistent with the finding in

prior literature that banks act as liquidity providers to their borrowers during the crisis (e.g., Acharya

and Mora, 2015). More relevant to us, the coefficient estimates for CatFat × Crisis are negative in

both columns, although only statistically significant in column (7), indicating that banks with more

liquidity mismatch increase their commitment less during the crisis period. 14 The economic

magnitude of the effect is significant. The average annualized growth in commitment is 1.1%,

whereas a one standard deviation increase in CatFat would lower growth in commitment during the

crisis period by 1.0%. Furthermore, as we discuss next, more mismatched banks experience a higher

failure rate during the crisis.




14
   In untabulated analysis, we follow Acharya and Mora (2015) and break the Crisis dummy into Crisis1 dummy (defined
as the period between 2007Q3 and 2008Q2) and Crisis2 dummy (defined as the period between 2008Q3 and 2009Q2).
We continue to find significant negative coefficients for both CatFat×Crisis1 and CatFat×Crisis2 when the dependent
variable is growth in commitment. However, when we examine growth in loans, we find a significantly positive
coefficient for CatFat×Crisis1 but a negative coefficient for CatFat×Crisis2. These results suggest that borrowers draw
down their commitment from banks during the first stage of the crisis, consistent with the findings from Ivashina and
Scharfstein (2010) and Acharya and Mora (2015).


                                                          29
5   The relation between liquidity mismatch and bank performance

       Our analyses thus far provide compelling evidence that liquidity mismatch results in

significantly fragile uninsured deposit funding. We next explore the consequences of this finding for

several bank outcomes including failure risk and overall profitability.

5.1.Liquidity mismatch and future bank failure

       We first examine whether the increased funding fragility of liquidity mismatched banks

increases their failure risk using the following logit model for both the non-crisis and crisis periods:

             ,               ,                                                      ,    5

where  ,                ,    is an indicator variable that equals 1 if bank i appears on FDIC's failed

bank list during the period spanning years t to t+j where j={1,2,3}. We estimate (5) using

observations from non-crisis period and examine the failure incidence during the crisis period

separately. To avoid double counting failures and underestimating standard errors, we use non-

overlapping periods such that an observation for a bank failure appears only once in the sample. For

example, when the dependent variable is failure within the next two year (i.e., [t,t+2]), we leave a

two year gap between successive observations by using observations from the first quarter of odd

years, such as 1995Q1, 1997Q1.

       Columns (1) ­ (3) of Panel A of Table 7 present the results for the non-crisis period. To ease

interpretation, we present the marginal effects at the means of the independent variables. The results

show that liquidity mismatch is a significant predictor of bank failure over horizons 2 years or longer.

For example, estimate from column (2) suggests that one standard deviation increase in bank's

liquidity mismatch would increase the chance of bank failure over the next 2 years by 3.4 basis points

(=0.2%*0.17), representing a 6.5% increase over the average failure rate of 52 basis points. In column


                                                   30
(4), we also model failure risk during the Financial Crisis period by using a dummy for failure during

the eight quarters from 2007Q3 to 2009Q2 as the dependent variable. Each bank contributes only one

observation for this analysis and all bank characteristics are measured in the most recent quarter preceding

the crisis. Naturally, all macroeconomic controls get excluded from this estimation. Estimates show

that liquidity mismatch is a stronger predictor of failure during the crisis compared to the non-crisis

period: A one standard deviation increase in CatFat is associated with a 21% increase over the

average failure rate of 2.18% during the crisis.

5.2. Liquidity mismatch and profitability

           Finally, we explore profitability differences between banks with more and less liquidity

mismatch. While liquidity mismatch exposes banks to risks associated with funding fragility, it

should also allow banks to earn higher return for the liquidity services they provide both on the asset

and liability side of the balance sheet. We examine this by regressing ROE and ROA on CatFat and

other bank characteristics and present the results in Panel B of Table 7. The coefficient estimate on

CatFat is positive and significant in all specifications with meaningful economic magnitude. For

example, the estimate in column (1) suggests that a one-standard deviation increase in CatFat is

associated with nearly 0.34% increase in annualized ROE. The estimate in column (2), where bank

fixed effects are included, suggests that the effect is larger (at 0.5%)15. The positive relation between

CatFat and bank profitability is consistent with Berger and Bouwman (2009)'s finding of a positive

association between CatFat and the stock market valuations for the subsample of publicly traded

banks. Overall, the analysis of economic consequences highlights that liquidity transformation is a




15
     This is calculated with the average value of the within bank standard deviation in CatFat at 0.06, multiplied by 8.399.

                                                              31
double-edged sword in that it allows banks to earn higher profits at the cost of heightened fragility

and failure risk.

6. Additional analyses and robustness checks

6.1.Do greater deposit outflows hurt liquidity mismatched banks more?

         The presence of strategic complementarities in banks with illiquid assets is based on the

assumption that if a sufficiently large portion of depositors withdraw money, it will hurt bank value

because the bank may be forced to inefficiently liquidate its assets at a loss and/or curtail its asset

growth to meet deposit withdrawals, which can lead to further losses and higher chances of default.

This is what gives a depositor the incentive to be in line before other depositors if she expects large

withdrawals by other depositors. In this section we present evidence on this assumption by examining

the implications of large deposit withdrawals on future asset growth and performance of banks with

high CatFat. We do so by estimating various versions of the following regression specifications:


                                                                                                            ,      7



where  is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the total deposit outflows in the previous

quarter is below 10th percentile of the total deposit flows (at -2.75% of total assets quarterly), and 0

otherwise.16          represents either ROE, loan growth, or growth in credit commitments. Because we

control for lagged performance, the coefficient on  would show the effect of large outflows

beyond what is predicted by past performances for banks with no liquidity mismatch (i.e., CatFat=0).

If large deposit outflows hurt future performance and asset growth more for high CatFat banks, we

should find coefficient  to be negative.



16
  In untabulated analysis, we obtain qualitatively similar results when we use 5th percentile or 25th percentile as the
cutoff point.

                                                            32
       Table 8 presents the results. Column (1) shows for a negative coefficient but insignificant

coefficient estimate for Outflow, indicating that large deposit outflows are not significantly associated

with poor future performance for banks that do not have any liquidity mismatch (i.e., CatFat=0). The

coefficient estimate for Outflow*CatFat, however, is negative at -0.771 and significant at less than

10% level, suggesting that future performance of banks with more liquidity mismatch is more

adversely affected by large outflows of deposits. Next, we examine the effect of large outflows on

banks' future growth in loan (in column 2) and in commitment/credit lines (column 3) to borrowers.

Column (2) show that the coefficient estimate for Outflow is significantly negative for loan growth.

This is expected because deposit outflows directly reduce banks' loanable funds, even for banks with

no liquidity mismatch. In contrast, the coefficient on Outflow is statistically indistinguishable from

zero for commitment growth, indicating that large outflows do not materially affect banks'

willingness to make commitment to borrowers when they do not have any liquidity mismatch problem.

More importantly for our analysis, the coefficients for the interactive term between Outflow and

CatFat are significantly negative at less than 1% level in both columns, indicating that large deposit

outflows have more adverse effects on banks' future loan and credit commitment growth when banks

are more liquidity mismatched.

6.2.Alternative liquidity mismatch measure

       In this section, we present results using the alternative liquidity mismatch measure from Bai

et al. (2018). As explained in Section 2 earlier, incorporation of market liquidity conditions in this

measure poses interpretational problems and makes it harder to detect panic based running. We

present these results mainly for completeness.

       Bai et al. (2018) create liquidity mismatch index (LMI) to measure the difference between the

market liquidity of assets and the funding liquidity of liabilities and compute it as follows:

                                                   33
      ,      ,         ,      ,   , where    ,   and    ,    are the time-varying liquidity factors for assets and

liabilities. Bai et al. use repo market haircuts to extract the liquidity factors of different asset classes.

For example, a haircut of 20% on corporate loans means that a bank can raise $80 cash immediately

using a repo transaction collateralized by $100 of its loan portfolio. To assess time-variation in

liquidity of its liabilities (i.e.,    ,   , Bai et al. use the spread between the Treasury bill rate and the

Overnight Indexed Swap rate (hereafter, OIS-Tbill spread). The idea is that greater OIS-Tbill spread

reflects a stronger market desire to own liquid assets and therefore it is indicative of increased

likelihood that banks' liabilities will be redeemed.

          The measure we actually use in our analysis is LMIRisk, which is based on LMI and designed

by Bai et al. to directly measure the exposure of a bank to liquidity risk based on changes in market

liquidity conditions. Specifically, LMIRisk is the decrease in LMI that would occur if the market and

funding liquidity conditions (i.e., haircuts and OIS-Tbill spreads) deteriorated by 1 standard deviation;

i.e., LMIRisk = LMIt - LMIt,1. We obtain the underlying data and code to construct the measure from

Bai et al. who make them publicly available for years 2002 to 2014, resulting in a smaller sample

than the one for CatFat. Figure A1 in the Appendix presents the over time changes in LMIRisk for

the whole sample as well as for different bank size groups. It is noticeable that unlike CatFat, most

of the variations in LMIRisk are time-series and not cross-sectional. This is further confirmed in Table

A1 which shows that quarterly fixed dummies alone explain 92% (7.5%) of the variations in LMIRisk

(CatFat), whereas bank fixed dummies explain only 8.7% (more than 76%) of the variations in

LMIRisk (CatFat).

          Table 9, Panel A presents the results using the demeaned version of LMIRisk. Estimates in

column (1) shows that the sensitivity of uninsured deposit flows to performance is significantly higher

in banks with higher LMIRisk. Furthermore, consistent with our results for CatFat, estimates in

                                                            34
column (2) show that insured deposit flows counter the higher sensitivity of uninsured deposits,

resulting in an insignificant coefficient estimate on ROE×LMIRisk when we model total deposit flows

in column (3).

6.3.Alternative performance measures

       In our final set of robustness tests presented in Panel B of Table 9, we explore the sensitivity

of our results to two alternative performance measures: return on assets (ROA) and non-performing

loans (NPL). The results using these measures are qualitatively similar to those using ROE.

Specifically, column (1) shows that the sensitivity of uninsured deposit to ROA is increasing in

liquidity mismatch measured as CatFat. Column (4) shows uninsured deposit flows is negatively

associated with banks' non-performing loans, and more so for banks with more liquidity mismatch.

7. Conclusion

       In this paper we examine the relation between liquidity mismatch on bank's balance sheet and

depositors' response to bank performance. We find that the sensitivity of uninsured deposit flows to

bank performance is higher for banks with more liquidity mismatch on their balance sheet, especially

for banks with intermediate level of performance. The effects are present in banks of all sizes and

significantly so in small and medium banks that do not have easy access to alternative financing

channels. The effects of liquidity mismatch are robust to control for the informational properties of

bank earnings and are exacerbated when the aggregate conditions in the banking system are

unfavorable. Evidence also suggests that the deposit fragility associated with liquidity mismatch can

result in bank instability, as we find a positive association between bank's liquidity mismatch and

their future failure, especially during the financial crisis of 2008. Banks with more liquidity mismatch

also experience more deposit withdrawals and lending reduction during the crisis. Our results are

consistent with the theoretical prediction of Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) where liquidity mismatch
                                                  35
can generate strategic complementarities in depositors' payoff and induce panic-based runs due to

coordination failure among depositors. While our results emphasize the importance of fundamentals

in bank runs, they also support the idea that liquidity creation by banks comes at the cost of fragility.



References

Acharya, V.V. and Mora, N., 2015. A crisis of banks as liquidity providers. Journal of
   Finance, 70(1), pp.1-43.

Allen, F., Carletti, E., Goldstein, I. and Leonello, A., 2018. Government guarantees and financial
   stability. Journal of Economic Theory, 177, pp.518-557.

Allen, F. and Gale, D., 1998. Optimal financial crises. The Journal of Finance, 53(4), pp.1245-
   1284.

Artavanis, N., Paravisini, D., Robles-Garcia, C., Seru, A. and Tsoutsoura, M., 2019. Deposit
   Withdrawals. Working paper.

Badertscher, B.A., Burks, J.J. and Easton, P.D., 2018. The market reaction to bank regulatory
   reports. Review of Accounting Studies, 23(2), pp.686-731.

Bagehot, W. 1873. Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market, CreateSpace Independent
   Publishing Platform.

Bai, J. Krishnamurthy and Weymuller, C. 2018. Measuring liquidity mismatch in the banking
   sector. Journal of Finance, 73(1), pp. 51-93.

Benston, G. J., and Kaufman, G., 1997. "FDICIA after Five Years." Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, 11 (3): pp. 139-158.

Berger, A.N. and Bouwman, C.H., 2009. Bank liquidity creation. Review of Financial
   Studies, 22(9), pp.3779-3837.

Bernard, V.L. and Thomas, J.K., 1989. Post-earnings-announcement drift: delayed price response
   or risk premium?. Journal of Accounting Research, pp.1-36.

Brunnermeier, M., Gorton, G. and Krishnamurthy, A., 2013. Liquidity mismatch measurement.
   In Risk topography: Systemic risk and macro modeling (pp. 99-112). University of Chicago
   Press.

Chari, V.V. and Jagannathan, R., 1988. Banking panics, information, and rational expectations
   equilibrium. The Journal of Finance, 43(3), pp.749-761.

                                                   36
Chevalier J. and Ellison E. 1997. Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives. Journal
   of Political Economy 105(6), pp. 1167-1200.

Chen, Q., Goldstein, I., Huang, Z.Q., and Vashishtha, R., 2020. Bank transparency and deposit
   flows. Working paper, Duke, Wharton and Yale.

Chen, Q., Goldstein, I. and Jiang, W., 2010. Payoff complementarities and financial fragility:
   Evidence from mutual fund outflows. Journal of Financial Economics, 97(2), pp. 239-262.

Demirguc-Kunt, A. and Detragiache, E. 1998. The determinants of banking crisis: evidence from
  developed and developing countries. IMF Staff Papers 45, 81-109.

Demirguc-Kunt, A. and Detragiache, E. 1998. Does deposit insurance increase banking system
  stability? An empirical investigation. Journal of Monetary Economics 49. Pp. 1373-1406.

Diamond, D.W. and Dybvig, P.H., 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. Journal of
   Political Economy, 91(3), pp.401-419.

Drechsler, I., Savov, A. and Schnabl, P., 2017. The deposits channel of monetary policy. The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), pp.1819-1876.

Egan, M., Hortaçsu, A. and Matvos, G., 2017. Deposit competition and financial fragility: Evidence
   from the U.S. banking sector. American Economic Review, 107(1), pp.169-216.

Egan, M., Lewellen, S. and Sunderam, A., 2017. The cross section of bank value (No. w23291).
   National Bureau of Economic Research.

Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, 2000. Uniform retail credit classification and
   account measurement policy.

Foley-Fisher, N., Narajabad, B. and Verani, S., 2019. Self-fulfilling runs: Evidence from the US life
   insurance industry. Journal of Political Economics, forthcoming.

Gatev, E. and Strahan, P.E., 2006. Banks' advantage in hedging liquidity risk: Theory and evidence
   from the commercial paper market. Journal of Finance, 61(2), pp.867-892.

Goldstein, I., 2013. Empirical literature on financial crises: Fundamentals vs. panic. The Evidence
   and Impact of Financial Globalization, G. Caprio, ed., Elsevier, pp.523-534.

Goldstein, I., Jiang. H and Ng. D. 2017. Investor flows and fragility in corporate bond funds.
   Journal of Financial Economics, 126, pp. 592-613.

Goldstein, I., Kopytov, A., Shen, L. and Xiang, H. 2020. Bank heterogeneity and financial stability.
   Working paper.



                                                 37
Goldstein, I. and Pauzner, A., 2005. Demand­deposit contracts and the probability of bank
   runs. Journal of Finance, 60(3), pp.1293-1327.

Gorton, G., 1988. Banking panics and business cycles. Oxford economic papers, 40(4), pp.751-781.

Ivashina V. and Scharfstein, D. 2010. Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008. Journal of
    Financial Economics 97, pp. 319-338.

Iyer, R. and Puri, M., 2012. Understanding bank runs: The importance of depositor-bank
    relationships and networks. American Economic Review, 102(4), pp.1414-45.

Iyer, R., Puri, M. and Ryan, N., 2016. A tale of two runs: Depositor responses to bank solvency
    risk. Journal of Finance, 71(6), pp.2687-2726.

Jacklin, C.J. and Bhattacharya, S., 1988. Distinguishing panics and information-based bank runs:
   Welfare and policy implications. Journal of Political Economy, 96(3), pp.568-592.

Keister, T., 2016. Bailouts and financial fragility. The Review of Economic Studies, 83(2), pp.704-
   736.

Liu, X. 2016. Interbank market freezes and creditor runs. The Review of financial studies, 29(7),
   1860-1910.

Lin, L., 2020. Bank deposits and the stock market. The Review of Financial Studies, 33(6),
   pp.2622-2658.

Martin, C., Puri, M. and Ufier, A., 2018. Deposit Inflows and Outflows in Failing Banks: The Role
   of Deposit Insurance. NBER Working Paper

Robinson, P.M., 1988. Semiparametric econometrics: A survey. Journal of Applied
   Econometrics, 3(1), pp.35-51.

Rochet, J.C. and Vives, X., 2004. Coordination failures and the lender of last resort: was Bagehot
   right after all?. Journal of the European Economic Association, 2(6), pp.1116-1147.

Schmidt, L., Timmerman A. and Wermers, R. 2016. Runs on money market mutual funds.
   American Economic Review 106, 2625-2657.

Schumacher, L. 2000. Bank runs and currency run in a system without a safety net: Argentina and
   the `tequila' shock. Journal of Monetary Economics 46, pp. 257-277.

Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R.W., 1992. Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market equilibrium
   approach. The Journal of Finance, 47(4), pp.1343-1366.

Vives, X. 2014. Strategic complementarities, fragility, and regulation. Review of Financial Studies,
   27(12), pp. 3547-3592.


                                                 38
               Figure 1: Examples for calculating the Berger and Bouwman measure of bank liquidity creation

                                                              Bank A                 Bank B                   Bank C
                                                              $ liquidity             $ liquidity            $ liquidity
                                              Weight $ amount created        $ amount created       $ amount created
                                              (a)    (b)      (c=a*b)        (b)      (c=a*b)       (b)      (c=a*b)
Assets
 Cash                                          -0.5      0              0      100            -50      0                0
 Residential loan                                0      100             0       0              0      100               0
 Commercial loan                                0.5     200            100     200            100     200              100
Liquidity creation on asset side (LC_A)                                100                    50                       100
Liabilities and Equities
 Demand deposits                                0.5     200            100     200            100     100           50
 Equity                                        -0.5     100            -50     100            -50     200          -100
Liquidity creation on liability side (LC_L)                             50                     50                   -50

Total Liquidity Created (LC_A+LC_L)                                    150                    100                      50
Scaled by total assets (CatFat)                                        0.5                0.33                     0.17




                                                                39
Figure 2: Over time changes in CatFat
        Panel A: Full sample




   Panel B: Subsample by bank size




                 40
Figure 3: Sensitivity of deposit flows to bank performance
              Panel A: Insured vs. uninsured




       Panel B: Uninsured for subsamples by Catfat




                           41
                                                         Table 1. Summary statistics
This table presents summary statistics for (correlations among) the main regression variables calculated over the regression sample in Panel A (B).
To avoid the impact of mergers and acquisitions, we exclude bank-quarter observations with quarterly asset growth greater than 10%. We also
exclude observations with total assets less than 100 million. The unit of observation is at commercial bank-quarter level. The final sample includes
8,153 unique commercial banks from 1994 to 2016. The Appendix provides detailed information for variable definitions.

                                                          Panel A: Summary statistics


                                         N             Mean         Stdev          P10        P25         P50         P75         P90
     ROE (in %)                           287,018     10.36         10.37          2.42      6.94        11.05       15.44       20.18
     CatFat                               287,018      0.33         0.17           0.11      0.22         0.34       0.45         0.54
                                          287,018      2.11         9.88          -7.42     -2.04         2.16       6.84        12.71
                                          287,018      2.78         9.18          -4.95     -1.63         1.32       5.00        11.03
                                          287,018      4.76         10.42         -6.77     -1.48         3.87       9.93        17.14
     Ln(Assets)                           287,018     12.63         1.05          11.66     11.89        12.34       13.02       13.93
     RealEstate_Loans                     287,018      0.69         0.17           0.46      0.60         0.72       0.82         0.89
     Capital_Ratio                        287,018      0.10         0.03           0.07      0.08         0.09       0.11         0.13
     Wholesale_Funding                    287,018      0.20         0.10           0.08      0.12         0.19       0.26         0.34
     Std(ROE)                             287,018      5.29         5.79           1.28      1.93         3.21       6.07        11.45
     Large Time Deposit Rate              287,018      3.39         1.73           1.04      1.89         3.37       4.90         5.69
     Core Deposit Rate                    287,018      2.29         1.42           0.48      1.03         2.12       3.51         4.31
     Persistence                          233,270      0.16         0.38          -0.30     -0.11         0.13       0.42         0.67
     Informativeness                      282,480     0.22          0.45          -0.42     -0.10        0.27        0.58        0.78
     LiqCreation_Asset                    287,018      0.08         0.14          -0.11     -0.02         0.08       0.18         0.25
     LiqCreation_Liab                     287,018      0.19         0.07           0.10      0.14         0.19       0.24         0.28
     PctUninsured                         265,846     33.69         14.50         17.08     23.18        31.44       41.73       53.18
     LMIRisk                              164,198      0.10         0.09           0.02      0.03         0.10       0.13         0.17
     ROA                                  287,018      1.00         0.90           0.24      0.70         1.08       1.44         1.85
     Pct_NPL                              287,017      1.50         1.97           0.10      0.34         0.83       1.80         3.59



                                                                        42
                                                                       Panel B: Pairwise correlation


                                1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10      11      12      13      14      15      16      17      18      19

1    ROE                       1.00    0.04    0.17    0.05    0.23    0.00    -0.16   0.02    -0.12   -0.52   0.10    0.06    -0.05   -0.11   -0.09   0.17    0.18    -0.15   0.96
2    CatFat                    0.04    1.00    0.05    0.05    0.09    0.28    0.01    -0.23   -0.06   0.07    0.03    -0.01   0.12    0.05    0.84    0.29    0.28    0.10    -0.01
3                              0.17    0.05    1.00    -0.47   0.57    0.02    -0.06   0.03    -0.04   -0.12   -0.05   -0.05   -0.05   -0.05   -0.02   0.11    -0.06   -0.15   0.17
4                              0.05    0.05    -0.47   1.00    0.43    0.01    -0.01   -0.01   0.06    -0.10   0.11    0.11    0.07    0.04    0.07    -0.06   0.19    0.12    0.04
5                              0.23    0.09    0.57    0.43    1.00    0.03    -0.07   0.02    0.02    -0.23   0.06    0.05    0.01    -0.02   0.04    0.06    0.12    -0.05   0.22
6    Ln(Assets)                0.00    0.28    0.02    0.01    0.03    1.00    -0.04   -0.07   0.18    0.03    -0.03   -0.11   0.13    0.11    0.11    0.13    0.33    0.08    -0.03
7    RealEstate_Loans          -0.16   0.01    -0.06   -0.01   -0.07   -0.04   1.00    -0.07   0.01    0.13    -0.01   -0.02   0.07    0.02    0.09    0.00    -0.13   0.06    -0.17
8    Capital_Ratio             0.02    -0.23   0.03    -0.01   0.02    -0.07   -0.07   1.00    -0.17   -0.20   -0.12   -0.12   -0.05   -0.02   -0.15   -0.21   -0.06   0.03    0.20
9    Wholesale_Funding         -0.12   -0.06   -0.04   0.06    0.02    0.18    0.01    -0.17   1.00    0.13    0.15    0.21    0.06    0.04    0.20    -0.58   0.25    0.09    -0.15
10   StDev_ROE                 -0.52   0.07    -0.12   -0.10   -0.23   0.03    0.13    -0.20   0.13    1.00    -0.18   -0.12   -0.02   0.08    0.16    -0.08   -0.18   0.10    -0.52
11   Large Time Deposit Rate   0.10    0.03    -0.05   0.11    0.06    -0.03   -0.01   -0.12   0.15    -0.18   1.00    0.83    0.11    0.01    0.16    -0.31   0.27    -0.04   0.08
12   Core Deposit Rate         0.06    -0.01   -0.05   0.11    0.05    -0.11   -0.02   -0.12   0.21    -0.12   0.83    1.00    0.09    0.01    0.21    -0.47   0.20    -0.04   0.03
13   Persistence               -0.05   0.12    -0.05   0.07    0.01    0.13    0.07    -0.05   0.06    -0.02   0.11    0.09    1.00    0.13    0.12    -0.02   0.12    0.03    -0.06
14   Informativeness           -0.11   0.05    -0.05   0.04    -0.02   0.11    0.02    -0.02   0.04    0.08    0.01    0.01    0.13    1.00    0.06    -0.02   0.03    0.04    -0.11
15   LiqCreation_Asset         -0.09   0.84    -0.02   0.07    0.04    0.11    0.09    -0.15   0.20    0.16    0.16    0.21    0.12    0.06    1.00    -0.20   0.13    0.11    -0.11
16   LiqCreation_Liab          0.17    0.29    0.11    -0.06   0.06    0.13    0.00    -0.21   -0.58   -0.08   -0.31   -0.47   -0.02   -0.02   -0.20   1.00    0.16    0.02    0.12
17   PtUninsured               0.18    0.28    -0.06   0.19    0.12    0.33    -0.13   -0.06   0.25    -0.18   0.27    0.20    0.12    0.03    0.13    0.16    1.00    0.07    0.15
18   LMIRisk                   -0.15   0.10    -0.15   0.12    -0.05   0.08    0.06    0.03    0.09    0.10    -0.04   -0.04   0.03    0.04    0.11    0.02    0.07    1.00    -0.14
19   ROA                       0.96    -0.01   0.17    0.04    0.22    -0.03   -0.17   0.20    -0.15   -0.52   0.08    0.03    -0.06   -0.11   -0.11   0.12    0.15    -0.14   1.00
20   Pct_NPL                   -0.56   -0.02   -0.16   -0.09   -0.26   0.04    0.20    -0.05   0.11    0.61    -0.21   -0.15   0.02    0.09    0.10    -0.14   -0.23   0.14    -0.55




                                                                                        43
                           Table 2. Liquidity mismatch and sensitivity of deposit flows to bank performance
                                                              Panel A: Main Results
This table presents OLS estimates of Equation (3). The dependent variables are changes in the uninsured, insured, and total deposits scaled by the
beginning value of total assets. CatFat is demeaned when interacted with ROE. Standard error estimates are clustered at the bank level. T-statistics,
reported in parentheses, are based on standard error estimates clustered at the bank level. Statistical significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level is denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.

                                                                                                                                          
                             (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)           (5)         (6)             (7)          (8)         (9)

ROE it-1                    0.101***       0.024***     0.126***      0.094***      0.007**       0.106***      0.061***      0.045***      0.109***
                            (35.458)         (7.628)    (34.967)      (28.275)       (2.124)      (29.736)      (21.139)      (16.133)      (30.406)
ROE it-1× CatFatit-1        0.120***      -0.218***    -0.093***      0.211***     -0.176***        0.030       0.110***     -0.076***        0.027
                             (7.032)       (-11.628)     (-4.182)     (10.114)      (-8.058)       (1.282)       (5.871)       (-4.223)      (1.155)
CatFatit-1                  3.204***       7.298***    10.228***      3.144***     11.550***     14.033***      5.500***      8.449***     13.512***
                            (12.389)        (25.984)    (30.117)       (6.555)      (22.450)      (26.071)      (13.661)      (21.099)      (23.534)
Control Variables
Ln(Size)it-1                 -0.074**     -0.298***     -0.399***    -3.213***     -2.769***     -5.656***     -3.592***     -3.020***     -6.163***
RealEstate_Loans it-1       -0.471***      1.350***      0.773***    -2.813***       -0.106      -3.025***     -1.478***     -2.197***     -3.505***
Capital_Ratio it-1           8.685***        0.073       9.652***    37.892***     29.249***     66.983***     39.114***     23.167***     62.738***
Wholesale_Funding it-1       1.129***      6.464***      7.704***      1.000*      20.156***     20.140***      9.617***      9.909***     18.746***
Std(ROE) it-1               -0.066***     -0.143***     -0.211***    -0.076***     -0.135***     -0.210***     -0.064***     -0.157***     -0.219***
Large Time Deposit
                            -0.358***     0.327***        -0.044      -0.352***     0.283***      -0.077**      -0.039*      -0.057***     -0.094***
Ratet
Core Deposit Ratet-1        -0.485***     0.977***      0.448***      -0.987***     1.312***      0.294***      0.205***     0.210***      0.398***

Bank fixed effects              N             N             N             Y            Y             Y             Y             Y             Y
Macro controls                  Y             Y             Y             Y            Y             Y             N             N             N
Quarter fixed effects           N             N             N             N            N             N             Y             Y             Y
Observations                 287,018       287,018       287,018       286,831      286,831       286,831       286,831       286,831       286,831
Adj. R-squared                0.064         0.055         0.066         0.102        0.102         0.166         0.282         0.330         0.188

                                                                          44
                          Panel B: Main results in subsamples by bank asset size
This panel explores whether the effect of liquidity mismatch on flow-performance sensitivity differs by bank
asset size. Columns (1)-(2), columns (3)-(4), and columns (5) to (6) present the results for deposit flow-
performance sensitivity using ordinary least-squares estimates of Equation (3) for the subsample of small,
medium, and large banks, respectively. Small banks are defined as those with total assets below 500 million,
large banks have assets above 3 billion, and medium banks have assets between 500 million and 3 billion
(measured in 2000 real dollars). CatFat is demeaned within each subsample when interacted with ROE. T-
statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard error estimates clustered at the bank level. Statistical
significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.

                                   Small banks:                 Medium banks:
                                 Assets                        Assets                        Large banks:
                                  0.1,0. 5 billion              0.5, 3 billion            Assets    3 billion
                                                                                                     
                                    (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)

ROEit-1                         0.081***       0.013***       0.113***      -0.015*      0.138***     -0.058***
                                (22.563)        (3.473)       (12.363)      (-1.770)      (8.920)      (-4.212)
ROE it-1 × CatFat it-1          0.193***      -0.130***       0.258***     -0.228***       0.088      -0.202***
                                 (8.413)       (-5.269)        (4.739)      (-4.210)      (1.100)      (-2.669)
CatFat    it-1                  4.370***      12.099***       3.163***     14.198***      -0.382       7.534***
                                 (7.809)       (20.595)        (2.642)      (11.534)     (-0.237)       (4.037)

Bank characteristics               Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
Bank fixed effects                 Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
Macro controls                     Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
Observations                     231,860        231,860        43,169        43,169       11,678        11,678
Adj. R-squared                    0.103          0.115          0.154         0.106       0.108         0.066




                                                        45
                 Table 3: Controlling for differences in informational properties of ROE
This table presents ordinary least-squares estimates of Equation (3) after controlling for the effect of performance
persistence. Variables are entered as their demeaned value when interacted with ROE. We measure Persistence
as the AR(1) coefficient from a time-series regression of banks' ROE on its lagged value over the 12-quarters
and Informativeness as the transparency measure in Chen et al (2020). The Appendix contains detailed
descriptions for all variables. T-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard error estimates clustered
at the bank level. Statistical significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is denoted by *, **, and ***,
respectively.

                                                                                                          
                                             (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)

 ROE it-1                                0.081***          0.074***       0.075***       0.135***        0.126***
                                         (23.390)          (21.962)       (21.843)       (27.557)        (26.032)
 ROEit-1 × CatFat it-1                   0.203***          0.185***       0.191***       0.198***        0.172***
                                          (9.264)           (8.483)        (8.777)        (8.965)          (7.885)
 CatFatit-1                              1.348***          1.643***       1.520***       1.135**         1.531***
                                          (2.926)           (3.596)        (3.313)        (2.445)          (3.336)
 ROE it-1× Persistenceit-1                                 0.068***                                      0.058***
                                                           (10.616)                                        (8.940)
 Persistenceit-1                                          -1.686***                                     -1.499***
                                                           (-16.666)                                     (-14.666)
 ROE it-1× Informativenessit-1                                            0.037***                       0.028***
                                                                           (6.926)                         (5.087)
 Informativenessit-1                                                     -0.847***                      -0.644***
                                                                          (-10.772)                       (-8.019)
 ROE it-1× Std(ROE) it-1                                                                -0.005***       -0.005***
                                                                                         (-15.550)       (-16.024)
 Std(ROE) it-1                                                                          -0.051***       -0.048***
                                                                                          (-7.048)        (-6.791)
 Bank characteristics                        Y                Y              Y                Y               Y
 Bank fixed effects                          Y                Y              Y                Y               Y
 Macro controls                              Y                Y              Y                Y               Y
 Observations                             231,728          231,728        231,728         231,728         231,728
 Adj. R-squared                            0.104            0.106          0.104            0.105           0.108




                                                         46
              Table 4. Effects of liability side variation in strategic complementarities
  This table presents ordinary least-squares estimates of Equation (3) for subsamples partitioned by the
  percentage of uninsured deposits and the liquidity creation on the liability side (averaged over the preceding
  3 years) and ROE is interacted with the (demeaned) measure of liquidity creation on the asset side. Panel
  A is estimated based on the whole sample. Panel B is estimated based on samples matched based on
  liquidity creation on the asset sides. The Appendix contains detailed descriptions for all variables. All
  regressions include bank-fixed effects. T-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard error
  estimates clustered at the bank level. Statistical significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is
  denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.
                                       Panel A: Full Sample Analysis
Sample sorted by terciles for                 PctUninsured                  LiqCreation_Liab
Tercile rank (low to high)          1st           2nd      3rd               1st         2nd             3rd
                                                                                                         
                                    (1)           (2)      (3)               (4)         (5)             (6)

ROEit-1                            0.035***     0.068***      0.103***      0.074***      0.089***      0.095***
                                   (11.094)      (13.36)      (14.870)      (13.393)       (16.31)       (15.48)
ROEit-1 × LiqCreation_Asset it-1   0.128***     0.164***      0.342***      0.231***      0.454***      0.313***
                                    (4.904)      (4.634)       (8.542)       (6.109)       (11.05)       (7.406)
LiqCreation_Asset it-1               0.077        0.132      -4.312***     -6.451***     -6.163***      -3.765**
                                    (0.147)      (0.207)      (-5.552)      (-8.997)      (-9.023)      (-4.979)

Bank characteristics                                Y                                 Y
Bank fixed effects                                  Y                                 Y
Macro controls                                      Y                                 Y
Observations                                     277,462                           286,831
Adj. R-squared                                    0.134                             0.107

Test of Differences: Top Tercile ­ Bottom Tercile
ROEit-1:
       Diff                                    0.068***                            0.021**
     (t-stat)                                    (8.837)                           (2.564)
ROEit-1 × LiqCreation_Asset it-1:
       Diff                                    0.214***                             0.082
     (t-stat)                                   (4.558)                            (1.472)




                                                       47
          Panel B: Analysis on matched sample of top and bottom terciles

Sample sorted by terciles for         PctUninsured             LiqCreation_Liab
Tercile rank                       lowest      highest      lowest        highest
                                                                          
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)

ROEit-1                            0.040***     0.110***    0.071***     0.089***
                                    (8.439)      (14.81)    (12.675)      (13.04)
ROEit-1 × LiqCreation_Asset it-1   0.148***     0.387***    0.199***     0.359***
                                    (4.227)      (7.728)     (5.093)      (7.525)
LiqCreation_Asset it-1               0.971     -5.217***   -4.801***     -4.627**
                                    (1.311)     (-5.171)     (-5.663)     (-5.033)

Bank characteristics                        Y                          Y
Bank fixed effects                          Y                          Y
Macro controls                              Y                          Y
Observations                             142,348                    163,039
Adj. R-squared                            0.131                      0.112

Test of Differences: Top Tercile ­ Bottom Tercile
ROEit-1:
       Diff                               0.070***                  0.018**
     (t-stat)                              (8.086)                  (2.036)
ROEit-1 × LiqCreation_Asset it-1:
       Diff                               0.239***                 0.161***
     (t-stat)                              (4.017)                  (2.645)




                                          48
                    Table 5: Systematic vs. idiosyncratic performance shocks
This table presents OLS estimates of a modified version of Equation (3) where we decompose ROE into a
systematic component and an idiosyncratic component. The dependent variables are changes in the
uninsured, insured, and total deposits scaled by the beginning value of total assets. ROE_Sys is the average
ROE for all banks in a given quarter and ROE_Idio is the difference between ROE and ROE_Sys. CatFat
is demeaned when interacted with ROE or its components. T-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based
on standard error estimates clustered at the bank level. Statistical significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level is denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.

                                                                                  
                                                          (1)          (2)            (3)

              ROE_Sys it-1                            0.561***      -0.519***      0.063***
                                                      (60.068)       (-49.670)       (5.761)
              ROE_Sys it-1*CatFatit-1                 0.593***      -0.222***      0.409***
                                                      (13.052)        (-4.907)       (7.293)
              ROE_Idio it-1                           0.060***       0.045***      0.108***
                                                      (18.344)       (13.850)       (29.991)
              ROE_Idio it-1*CatFatit-1                0.121***      -0.131***         -0.022
                                                        (5.730)       (-6.111)      (-0.896)
              CatFatit-1                              -1.360**      12.262***      9.751***
                                                       (-2.185)      (20.054)       (12.498)
              Ln(Size)it-1                           -2.702***      -3.272***     -5.624***
                                                      (-23.566)      (-27.517)     (-36.652)
              RealEstate_Loans it-1                  -1.156***      -2.106***     -3.319***
                                                       (-2.648)       (-4.717)      (-6.119)
              Capital_Ratio it-1                     41.513***      25.971***     67.516***
                                                      (18.947)       (11.942)       (24.394)
              Wholesale_Funding it-1                  4.046***      16.346***     19.454***
                                                        (7.712)      (29.151)      (27.508)
              Std(ROE) it-1                          -0.032***      -0.183***     -0.212***
                                                       (-5.212)      (-24.696)     (-24.857)
              Large Time Deposit Ratet               -0.342***       0.274***      -0.076**
                                                       (-5.161)        (4.105)      (-2.542)
              Core Deposit Ratet-1                   -0.763***       1.074***      0.290***
                                                       (-4.348)        (4.576)       (4.232)

              Bank fixed effects                         Y              Y             Y
              Macro controls                             Y              Y             Y
              Observations                            286,831        286,831       286,831
              Adj. R-squared                           0.118          0.124         0.167


                                                     49
                                               Table 6. Effects of liquidity mismatch during crisis

This table presents ordinary least-squares estimates of Equation (6). All dependent variables are scaled by lagged total assets. The Appendix contains
detailed descriptions for the independent variables. All regressions include bank- and quarter-fixed effects. T-statistics, reported in parentheses, are
based on standard error estimates clustered at the bank level. Statistical significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is denoted by *, **,
and ***, respectively.


                                                                                    Core
                                                                                                Large Time
                                                                                   Deposits                                   
                                                                                                 Deposits
                                                                                     rate
                                         (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)

             Crisis                  -10.612***     17.535***       5.846***       0.464***      0.703***      5.230***        9.332***
                                       (-9.450)      (16.045)        (4.427)         (5.608)      (6.706)        (4.284)        (14.122)
             Crisis× CatFatit-1       -5.424***     1.314***       -3.950***       0.511***      0.317***        -0.020       -5.965***
                                       (-9.789)       (2.578)        (-6.483)       (13.126)      (6.838)       (-0.035)       (-20.689)
             Catfatit-1                8.220***     8.525***       16.074***      -0.983***        0.066       17.400***       1.960***
                                       (21.936)      (22.160)       (32.317)       (-23.223)      (1.359)       (35.866)        (10.785)

             Controls                     Y              Y             Y              Y              Y             Y              Y
             Controls*Crisis              Y              Y             Y              Y              Y             Y              Y
             Bank fixed effects           Y              Y             Y              Y              Y             Y              Y
             Observations              287,018        287,018       287,018        281,816        281,798       287,018        287,018
             Adj. R-squared             0.204          0.211         0.188          0.892          0.813         0.275          0.099




                                                                             50
                          Table 7: Liquidity mismatch and performance

                             Panel A. Liquidity mismatch and bank failure

This table shows the estimates of the marginal effects from a logit regression that explores the
association between liquidity mismatch and bank failure. In columns (1) to (3), the dependent
variable is an indicator variable that the bank fails within the next 1, 2, and 3 years during the non-
crisis period, respectively. In column (4), the dependent variable is an indicator variable that the
bank failed during the financial crisis period. The Appendix contains detailed descriptions for the
independent variables. T-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard error estimates
clustered at the bank level. Statistical significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is
denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.

                                                         Failure in   Failure in
                                       Failure in         next two    next three     Failure
                                       next year           years        year       during crisis
                                          (1)               (2)          (3)            (4)

      CatFat   it                         0.001            0.002**       0.002*      0.027***
                                        (0.984)            (2.151)      (1.851)       (3.108)
      ROEit                            -0.000***         -0.000***    -0.000***        0.000
                                        (-2.900)           (-2.764)     (-3.073)      (0.940)
      In(Assets) it                      0.000*              0.000        0.000      0.005***
                                        (1.825)            (1.470)      (1.378)       (4.555)
      RealEstate_Loans it               -0.002*             -0.001       -0.001      0.035***
                                        (-1.656)           (-1.118)     (-0.477)      (3.852)
      Capital Ratioit                  -0.048***         -0.047***    -0.074***        0.049
                                        (-3.407)           (-2.834)     (-4.276)      (1.298)
      Wholesale_Funding it                0.003           0.005***     0.006***      0.038***
                                        (1.621)            (2.799)      (3.182)       (3.382)
      Core Deposit Rateit               0.000**              0.000        0.000      0.009***
                                        (2.152)            (0.278)      (1.256)       (4.776)
      Large Time Deposit Rate it         -0.000             -0.000     0.000***       0.003**
                                        (-0.212)           (-0.473)     (2.904)       (2.113)
      FedFundRatet                       -0.000           -0.001**       -0.001
                                        (-1.054)           (-2.064)    (-0.813)
      StockRett                         0.005**           0.011***     0.007**
                                        (2.282)            (3.111)      (2.319)
      FedFundRatet-1                      0.000             0.001*       -0.000
                                        (0.315)            (1.707)     (-0.001)
      StockRett-1                        -0.001             0.003*       -0.002
                                        (-0.813)           (1.879)     (-0.548)

      Observations                      62,428            27,822       21,984          3,532
      Pseudo. R-squared                  0.242             0.278        0.388          0.207




                                                    51
                            Panel B: Liquidity mismatch and bank profitability

This table explores the association between liquidity mismatch and bank performance. The
dependent variable is return on equity (ROE) for columns (1) and (2), and ROA for columns (3)
and (4). The Appendix contains detailed descriptions for the independent variables. T-statistics,
reported in parentheses, are based on standard error estimates clustered at the bank level. Statistical
significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.


                                         ROE             ROE        ROA            ROA
                                          (1)             (2)        (3)            (4)

            CatFat   it                 1.966***      8.390***     0.162***       0.857***
                                         (5.139)      (16.278)      (4.585)       (17.609)
            In(Assets) it               0.190***     -3.319***      0.011**      -0.265***
                                         (3.237)      (-27.123)     (2.063)       (-23.125)
            RealEstate_Loans it        -7.624***     -5.145***    -0.709***      -0.631***
                                        (-19.700)      (-8.848)    (-19.532)      (-12.036)
            Capital Ratioit           -59.299***    -26.221***     5.096***       6.115***
                                        (-24.044)      (-9.138)    (19.607)        (21.583)
            Wholesale_Funding it       -7.814***       -1.257*    -0.769***      -0.197***
                                        (-12.444)      (-1.831)    (-13.495)       (-3.169)
            Std(ROE) it-1              -0.782***     -0.768***
                                        (-62.123)     (-58.471)
            Std(ROA) it-1                                         -0.438***      -0.408***
                                                                   (-45.576)      (-42.127)
            Constant                   24.220***    60.012***     1.186***        4.165***
                                        (31.312)     (47.326)      (15.940)       (34.696)

            Bank fixed effects             N            Y             N              Y
            Observations                287,018      286,831       287,018        286,831
            Adj. R-squared               0.232        0.461         0.194          0.445




                                                    52
         Table 8. Do large deposit outflows hurt liquidity-mismatched banks more?
This table explores the effect of liquidity mismatch on bank performance. The dependent variable
is return on equity (ROEit+1) for period t+1. Outflowit is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the
bank's total deposit flows is below the 10th percentile value of the sample in quarter  , and 0
otherwise. All regressions include both current and lagged ROEs in previous four quarters. The
Appendix contains detailed descriptions for all variables. T-statistics, reported in parentheses, are
based on standard error estimates clustered at the bank level. Statistical significance (two-sided)
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.

                                            ROEi,t+1      Loani,t+1    Commiti,t+1
                                              (1)          (2)           (3)

                Outflowit                     -0.188      -0.690***          0.000
                                             (-1.344)       (-4.163)        (0.001)
                Outflowit *CatFatit          -0.771*      -1.370***      -0.956***
                                             (-1.939)       (-3.092)       (-3.670)
                CatFatit                    2.832***      15.854***        0.483**
                                              (8.751)       (32.116)        (2.309)
                Ln(Assets)it               -1.460***      -3.524***      -0.899***
                                            (-15.720)      (-22.699)      (-14.683)
                Real_estate_loans            -0.580*          -0.335     -2.784***
                                             (-1.747)       (-0.603)      (-11.618)
                Capital_Ratio it+1        -42.476***      18.203***       4.038***
                                            (-21.809)        (6.852)        (3.778)
                Wholesale_Funding it+1     -7.228***      -5.154***      -2.103***
                                            (-14.357)       (-7.336)       (-7.515)

                Lagged ROEs                    Y              Y              Y
                Macro control                  Y              Y              Y
                Bank fixed effects             Y              Y              Y
                Observations                202,773        216,283        216,283
                Adj. R-squared               0.577          0.307          0.096




                                                 53
  Table 9. Robustness to alternative measures of liquidity mismatch and bank performance
 Panel A of this table explores the robustness of our main results to using LMIRisk as the liquidity
 mismatch measure. Panel B explores the robustness to two alternative bank performance
 measures­ ROA (return on assets) in columns (1)-(3) and Non-performing Loan (NPL) in columns
 (4)-(6). The Appendix contains detailed descriptions for all variables. T-statistics, reported in
 parentheses, are based on standard error estimates clustered at the bank level. Statistical
 significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.

                 Panel A: Robustness to using LMIRisk as liquidity mismatch measure

                                                                                        
                                                      (1)               (2)             (3)

                     ROEit-1                        0.064***            0.032***        0.099***
                                                    (11.165)             (5.316)        (23.113)
                     ROE it-1 * LMIRiskit-1         0.499***           -0.557***          -0.005
                                                     (8.472)             (-8.577)        (-0.128)
                     LMIRisk it-1                  -32.855***          36.338***        1.431**
                                                    (-39.434)           (42.526)         (2.264)

                     Bank characteristics                Y                 Y               Y
                     Macro controls                      Y                 Y               Y
                     Bank fixed effects                  Y                 Y               Y
                     Observations                     164,081           164,081         164,081
                     Adj. R-squared                    0.179             0.180           0.184

                        Panel B: Robustness to alternative performance measures


                                                                                                          
Performance measure                            ROA                                            %NPL
                                    (1)         (2)              (3)              (4)          (5)           (6)

BankPerfit-1                   1.126***        -0.086**        1.084***      -0.405***       -0.219***    -0.642***
                               (29.458)         (-2.205)       (26.418)       (-21.240)       (-11.038)    (-27.543)
BankPerf it-1 * CatFatit-1     2.412***       -1.564***       0.841***       -1.395***        0.338***    -1.104***
                               (10.117)         (-6.619)        (3.142)       (-13.183)        (3.196)      (-9.436)
CatFatit-1                     2.813***       11.410***       13.520***       7.041***        8.578***    14.957***
                                (5.733)        (22.068)        (24.304)        (14.822)       (16.648)     (30.596)

Bank characteristics               Y              Y               Y              Y               Y            Y
Macro controls                     Y              Y               Y              Y               Y            Y
Bank fixed effects                 Y              Y               Y              Y               Y            Y
Observations                    286,831        286,831         286,831        286,830         286,830      286,830
Adj. R-squared                   0.103          0.102           0.165          0.101           0.103        0.170




                                                         54
                                        Appendix: Variable definitions



Variables              Definitions
                       Annualized ROE (in %) in quarter t-1, calculated as net income (RIAD4300, adjust year-to-
ROE I,t-1              date reporting to within quarter) divided by beginning equity (RCFD3210).
                       The preferred measure of Bank liquidity creation per unit of gross total assets, by Berger and
                       Bouwman (2009) and downloaded from https://sites.google.com/a/tamu.edu/bouwman/data.
                       Step 1: Classify all bank activities (asset, liability, and off-balance-sheet) as liquid, semi-
                       liquid, or illiquid based on product category.
                       Step 2: Assign weights to the activities classified in Step 1. Illiquid assets, liquid liabilities
                       get ½, Liquid assets, illiquid liabilities and equities get -1/2. Certain loans and liabilities are
                       classified as semi-liquid and get 0.
                       Step 3: Combine bank activities as classified in Step 1 and as weighted in Step 2 to construct
CatFat                 our liquidity creation measure.
                       Annualized growth rate in insured deposits as a percentage of lagged assets in quarter  and
                        1. (in %):   ,                                ,                       / ,  200%.

                       Insured deposits are accounts of $100,000 or less. After 2006Q2, it includes retirement
                       accounts of $250,000 or less. From 2009Q3, reporting thresholds on non-retirement deposits
                       increased from $100,000 to $250,000.
                       Insured deposits: RCON2702 (before 2006Q2); RCONF049 + RCONF045 (from 2006Q2).
                       Annualized growth rate in uninsured deposits as a percentage of lagged assets (in %) in
                       quarter  and  1. Uninsured deposit is calculated as total deposits (RCFD2200) ­ insured
                       deposits.
                       Sum of  and 
Ln(Assets)             Log of total assets (RCFD2170).
RealEstate_Loan        Loans secured by real estate (RCFD1410) scaled by total loans (RCFD1400).
Capital_Ratio          Total equity (RCFD3210) divided by total assets (RCFD2170).
                       Wholesale funds are the sum of following: large-time deposits (RCON2604), deposits
                       booked in foreign offices (RCFN2200), subordinated debt and debentures (RCFD3200),
                       gross federal funds purchased and repos [RCFD2800, or (RCONB993+RCFDB995 from
Wholesale_Funding      2002q1)], other borrowed money (RCFD3190). Scaled by total assets.
                       Standard deviation of ROE measured over 12 rolling quarters (from Quarter  12 to 
Std(ROE) i,t-1         1).
                       Annualized average interest rate (in %) over the two quarters ,  1 on savings deposits:
Large Time Deposit     (         1 /
Ratei,t                 .          1  400% .
                       Core deposits include transaction, saving, and small time deposits, and core deposit rate is
Core deposit Ratei,t   the average interest rate paid on the three.
                       An indicator variable that equals 1 if the bank fails in the next n years, measured as 1 if the
Failure in n year      bank is on the FDIC failed banks list on https://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/
CatNonFat              The same as CatFat, but does not include off-balance sheet items.
                       _                 max            , 0 . The liquidity risk of a bank is the exposure of that
                       bank to a 1 unfavorable change in both market and funding liquidity conditions.  is
                       constructed following Bai et al. (2018) and its online appendix for a sample of commercial
                       banks. Specifically,  for bank i at time t is computed as the net of the asset and
                       liability liquidities:           ,  ,           ,  , .where  , is time varying asset
                       liquidity factor that was backed out from haircuts in repo market ;  , is the liability
                       liquidity factor that calculated recursively using the maturity and liquidity cost. The
LMI_Risk               parameters on liquidity factors are from Bai et al. (2018).

                                                           55
                   Annualized ROA (in %) in quarter t-1, calculated as net income (RIAD4300, adjust year-to-
ROA i,t-1          date reporting to within quarter) divided by beginning assets.
NPL I,t-1          The percentage of non-performing loan (RCFD1403+RCFD1407) to total loan.
                   The adjusted R-squared from the following regression
                                                                                                          ,
Informativeness    estimated for each bank-quarter using the bank's observations over the previous 12 quarters.
                   The slope coefficient  in                               , estimated for each bank-quarter
Persistence it-1   using the bank's observations over the previous 12 quarters.




                                                     56
           Online Appendix
Figure A1: Over time changes in LMIRisk
         Panel A: Full sample




    Panel B: Subsample by bank size




                  57
                     Figure A2: Changes around the Financial Crisis of 2008




                          Table A1: Variations in liquidity mismatch variables
This panel presents to what extent bank fixed effects and quarter fixed effects explain liquidity mismatch
variables. Columns (1) and (4) includes both bank and quarter fixed effects, columns (2) and (5) include
only bank fixed effects, and columns (3) and (6) include only quarter fixed effects.


                                         CatFatit                               LMIRiskit
                               (1)         (2)             (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)

  Bank fixed effects           Yes         Yes             No        Yes          Yes          No
  Quarter fixed effects        Yes         No              Yes       Yes          No           Yes
  Observations               286,831     287,018         287,018   164,081      164,198      164,198
  Adjusted R-squared          0.832       0.762           0.075     0.956        0.087        0.921




                                                    58
