                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ON THE ORIGINS OF GENDER-BIASED BEHAVIOR:
                 THE ROLE OF EXPLICIT AND IMPLICIT STEREOTYPES

                                       Eliana Avitzour
                                         Adi Choen
                                        Daphna Joel
                                        Victor Lavy

                                     Working Paper 27818
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27818


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




We thank B. Hameiri, U. Bram, Y. Bar-Anan, E. Duchini, E. Sand, and H. R. Trachtman for their
useful comments. We also thank the Department of Education in Tel-Aviv municipality and the
participating teachers for their cooperation in this study. Funding: None. Competing interests:
None. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Eliana Avitzour, Adi Choen, Daphna Joel, and Victor Lavy. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Origins of Gender-Biased Behavior: The Role of Explicit and Implicit Stereotypes
Eliana Avitzour, Adi Choen, Daphna Joel, and Victor Lavy
NBER Working Paper No. 27818
September 2020
JEL No. J16

                                         ABSTRACT

In recent years, explicit bias against women in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
(STEM) is disappearing but gender discrimination is still prevalent. We assessed the gender-
biased behavior and related explicit and implicit stereotypes of 93 math teachers to identify the
psychological origins of such discrimination. We asked the teachers to grade math exam papers
and assess the students' capabilities while manipulating the perceived gender of the students to
capture gender-biased grading and assessment behavior. We also measured the teachers' implicit
and explicit stereotypes regarding math, gender, and talent. We found that implicit, but not
explicit, gender stereotypes correlated with grading and assessment behavior. We also found that
participants who underestimated their own implicit stereotypes engaged in more pro-male
discrimination compared to those who overestimated or accurately estimated them. Reducing
implicit gender stereotypes and exposing individuals to their own implicit biases may be
beneficial in promoting gender equality in STEM fields.

Eliana Avitzour                                 Daphna Joel
School of Psychological Sciences                School of Psychological Sciences
Tel Aviv University                             and Sagol School of Neuroscience
Tel Aviv                                        Tel Aviv University
Israel                                          Tel Aviv
elianaa@mail.tau.ac.il                          Israel
                                                djoel@tauex.tau.ac.il
Adi Choen
School of Psychological Sciences                Victor Lavy
Tel Aviv University                             Department of Economics
Te Aviv                                         University of Warwick
Israel                                          Coventry, CV4 7AL
adi6@mail.tau.ac.il                             United Kingdom
                                                and Hebrew University of Jerusalem
                                                and also NBER
                                                v.lavy@warwick.ac.uk
1. Background
Why does gender discrimination in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM)
fields persist despite ongoing advancements in gender equality discourse and policies? In
recent years, explicit bias against women in STEM has been rapidly disappearing (GSS
Data Explorer Key Trends, 2019) and leading companies in STEM fields have been taking
efforts to include more women within their ranks (Women in the Workplace, 2019). Yet
despite these shifts in opinions and hiring policies, women still feel that their gender is a
barrier to advancement (Women in the Workplace, 2019) and scholarly reviews suggest
that gender discrimination is indeed still prevalent in the workplace, especially in STEM
fields (Charlesworth & Banaji, 2019). For example, identical job applicants receive
different offers based on their perceived gender: in a study concerning hiring behavior of
STEM faculty, the same application was offered lower salaries and received more negative
assessments of the candidate's competency and suitability, if the applicant name was
female rather than male (Moss-Racusin et al., 2012). Gender discrimination is also well
documented in math and science education. Multiple observational studies reveal that
math teachers are susceptible to gender bias when grading examination papers (Breda &
Hillion, 2016; Lavy, 2008; Lavy & Megalokonomou, 2019; Lavy & Sand, 2018), and that
this bias is consistent over their teaching careers (Lavy & Megalokonomou, 2019).
       Charlesworth and Banaji suggest that implicit and explicit stereotypes are partially
responsible for gender discrimination in STEM fields (Charlesworth & Banaji, 2019).
Existing evidence points to a connection between lower representation of women in
STEM fields and gender stereotypes regarding math and brilliance (Bian et al., 2018; Leslie
et al., 2015; Nosek et al., 2009; Storage et al., 2016) and some observational studies
demonstrate a possible relationship between teachers' implicit stereotypes and the
achievements of students from stigmatized groups (Carlana, 2019; van den Bergh et al.,
2010). However, only a handful of studies have investigated the relationship between
stereotypes and discrimination experimentally, and those that did, did not contrast the
importance of implicit versus explicit stereotypes (Moss-Racusin et al., 2012; Reuben et

                                                                                           2
al., 2014). To more fully investigate the origins of gender-based discrimination, we
designed a study that assessed participants' gender discrimination and related explicit
and implicit stereotypes, in an ecological yet controlled experiment. We found that
implicit, but not explicit, stereotypes correlated with discriminatory behavior. We also
found that participants who underestimated their own implicit stereotypes engaged in
more pro-male discrimination compared to those who overestimated or accurately
estimated their own implicit stereotypes, a finding that could suggest that exposing
individuals to their own implicit biases may be useful in promoting egalitarian behavior.


2. Method

Our experiment was conducted on primary school math teachers, who graded math
examination papers of actual Fifth Grade students, assessed the students' capabilities,
answered several questionnaires, and then performed the Gender-Science Implicit
Association Test (IAT). Most studies about gender-biased grading use observational data
in natural settings.1 These studies employ various control methods in an attempt to rule
out the possibility that differential grading is the result of the different exam-taking
behaviors of girls and boys rather than the grading behavior of the teachers (Breda &
Hillion, 2016; Lavy, 2008; Lavy & Megalokonomou, 2019; Lavy & Sand, 2018). We used an
experimental design that rules out this confounding behavior completely by randomly
assigning the gender of the student - every exam paper had a "female version" and a
"male version" (that is, it appeared as though it was solved by a female or a male student)
and so the exact same papers are graded by different teachers under different gender
conditions. Several aspects of our design allowed us to boost the ecological validity of the
study while still maintaining the methodological accuracy of a controlled experiment.


1
    An example of an exception is Hanna & Linden (2012), who randomly assigned student demographics to

cover sheets of exam papers to capture gender and cast discrimination in teachers' grading in India.


                                                                                                       3
First, our participants were professional math teachers and their task was to grade
examination papers that were solved by actual Fifth Grade students. Second, most of our
participants graded these papers from home, where, according to their own report, they
usually grade papers. Lastly, we measured implicit gender stereotypes not only using the
IAT but also in teachers' descriptions of their own students, in which we estimated and
quantified their tendency to associate girls with hard work and boys with brilliance. Thus,
our experiment comes close to the conditions of a field experiment in that we measured
behaviors that are natural to our participants rather than a made-up task set in a lab
room.


Participants: Ninety-three elementary school math teachers (88 women and 5 men) from
numerous towns in central Israel participated in the experiment. Two additional teachers
were dropped from the analyses because they had only taught in all-boy schools. Our
sample size was based on the expectation that the effect of stereotypes on behavior
would be medium (Cohen f2=0.15). Detecting such an effect with detection power of 0.9
would require a sample size of around approximately 100 participants.



Procedure: Participants completed the study online at a time and place of their own
convenience. The study was comprised of three parts. In Part I, participants graded the
papers and answered questions about each student whose exam they had graded. In Part
II, participants completed a questionnaire that included closed and open-ended
questions. In Part III they took the Gender-Science IAT. Finally, they were thanked and
awarded vouchers for a bookstore chain.


Materials:

Part I: Grading Exams and Assessing Students

        Each exam paper was manipulated to appear as though it had been solved by a
boy or a girl in accordance with its assigned condition. We graphically manipulated the
                                                                                         4
text of the students' written answers - adding or removing affixes to words they wrote -
to change the grammatical gender of the writer from male to female or vice versa (Fig.
S1). We created four sets of exam papers. Each set contained the same twelve papers,
solved by the same students, but with different papers manipulated and presented in the
male and female conditions in each set. Teachers were randomly assigned one of the four
sets at the beginning of the study.2 Teachers were asked to grade the papers, write notes
to the students where they thought appropriate, and write a final note for each student
with advice or a summary of what the student should focus on3. After grading each paper,
participants were also asked to fill out an assessment form about the student. Teachers
were informed that the students would not see this form and were encouraged to answer
honestly. The assessment form included questions about the student's (a) mathematical
talent, (b) mathematical capability, (c) effort, and (d) chances of doing well in a top-level
math class. The last question (e) asked teachers to advise on which math class level the
student should be placed in the following school year (Table S1). The answers to all these
questions were on 5-point Likert scales ranging from positive to negative assessments of
the student (e.g. "Very Talented" to "Very Untalented").



Measuring gender-biased grading and assessment behavior

            We used the grades and assessments that teachers gave the students to measure
gender bias in their behavior. The average grade or assessment that an exam paper
received across all conditions and teacher was used as a baseline for computing
deviations for or against a specific "girl" or "boy".4 If a teacher, for instance, awarded
exam paper #137 two points more than the average points awarded to this exam paper,
she demonstrated a two-point grading preference in favor of the student. If she indicated


2
    For further discussion see Supplementary Information
3
    We are currently analyzing teachers' notes to students, and these will be discussed in a separate article


4
    For further discussion see Supplementary Information
                                                                                                                5
that student #137 was of high mathematical abilities (4 Likert scale points) and the rest
of the sample indicated on average that student of exam paper #137 displayed medium
mathematical abilities (3 Likert scale points), she demonstrated an assessment bias of one
Likert scale point in favor of student #137. We calculated for each teacher a gender-biased
grading behavior score using the following formula:



           -       
              



Where positive values signify that a teacher favored boys and negative values signify that
she favored girls. By subtracting a teacher's deviations in the Girl condition from her
deviations in the Boy condition, we controlled for her personal tendency to give higher or
lower grades.

       Each teacher initially received six gender-biased behavior scores: one gender-
biased grading score and five gender-biased assessment scores - of talent, capability,
diligence, chances of doing well in a top-level class, and streaming advice. We tested for
internal reliability of the five biases in assessment. Diligence is stereotypically associated
with girls while the rest of the assessment items are stereotypically associated with boys
(Bian et al., 2018; Leslie et al., 2015; Nosek et al., 2009; Storage et al., 2016). We therefore
reversed the values of the diligence bias scores and tested the reliability of the five
assessment biases. The analysis revealed questionable internal reliability (Cronbach's  =
0.63) due to the inclusion of the reversed diligence bias score and we therefore dropped
the diligence score from the analysis. The remaining four biases (talent, capability,
chances, and streaming advice) demonstrated excellent internal reliability ( = 0.90) and
we therefore used their average as a single gender-biased assessment score. Finally, we
created a combined gender-biased grading and assessment score by averaging the
gender-biased assessment score and the gender-biased grading score (Cronbach's  =
0.73). This combined measure was our dependent variable in all further analyses. To
                                                                                              6
simplify the term, we refer to this measure as Gender-Biased Grading Behavior
throughout the text.5




Part II: The Survey

            After grading and assessing the papers, teachers were asked to answer a survey.
For all survey items see Table S2. The following paragraphs contain information regarding
variables that were calculated using more than one survey item.

            Implicit Gender-Brilliance Association: Teachers were asked to describe four
students whom they had taught or are currently teaching: one of high potential who had
succeeded, one of high potential who had failed, one of medium or low potential who
had succeeded and one of medium or low potential who had failed. Ninety-three teachers
wrote four descriptions of students. In 16 out of the 372 descriptions the gender of the
students could not be inferred from the teachers' grammar and these were dropped from
the analysis. We analyzed the content of the remaining 356 descriptions and tested for
gender differences in the characteristics that emerged. The following paragraphs describe
the group-level content analysis of the teachers' descriptions and the calculation of
individual Implicit Gender-Brilliance Association scores in detail.

            Content analysis: We removed all gender-identifying signs from the text,
rendering all nouns, adjectives and verbs gender-neutral by using the male/female
grammatical form, and asked two research assistants to identify prevalent student
characteristics that appeared in the teachers' descriptions and that are relevan t to
success and failure. The research assistants were blind to the gender of the students in



5
    When using grading or assessment without averaging them, the results are qualitatively similar though the

correlations and regression coefficient estimates are generally more precise when using grading than when using

assessment.


                                                                                                                  7
the description texts. The first author of this article developed a coding scheme of eight
characteristics based on the observations made by the research assistants and herself.
Two other research assistants ­ also blind to the conditions and to the sex of the students
­ coded the recurrence of these characteristics in the description texts. The coding was
done by each research assistant separately. Inter-coder agreement ranges from
Krippendorf's Cu = 0.76 to Cu = 0.93 for all codes, indicating acceptable to excellent
reliability (Table S3). After demonstrating inter-coder agreement, the two research
assistants resolved the remaining differences of their coding by conversation. We then
tested whether each of these eight characteristics was correlated with gender using chi-
square test for independence (Fig. 2B; Table S3).

   Implicit Gender-Brilliance Association scores: After demonstrating an association of
boys with brilliance and girls with hard work at the group level (Fig. 2B) we calculated
individual Implicit Gender-Brilliance Association scores by counting the number of
stereotypical and counter-stereotypical statements in the descriptions of each teacher
and subtracting the latter from the former. We defined a statement as stereotypical or
counter-stereotypical based on the results of the group-level content analysis (Fig. 2B;
Table S3). A stereotypical statement is therefore defined as describing a boy as (1)
naturally talented, (2) lazy or unmotivated, or (3) messy. It is also defined as describing a
girl as (4) lacking natural talent, (5) diligent or motivated, or (6) getting help from adults.
A counter-stereotypical statement is the opposite (e.g. describing a girl as naturally
talented or a boy as lacking natural talent). Statements referring to (7) having emotional
problems and (8) lacking help from adults were not used in this calculation because they
were not significantly associated with gender (Fig. 2B; Table S3).

   Field-specific ability beliefs: Field specific ability beliefs are the view that brilliance is
more crucial than effort for success in a certain field (Leslie et al., 2015). We asked three
questions related to this belief. The first two were indirect, asking the teachers to indicate
their levels of agreement with two opposing views: (1) "Most children have the necessary
talent for math and the main reason for differences in performance is due to the effort
                                                                                               8
that they invest in the subject" and (2) "Most children make an effort to succeed in math
and the main reason for differences in performance is due to natural talent". The third
item asked teachers to compare the importance of talent and effort for success in math
directly, reading "What influences success in math more: innate talent or effort?". The
first two items were meant to represent two mutually exclusive views and therefore be
negatively correlated. However, there was no significant correlation between the two
items [correlation coefficient r(92) = -0.13, P = 0.21]. We therefore dropped them from
the analyses and used the direct comparison item alone.

   Boy-Math stereotype: Two items were used to assess the extent to which teachers
viewed boys as better in math. The two were averaged and were used as a single score
(Cronbach's  = 0.71).

   Gender Essentialism: four items were used to assess whether teachers saw men and
women as inherently different from each other. Three of them represented essentialist
views regarding gender (e.g. "Men and women are naturally different from each other in
their ability, preferences and character") and one represented social constructionist
views ("The differences in men and women's preferences and abilities are mostly the
result of social circumstances: education, how they are treated, etc."). The three
essentialist items demonstrated acceptable internal reliability (Cronbach's  = 0.77) but
when adding the reversed social constructionist item, alpha was reduced to an
unacceptable figure (Cronbach's  = 0.42). It was therefore dropped from the analysis and
essentialism was measured through the average of the three essentialist items.

   Feminism: Two items were used to assess support and identification with feminism.
The two were averaged and used as a single score (Cronbach's  = 0.84).

   Awareness of own implicit gender-science stereotype: To assess teachers' awareness
of their own implicit stereotypes, we described the Gender-Science IAT prior to the test
and asked them to predict their own IAT score on the 7-point Likert scale used by the
Project Implicit website as feedback to participants. We then transformed their actual IAT

                                                                                        9
results to the same 7-point scale as follows: D-scores >.65 were coded as +3, D-scores
between.65 to.35 were coded as +2, D-scores between.35 and.15 were coded as +1, D-
scores between.15 and -.15 were coded as 0, D-scores between -.15 and -.35 were coded
as -1, D-scores between -.35 to -.65 were coded as -2 and D-scores <-.65 were coded as -
3. These cut-offs were made according to conventions used on the Project Implicit
website. We subtracted participants' IAT scores from their self-predicted scores and used
the delta to assess participants' awareness of own implicit gender-science stereotype. A
negative score signifies that a teacher predicted less stereotypical association than later
demonstrated (underestimating one's own implicit Gender-Science stereotype) and a
positive score signifies overestimating it. Participants with a score of zero have accurately
predicted their own IAT results.



Part III: completing the Gender-Science Implicit Association Test

       After answering the survey, participants completed a Hebrew version of the
Gender-Science Implicit Association Test and their results were recorded in our database.
We computed D-scores according to the scoring algorithm recommended in (Greenwald
et al., 2003). Three of the participants did not complete the IAT due to technical problems.
We used their data in all our analyses except those involving the IAT scores.



3. Analyses and Results:


        The data relating to this study will be available at our websites upon publication
of this manuscript. No code is available since we did not use it for any of the analyses.


Gender-biased behavior
       We calculated a Gender-Biased Grading Behavior score for each teacher by
comparing her grading and assessment behaviors in the "boy" and the "girl" papers.
Consistent with previous findings (Breda & Hillion, 2016; Lavy, 2008; Lavy &

                                                                                          10
Megalokonomou, 2019; Lavy & Sand, 2018), some teachers favored boys when grading
exams while others favored girls. The mean was not significantly different from zero (Fig.
1A).




                                                                                       11
Fig. 1. Distributions of main variables in the study. Notes. Positive/higher values
represent: (A) boy-favoring grading behavior; (B) male-science stereotype; (C) boy-math
stereotype; (D) girls work harder; (E) invest more in boys; (F) feminist views; (G) more
exposure; (H) essentialist views; (I) valuing talent over effort; (J) implicit men-science
association; (K) implicit boy-brilliance association; (L) overestimating own stereotype.
Distributions B-E and I theoretically range from -3 to +3 but the graphs only show values
that were obtained in practice. Significance values refer to two-tailed one-sample t-tests
against zero (*P<0.05. **P<0.01. ***P<0.001.). For descriptive statistics see table S4.


                                                                                          12
Implicit and explicit stereotypes and opinions

       Teachers' explicit stereotypes and opinions were assessed with a series of
questions regarding gender, STEM and brilliance (Table S2). On average, teachers
expressed stereotypical and gender-essentialist views (Fig. 1B-D and Fig. 1H, respectively)
and stated that teachers invest more in boys than girls (Fig. 1E). However, some of these
results are driven by a small minority of teachers. For example, most teachers stated that
men and women are equally suitable for science and humanities (Fig. 1B), that boys and
girls are equally talented and successful in math (Fig. 1C), and that teachers invest their
efforts in boys and girls equally (Fig. 1E). Yet because the non-egalitarian answers were
overwhelmingly in the direction of boys, the averages are significantly higher than zero.

       We measured two aspects of teachers' implicit gender stereotypes: (1) Implicit
Gender-Science Association and (2) Implicit Gender-Brilliance Association. Teachers'
Implicit Gender-Science Association was assessed using the Gender-Science Implicit
Association Test (IAT). Consistent with the general population (Miller et al., 2015; Nosek
et al., 2009), most teachers exhibited the stereotypical implicit association of males with
science and females with the humanities (Fig. 1J). Teachers' Implicit Gender-Brilliance
Association was assessed in their descriptions of their own students. Each teacher
described four of her students: one of high potential who had succeeded, one of high
potential who had failed, one of medium or low potential who had succeeded and one of
medium or low potential who had failed. We found that teachers most frequently
categorized male students as failing despite having high potential and female students as
succeeding despite having medium or low potential (Fig. 2A). A logistic regression model
with Potential (High/Medium or Low) and Outcome (Success/Failure) predicting the
gender of the mentioned student shows significant main effects for both Potential (`high
potential' predicting boy) [ = 0.53, Wald 2 = 5.3, P = 0.02, OR = 1.7] and Outcome
(`success' predicting girl [ = -0.83, Wald 2 = 14.1, P < 0.001, OR = 0.418] (Table S5). We
also analyzed the content of the descriptions and found that teachers tended to describe
their male students as talented, messy, and lazy or unmotivated, and their female
                                                                                        13
students as untalented, highly diligent or motivated, and as receiving help from adults
(Fig. 2B; Table S3). It seems that the teachers remember their male students as messy
geniuses who sometimes fail despite innate brilliance and their female students as
mediocre students who sometimes succeed by working hard and getting help. In other
words, they implicitly associate boys with brilliance and girls with hard work. For each
teacher, we counted the number of stereotypical and counter-stereotypical statements
in the descriptions they wrote of their students and subtracted the latter from the former
to create individual Implicit Gender-Brilliance Association scores for further analyses (Fig.
1K).




                                                                                          14
Fig. 2. Percentage of mentions of boys and girls (out of the total number of mentions of
boys and girls, respectively) who were described in each category (A) and with each
characteristic (B). Significance values refer to chi-square tests for independence (*P<0.01.
**P <0.001.).

                                                                                         15
The relations between gender-biased behavior and implicit and explicit stereotypes and
opinions

       To assess the relative contribution of explicit and implicit cognitions to teachers'
grading behavior, we estimated the hierarchical regression model reported in Table 1. We
started with a block of demographic control variables (model 1) and then added a block
of explicit variables (model 2) and a block of implicit variables (model 3). None of the
demographic or explicit opinion variables explained any variance in biased grading
behavior (all p-values > 0.21) except one: believing that natural talent is more important
for success in math than hard work. This belief, called field-specific ability belief (9) was
positively correlated with boy-favoring grading behavior [correlation coefficient r(93) =
0.20, P = 0.049] and the coefficient remained significant when controlling for
demographics [pr(93) = 0.24, P = 0.024]. While this field-specific ability belief was explicit,
its correlation with boy-favoring grading behavior may reflect an implicit association
between boys and brilliance. A recent study found that fields characterized by the belief
that natural talent is more important for success have a lower representation of women
(Leslie et al., 2015), and the authors hypothesized that this connection is mediated by the
stereotype that women are less brilliant than men (The Field-Specific Ability Hypothesis;
Leslie et al., 2015). Adding the belief that natural talent is more important for success in
math than hard work to the block of implicit variables in the hierarchical regression
model, we found that the coefficient remained significant (Table 1). Implicit gender-
science associations (IAT scores) were also positively correlated with boy-favoring grading
behavior [correlation coefficient r(90) = 0.23, P = 0.021]. This coefficient remained
significant when controlling for demographics [pr(90) = 0.23, P = 0.028] and when added
to the implicit block of the hierarchical regression model (Table 1). Last, Implicit gender-
brilliance associations (stereotypical minus counter-stereotypical statements in
descriptions of students) were also associated with boy-favoring grading behavior. The
Pearson correlation coefficient approached significance [correlation coefficient r(93) =
0.19, P = 0.066], and became significant when controlling for demographics [pr(93) = 0.24,

                                                                                            16
        P = 0.023]. The coefficient was also significant when added to the implicit block of the
        hierarchical regression model (Table 1). Overall, the block of implicit variables (model 3)
        explained 15% of the variance in gender-biased grading behavior, while explicit variables
        (models 2) and demographics (model 1) explained none (Table 1).




Table 1. Hierarchical regression models predicting Gender-Biased Grading Behavior. N= 93 teachers except
when stated. Significant statistics are bold. R2 comparisons are always with the preceding model (to the left).

                                                               Model 1             Model 2           Model 3
Group          Predictor                                           T     P            T     P           T     P
               Year of birth                                0.01 0.07 0.948 0.00 -0.02 0.987 0.02 0.13 0.899
               Education                                   -0.09 -0.79 0.430 -0.07 -0.55 0.582 -0.15 -1.27 0.208
Demographics
               Experience                                   0.13 0.91 0.364 0.08 0.51 0.612 0.22 1.50 0.139
               Religiosity                                  0.05 0.49 0.628 0.07 0.55 0.587 0.09 0.80 0.424
               Gender-Science Stereotype                                       0.00 -0.03 0.977 -0.03 -0.29 0.772
               Boy-Math Stereotype                                             0.08 0.64 0.521 -0.01 -0.07 0.943
               Boys or Girls Work Harder in Math                              -0.07 -0.55 0.586 -0.12 -0.94 0.351
Explicit
               Math Teachers Invest More in Boys or Girls                      0.10 0.76 0.449 -0.04 -0.29 0.772
Variables
               Feminism                                                       -0.07 -0.54 0.591 -0.09 -0.77 0.446
               Day-to-day Exposure to Feminist Discourse                       0.04 0.33 0.745 -0.05 -0.38 0.704
               Gender Essentialism                                            -0.04 -0.32 0.752 -0.10 -0.84 0.406
               Field-Specific Ability Beliefs                                                   0.25* 2.23 0.029
Implicit
               Implicit Gender-Science Associations                                             0.26* 2.24 0.028
Variables
               Implicit Gender-Brilliance Association                                           0.27* 2.11 0.038
                 2
               R                                                  0.02               0.05              0.20
Model                            2
               F for change in R                                  0.45               0.32            4.78**
Statistics
               P for change in R2                                0.767              0.943             0.004
*P<0.05. **P<0.01.
 N = 90
Note. to ease the reading only key parameters are presented here. A fuller table, including unstandardized
coefficients and 95% confidence intervals, are presented in Table S6.




                                                                                                        17
Possible remedies for biased behavior: awareness of own implicit stereotypes

          To assess teachers' awareness of their own implicit gender-science stereotype, we
described the Gender-Science IAT prior to the test and asked the teachers to predict their
scores. We then subtracted their actual score from their prediction to see if they
underestimated their implicit stereotypes. On average, teachers in the sample
underestimated their own stereotypes, predicting that their implicit associations will be
significantly less stereotypical than they were (Fig. 1L). Further, the more they
underestimated their stereotypical Gender-Science associations the more boy-favoring
their grading behavior was [correlation coefficient r(90) = -0.212, P = 0.045]. The
coefficient remained significant when controlling for demographics [pr(90) = -0.22, P =
0.039].




4. Discussion:

          Overall, implicit measures of stereotypes were correlated with discriminatory
behavior while explicit measures were not. Similarly, feminist views did not correlate with
gender-biased grading behavior and neither did exposure to feminist discourses. In
addition, the relations between implicit stereotypes and gender-biased grading behavior
remained significant after controlling for explicit stereotypes, feminist views and
exposure to feminist discourse (Table 1). Together, these findings suggest that the
mechanisms that underlie biased behavior are not only implicit, they may also be
independent from explicit opinions and identifications. Clearly, it is impossible to know
whether scores on the different explicit measures reflect the true stereotypes and
opinions of participants or only the greater ability to disguise these when explicit
measures are used. Indeed, implicit associations may be driving behavior more than
explicit stereotypes and opinions exactly because the former cannot be counteracted.
This suggests, however, that reducing implicit stereotypes would help lessen
discriminatory behavior and increase gender equality in STEM fields.
                                                                                        18
       Reducing implicit stereotypes may contribute to gender equality in STEM fields
not only because of their association with discriminatory behavior but also because it
would create a more encouraging environment for girls and women. Teachers who
discriminated in favor of girls typically exhibited less implicit stereotypes than those who
discriminated in favor of boys, as reflected in the significant correlations between implicit
gender stereotypes and gender-biased grading behavior. However, even within this sub-
group of girl-favoring teachers, implicit stereotypes were significantly pro-male on
average. Teachers with girl-favoring grading behavior demonstrated stereotypical
gender-science (M=0.27, SD=0.38, t(46) = 4.92, P < 0.001) and stereotypical gender-
brilliance (M=1.04, SD=2.91, t(48) = 2.49, P = 0.016) associations. If we consider the effects
of self-fulfilling prophecies (Rosenthal & Jacobson, 1968), this could explain previous
findings that boys are less negatively affected than girls by gender-biased grading (Lavy &
Megalokonomou, 2019). Perhaps when boys are taught by a teacher who gives them
lower grades and poorer assessments than they deserve, this teacher still associates male
students with brilliance in math and interprets their failures as due to lack of effort. The
student may internalize this teacher's view and conclude that his grades may improve if
only he worked harder. By the same token, when girls are taught by a teacher who gives
them lower grades and assessments, the teacher is likely to also have a stereotypical
disassociation of female students with STEM and a tendency to interpret their success as
due to effort, and failures as due to lack of talent. These girls may therefore feel that their
low achievements are an accurate reflection of their abilities and consequently lose
motivation to improve. A similar mechanism may be responsible for the observation that
despite the conscious efforts made to increase the number of women in STEM companies,
women still feel that their gender is a barrier to advancement and many do not maintain
their jobs, a phenomenon referred to as the leaky pipeline of women in STEM (Women in
the Workplace, 2019).

       Another finding that demonstrates that general knowledge about stereotypes and
biases may not be enough, is our observation of the different relations of discriminatory
                                                                                            19
behavior with awareness of one's own bias versus awareness of other people's biases.
While underestimating own implicit bias correlated with boy-favoring behavior, beliefs
about gender-bias of other teachers did not. Responses to the question "Do most math
teachers invest more effort in advancing and encouraging girls, or boys?" did not predict
gender grading and assessment bias [correlation coefficient r(93) = 0.13, P = 0.21]. In
other words, the general belief in the existence of biased behavior did not facilitate the
rectification of one's own biases when grading and assessing students. This could be due
to the low variability of teachers' answers to this question - 73% indicated that teachers
are egalitarian in their encouragement of boys and girls - or because recognizing biased
behavior in others allows one to feel protected from bias, whereas acknowledging on e's
own implicit bias promotes correction of biased behavior. Another beneficial tactic to
promote gender equality may therefore be to increase individuals' awareness of their
own implicit stereotypes, for example, by exposing them to their own IAT scores. Recent
studies demonstrated the effectiveness of such interventions in the contexts of teachers'
bias against immigrant children in Italy (Alesina et al., 2018) and of STEM faculty bias
against women (Devine et al., 2017). We therefore expect that focusing on exposing
individuals in positions of power, such as teachers and employers, to their own implicit
biases and training them to overcome these biases will promote gender equality in STEM
fields.




                                                                                       20
5. References

Alesina, A. F., Carlana, M., La Ferrara, E., & Pinotti, P. (2018). Revealing Stereotypes:
     Evidence from Immigrants in Schools. SSRN Electronic Journal.
     https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3295948

Bian, L., Leslie, S. J., Murphy, M. C., & Cimpian, A. (2018). Messages about brilliance
     undermine women's interest in educational and professional opportunities. Journal
     of Experimental Social Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2017.11.006

Breda, T., & Hillion, M. (2016). Teaching accreditation exams reveal grading biases favor
    women in male-dominated disciplines in France. Science.
    https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf4372

Carlana, M. (2019). Implicit Stereotypes: Evidence from Teachers' Gender Bias* . The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjz008

Charlesworth, T. E. S., & Banaji, M. R. (2019). Gender in Science, Technology,
    Engineering, and Mathematics: Issues, Causes, Solutions. In The Journal of
    neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience.
    https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0475-18.2019

Devine, P. G., Forscher, P. S., Cox, W. T. L., Kaatz, A., Sheridan, J., & Carnes, M. (2017). A
    gender bias habit-breaking intervention led to increased hiring of female faculty in
    STEMM departments. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2017.07.002

Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A., & Banaji, M. R. (2003). Understanding and Using the
    Implicit Association Test: I. An Improved Scoring Algorithm. Journal of Personality
    and Social Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.85.2.197

GSS data explorer key trends. (2019). General Social Survey.
    https://gssdataexplorer.norc.org/trends

Hanna, R. N., & Linden, L. L. (2012). Discrimination in grading. American Economic
    Journal: Economic Policy. https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.4.4.146

Lavy, V. (2008). Do gender stereotypes reduce girls' or boys' human capital outcomes?
     Evidence from a natural experiment. Journal of Public Economics.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.02.009

Lavy, V., & Megalokonomou, R. (2019). Persistency in Teachers' Grading Bias and Effects
     on Longer-Term Outcomes: University Admissions Exams and Choice of Field of
     Study. Nber Working Paper Series. https://doi.org/10.3386/w26021

Lavy, V., & Sand, E. (2018). On the origins of gender gaps in human capital: Short- and
                                                                                            21
     long-term consequences of teachers' biases. Journal of Public Economics.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2018.09.007

Leslie, S. J., Cimpian, A., Meyer, M., & Freeland, E. (2015). Expectations of brilliance
     underlie gender distributions across academic disciplines. Science.
     https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1261375

Miller, D. I., Eagly, A. H., & Linn, M. C. (2015). Women's representation in science
     predicts national gender-science stereotypes: Evidence from 66 nations. Journal of
     Educational Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000005

Moss-Racusin, C. A., Dovidio, J. F., Brescoll, V. L., Graham, M. J., & Handelsman, J.
    (2012). Science faculty's subtle gender biases favor male students. Proceedings of
    the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
    https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1211286109

Nosek, B. A., Smyth, F. L., Sriram, N., Lindner, N. M., Devos, T., Ayala, A., Bar-Anan, Y.,
    Bergh, R., Cai, H., Gonsalkorale, K., Kesebir, S., Maliszewski, N., Neto, F., Olli, E.,
    Park, J., Schnabel, K., Shiomura, K., Tulbure, B. T., Wiers, R. W., ... Greenwald, A. G.
    (2009). National differences in gender-science stereotypes predict national sex
    differences in science and math achievement. Proceedings of the National
    Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
    https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0809921106

Reuben, E., Sapienza, P., & Zingales, L. (2014). How stereotypes impair women's careers
    in science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
    America. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1314788111

Rosenthal, R., & Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the classroom. The Urban Review.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02322211

Storage, D., Horne, Z., Cimpian, A., & Leslie, S. J. (2016). The frequency of "brilliant" and
     "genius" in teaching evaluations predicts the representation of women and African
     Americans across fields. PLoS ONE. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0150194

van den Bergh, L., Denessen, E., Hornstra, L., Voeten, M., & Holland, R. W. (2010). The
     implicit prejudiced attitudes of teachers: Relations to teacher expectations and the
     ethnic achievement gap. American Educational Research Journal.
     https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831209353594

Women in the Workplace. (2019). McKinsey & Company Report.
   https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/gender-equality/women-in-the-
   workplace-2019



                                                                                           22
Supplementary Information for


On the Origins of Gender-Biased Behavior: The Role of Explicit and Implicit Stereotypes



Supplementary Text


Pilot Study

         Gender-biased grading is often measured with the double-difference method (Botelho et
al., 2015; Breda & Hillion, 2016; Burgess & Greaves, 2013; Lavy, 2008; Lavy & Megalokonomou,
2019; Lavy & Sand, 2018). This method compares the achievements of boys and girls in two
separate examinations ­ one which is graded by teachers who know them (e.g. internal school
exams), and one which is graded by blind examiners (e.g. national exams). One critique of this
method is that the difference in the achievements of boys and girls in these two separate
conditions might reflect the behavior of students rather than the behavior or biases of teachers
(Lavy & Megalokonomou, 2019). To bypass this issue, we presented the same set of twelve papers
to all participating teachers. Each paper was presented to half the teachers as belonging to a male
student, and to the other half as belonging to a female student.
       The exam included ten questions that resembled those of the national standardized math
exams of recent years. Twenty-eight Fifth Grade students solved it. We chose sixteen of these
twenty-eight papers for our pilot based on the following criteria:
    a) Opportunity for bias: We read all twenty-eight papers and selected those that provided
       more room for subjective interpretation and grading. For example, papers with a simple
       computational error or with a correct answer to a multiple-choice question followed by
       an inaccurate explanation. In both examples, different teachers may grade differently.
    b) Manipulation strength: We looked for the papers in which students used verbs that
       revealed their gender (in Hebrew, sentences like "I don't know", or "I think that..." are
       grammatically different in the male and female form). These cases allowed a simple
       graphical manipulation of student gender. By adding or removing affixes, we changed the
       grammatical gender from male to female or vice versa (Fig. S1). We created two versions
       of each paper ­ one of a `boy' and another of a `girl'.
    Ten primary-school math teachers participated in our pilot. We asked the teachers to grade
and assess the sixteen exam papers and to answer our questionnaire. We then analyzed the
results and chose twelve out of the sixteen exam papers based on the following criteria:
    1. High between-teachers grading variance (increasing the opportunity for biased grading).
    2. High between-exam papers grade heterogeneity (i.e. some exam papers with low final
       grades and some with high final grades) to increase the ecological validity of the study.
   During the pilot stage we measured the time it took teachers to grade the exams and
conducted post-participation interviews. We used the interviews to ensure participants did not

                                                                                                23
suspect a gender manipulation of the exams and to improve the overall design of the study. Based
on these interviews, we decided to include only twelve exam papers instead of sixteen and to
shorten the papers from the ten original questions to five questions in order to decrease the total
amount of time teachers spent grading and assessing exams to below ninety minutes. This was
done to prevent frustration and fatigue among participants, which could compromise their
effectiveness and cooperation.



Recruiting participants:

         The stated theme of the study was math instruction in Israel. To recruit participants, we
first contacted the education departments of local authorities in central Israel and asked them to
send an e-mail to their elementary school math teachers with an invitation to participate in the
study (Table S7). To register for the study, participants had to confirm that they were practicing
math teachers, who have taught or are teaching Fifth or Sixth Grade math. These teachers were
invited to an event at Tel-Aviv University, which included a lecture on an unrelated topic
(children's attention), followed by an online study in designated computer rooms6. As we learned
that participants did not require any assistance to complete the study, subsequent participants
were recruited via e-mail invitations by local authorities and via social media posts on math
teachers designated Facebook pages and completed the study remotely (Table S7). After they
registered online, teachers received a telephone call from a research assistant who confirmed
their identity by asking them to repeat their name and the name of the school where they work
while searching for their names on their school's website. The research assistant then gave them
instructions on how to participate in the study and sent them a link and a personal ID number for
cross referencing the different parts of the study. Participants completed the study by opening
the link at a time and place of their own convenience.



Gender manipulation of the exam papers:

        The first page of each exam paper presented fictitious demographics of the student. To
ensure that the teachers paid attention to these details, we forced them to click on them in the
following manner. Before grading each paper, participants landed on a page that presented a
student ID number and three drop-down menus, each containing one demographic detail: (1) the
student's year in school (5th grade in all cases), (2) gender (Girl / Boy), and (3) annual math Grade
Point Average (GPA) of the student (High / Low) . Each drop-down menu contained only the
`correct' item for the student. For example, if student #137 was presented in the Girl condition
then the gender drop-down menu would include only the item `girl'. In the Boy condition, it would
include only the item `boy' (Fig. S2). We told teachers that students' demographics had already
been entered into the system and that therefore each menu only contained the correct details of
the student whose exam they are about to grade ­ but that due to a technical issue, this data had

6
    The lecture was unrelated to the study and was included to make the event attractive for teachers. In the main

paper we reported results using the entire sample. The same pattern of results was found with this initial set of data.


                                                                                                                     24
to be re-entered by them. We explained that they should therefore select the item which is
available under each menu and move on to grading the exam. In addition, each exam paper was
manipulated to appear as though it had been solved by a boy or a girl in accordance with its
assigned condition. We graphically manipulated the text of the students' written answers - adding
or removing affixes to words they wrote - to change the grammatical gender of the writer from
male to female or vice versa (Fig. S1). We created four sets of exam papers, each containing the
same twelve papers. The order of appearance of the twelve exam papers was randomized. The
four conditions (High-GPA Girl, Low-GPA Girl, High-GPA Boy, Low-GPA Boy) were counter-
balanced across the four sets. Teachers were randomly assigned one of the four sets at the
beginning of the study. The GPA conditions (High/Low) were included in the study in order to
explore whether gender-biased grading behavior is different for high and low achieving students.
A two-way ANOVA with student gender (Girl/Boy) and GPA condition (High/Low) predicting
grading behavior found no significant interaction between gender and GPA (P>0.05). We
therefore ignored the GPA conditions in future calculations.



Measuring gender-biased behavior

          Intuitively, measuring gender-biased behavior should be based on a comparison of the
grade given by a teacher to some objective grades, for example grades of teachers who mark the
papers gender-blindly. However, teachers are likely to imagine a male or a female student when
marking, even if they are given no information about the student's gender. In that sense, it is not
clear that a true `gender-blind' condition can ever be achieved. In addition, Hebrew is a gendered
language and the students' gender can be detected in their written answers. The conclusion is
that it is hard to come up with an `objective' grade. We therefore used as a reference point the
average grade or assessment given to an exam paper across all conditions.



Additional Results:

         Validity of the gender-biased grading behavior variable: Teachers graded the exams of
twelve students, each comprised of five questions. Each teacher's grading behavior was therefore
recorded sixty times (12x5=60). Teachers also assessed the students' abilities over five questions,
four of which were used in our analyses. Thus, assessment behavior was recorded forty-eight
times for each teacher (12x4=48). The calculation of each teacher's gender-biased grading
behavior is therefore based on one hundred and eight trials (60+48=108). This reduces the
chances that the distribution of this measure is random noise. Furthermore, as reported in the
main text, gender-biased grading behavior was correlated with all the implicit gender stereotypes
that were measured in our study (together they explained 15% of the variability in gender-biased
grading behavior, Table 1). That the distribution of gender-biased grading behavior is not random
noise is further supported by the observation that a GPA-Biased Grading Behavior variable was
not correlated with any of the variables in our study (all p-values > 0.153). GPA-Biased Grading
Behavior was calculated using the following formula:




                                                                                                25
         -         
            



         An alternative computation of gender-biased grading behavior variable: We used four
sets of exam papers, each containing the same twelve papers. The four conditions (High-GPA Girl,
Low-GPA Girl, High-GPA Boy, Low-GPA Boy) were counter-balanced across the four sets and
teachers were randomly assigned one of the four sets when they started the study. Because the
sets were randomized, the number of times an exam was presented in each condition was not
identical across exams. To ensure that none of the conditions had a disproportionate effect on
the exam average used for calculating deviations, we averaged each test in each of the four
conditions separately and then used the average of these four averages as the baseline for
calculating teachers' deviations. We repeated all our analyses with uncorrected averages and
received the same pattern of results. We also repeated all our analyses while calculating each
teachers' deviations from the average grade that was given to papers by all other 92 teachers, not
including their own grade. Again, the same pattern of results was received.


         Controlling for the number of Gender-Brilliance Association statements: A teacher's
Implicit Gender-Brilliance Association score is defined as the difference between her stereotypical
and counter-stereotypical statements. To ensure that teachers who wrote lengthier descriptions
did not carry more weight in the results, we added the total number of statements (stereotypical
and counter-stereotypical) as a controlling variable and repeated our analyses. The results remain
unchanged, both in the simple Pearson correlation (the original coefficient is r(93) = 0.19 and
when controlling for number of statements the partial coefficient is pr(93) = 0.19) and in the
hierarchical regression model (Table S8). We therefore report the analyses without this control in
the main text in order to simplify the interpretation of the parameter estimates.


         An alternative computation of Awareness of Own Implicit Gender-Science Stereotype:
To test the robustness of this variable we employed an alternative computation in addition to the
one described in the Materials and Method section and repeated our analyses. We transformed
both the teachers' predictions of their own IAT scores and their actual IAT scores to Z-Scores and
subtracted Z-IATs from Z-Predictions. This alternative computation of awareness gives the same
correlation between awareness and grading behavior which was reported in the main text but
with a slightly stronger coefficient [r(90) = -0.23, P = 0.023]. This coefficient remains significant
when controlling for demographics [pr(90) = -0.24, P = 0.023].




                                                                                                  26
Fig. S1. Example of a student's written answer to question #1 of the exam paper, manipulated
to appear in the female (A) and male (B) forms. The question reads: "Question 1 <break> The
following exercise is solved: <break> 35:7=5 <break> complete the missing number in the
following exercise with the solved exercise: <break> 35:7x___=10 <break> Explain how you used
the solved exercise above to complete the missing number". The student answered: "I know that
five can fit in ten twice and so when I saw the solved exercise and the exercise for which the
answer is 10 I knew that I should do 5x2 to get to 10". The word "know" (circled in both sections)
would take different grammatical forms for a male and female speaker. We graphically
manipulated the answer to produce one male and one female version of the same answer,
presenting it as a boy's paper to half the teachers and as a girl's paper to the other half.


                                                                                               27
Fig. S2. Drop-down menus containing fictitious GPA (A), gender (B) and year in school (C). The
teachers were forced to "re-enter" the demographics by selecting the only available option under
each drop-down menu before moving on to grading the exam paper, thus ensuring they see the
(fictitious) demographic details of each `student'.




                                                                                             28
Fig. S3. The (translated) invitation to participate in the study on campus. This flyer was sent to
local authorities with a request to distribute to schools.




                                                                                               29
Table S1: Student Assessment Form

Please fill out the following regarding the studenta whose exam sheet you have just marked.
Please note: the student will not see this assessment form. Please answer the questions honestly and
as well as you can (you can go back and look at the exam again).

        According to your assessment, how talented is the student in math?b

        According to your assessment, what are the student's mathematical abilities?c

        According to your assessment, to what extent is the student diligent? (D) (R)b

        According to your assessment, what are the student's chances of being successful in a top-
        level class?d

        Based on the exam that you have marked, in which class would you place this student?e

Notes. (D) indicates items that were dropped from the analysis due to low reliability. (R) indicates
items that were reverse-scored.
a
  The word "student" is gendered in Hebrew, so teachers are reminded here again of the gender of the
student whose exam paper they had marked.
b
  Responses to these items were given on a 5-point Likert scale (1=very little 5=very much).
c
  Responses to these items were given on a 5-point Likert scale (1=very low ability 5=very high ability).
Responses to these items were given on a 5-point Likert scale (1=very low chances 5=very high
chance).
e
  Responses to these items were given on a 5-point Likert scale (1=Low achieving class 2=Unsure as to
whether regular class or low achieving class 3=regular class 4=Unsure as to whether top-level or
regular class 5=top level class).




                                                                                                 30
Table S2: The survey items

Teachers' descriptions of own students

        You will now be asked to think about a few students whom you have taught or are
teaching and to tell us about them in two to three sentences (without using their names). Please
describe the students as you see fit. If you're not sure what to write, you can describe the
background of each student, their character and the reasons for their success and failure.a

       Please briefly describe (in 2-3 sentences) a student of high potential in math who has
succeeded:

       Please briefly describe (in 2-3 sentences) a student of high potential in math who has not
succeeded:

       Please briefly describe (in 2-3 sentences) a student of medium or low potential in math
who has succeeded:

       Please briefly describe (in 2-3 sentences) a student of medium or low potential in math
who has not succeeded:

Field-specific Ability Beliefs:

        What influences success in math more: innate talent or effort?b

       Most children have the necessary talent for math and the main reason for differences in
performance is due to the effort that they invest in the subjectc (D) (R)

       Most children make an effort to succeed in math and the main reason for differences in
performance is due to natural talentc (D)

Notes for this part of the table. (D) indicates items that were dropped from the analysis due to
low reliability. (R) indicates items that were reversed.
a
  Since Hebrew is a gendered language, we wrote the word student in the conventional gender-
neutral form of using a slash (/) to include both the male and female affix of the word.
b
  Responses to these items were given on a 5-point Likert scale (1=effort a lot more influential
than talent 5=talent a lot more influential than effort).
c
  Responses to these items were given on a 6-point Likert scale (0=highly disagree 5=highly agree).




                                                                                              31
Table S2: The survey items ­ continued

Boy-Math Stereotype:

        Who is better in math: boys or girls?a

        Who receives higher grades in math: boys or girls?a

Gender-Science Stereotype:

         You will now be asked to complete a computerized task. Before we start, please read the
following paragraphs and answer the questions below. Different people have different opinions
regarding the suitability of men and women for work in science. Our opinions can be comprised of a
variety of factors and aspects: our life experiences, ideas that we know, our opinions about other
matters and more. Examples of people's opinions regarding the suitability of men and women for work
in science are:

        - Women are more suitable for science and men are more suitable for the humanities

        - Men are more suitable for science and women are more suitable for the humanities

        - There is no relation between gender and the suitability for science

       What is your opinion regarding the suitability of men and women for science and the
humanities?b

Notes for this part of the table.
a
  Responses to these items were given on a 5-point Likert scale (1=girls a lot more than boys 5=boys a lot
more than girls).
b
  Responses to these items were given on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from "men are a lot more
suitable for science and women are a lot more suitable for the humanities" to "women are a lot more
suitable for science and men are a lot more suitable for the humanities".




                                                                                             32
Table S2: The survey items ­ continued

Self-Forecast of IAT score

        In addition to our conscious opinions, we all have automatic thoughts about men, women
and science. Our automatic thoughts are triggered without our control, sometimes also without
our knowledge. At times, our automatic thoughts are very different from our controlled thoughts.
Because automatic thoughts can operate without our knowledge, they can influence our behavior
and the way in which we judge and assess other people, unbeknownst to us.

         The following task measures automatic thoughts. The task is called the "implicit association
test". An association is the extent to which one term is connected or associated with another term.
For example, a person can associate science with men more than science with women because of
his belief about the different abilities of the two genders due to a social stereotype, or because of
the different gender ratios of people who work in science.

        Sometimes our associations are very different from our conscious thoughts. For example, a
person might associate science with men more than science with women because of the different
gender ratios of people who work in science, and yet hold the opinion that there is no connection
between gender and the suitability for science.

      The task will measure the extent to which you tend to associate science with men or
women. It is possible to get the following results in this task:

      -    You have an automatic association between men and the exact sciences and between
women and the humanities. This association may be strong, medium or weak.

      -   You have an automatic association between women and the exact sciences and
between men and the humanities. This association may be strong, medium or weak.

        -  You have no automatic association between men and women and the exact sciences
and the humanities.

         Please answer the following question: What kind of automatic association do you think you
will be shown to have between men and women and the exact sciences and the humanities?a

Notes for this part of the table.
a
  Responses to this item were given on the 7-point Likert scale in which IAT results are displayed in
Project Implicit website, ranging from "strong association between men and the exact sciences and
between women and the humanities" to "strong association between women and the exact
sciences and between men and the humanities"




                                                                                              33
Table S2: The survey items - continued

Boys or Girls Work Harder in Math

        Who invests more effort in math: boys or girls?a (R)

Math Teachers Invest More in Boys or Girls:

        Do most math teachers invest more effort in advancing and encouraging girls or boys?a

Gender Essentialism

        Men and women are naturally different from each other in their ability, preferences and
characterb

        Men and women tend to think about solving mathematical problems differentlyb

         The differences between men and women's preferences and abilities are mostly the
result of biological differences between the sexesb

         The differences in men and women's preferences and abilities are mostly the result of
social circumstances: education, how they are treated, etc.b (R) (D)

Feminism:

        I see myself as a feminista

        I support the feminist movement and its goalsa

Day-to-Day Exposure to Feminist Discourse

      To what extent are you exposed to discourses about feminism and the empowerment of
women in your daily life?b

Demographics:

        Age

        Year of birth

        Country of birth

        Year of immigration (if relevant)

        Religious stream

        Town of residence

        In what town is the school where you teach?

        Do you have a teaching certificate?


                                                                                           34
        What is your level of education?

        What were your fields of study at university or college?

Notes for this part of the table. (D) indicates items that were dropped from the analysis due to
low reliability. (R) indicates items that were reverse scored
a
  Responses to these items were given on a 5-point Likert scale (1=girls a lot more than boys
5=boys a lot more than girls).
b
  Responses to these items were given on a 5-point Likert scale (1=highly disagree 5=highly
agree).




                                                                                             35
Table S2: The survey items ­ continued

Demographics - continued:

        To what extent have you studied about feminism and the empowerment of women in
high school?a

        To what extent have you studied about feminism and the empowerment of women in
higher education?a

     In which of your higher education degrees have you studied about feminism and the
empowerment of women?

        How many years have you taught math?

        Where do you usually grade papers?

        Where did you grade papers in the context of this study?

        Are you a homeroom teacher or have been one in the last three years?

       Do you have other roles except for math teacher at your current school? (for example,
coordinator)? If so, please describe.

        How many students have you taught in the last year?

        Of this number, how many were boys?

        What is your family status?

        Do you have children?

        (If yes) How many sons do you have?

        (If yes) How many daughters do you have?

        What is the stream of education of your school?

        Is the head of the school where you teach male or female?

        How many math teachers are there in the entire school?

        Of this number, how many are men?

Notes for this part of the table.
a
  Responses to these items were given on a 5-point Likert scale (1=very little 5=a lot).




                                                                                           36
Table S2: The survey items - continued

Filler items (interspersed throughout the questionnaire to mask the gender theme of the study):

        Children from higher socio-economic backgrounds gain higher achievements in math than
children from lower socio-economic backgroundsa

          Some children are a lost cause when it comes to matha

          Children who do not get homework support from their parents will find it hard to succeed in
     a
math

          Succeeding in math increases one's earning capacitya

        It is important to encourage children to study math because succeeding in this field increases
one's earning capacitya

      Children do better academically when studying in homogenous groups with small gaps
between children in the groupa

          In lower grades the gaps between children are smaller, and they grow larger in higher
gradesa

      Children succeed or fail in math largely due to external circumstances such as family, socio-
economic status, etc.a

          It's possible to succeed in math without getting support from one's parentsa

          Most children like matha

          Many children who like math are embarrassed to admit ita

          Children who are good at math get positive reinforcement from their peer groupa

       In what should more time and resources be invested: promoting weak students or
encouraging excellence in math?b

        Do most teachers invest more effort in promoting weak students or in encouraging
excellence in math?b

Notes for this part of the table.
a
  Responses to these items were given on a 5-point Likert scale (1=highly disagree 5=highly agree).
b
  Responses to these items were given on a 5-point Likert scale (1=invest in promoting weak students
a lot more than in encouraging excellence 5=invest in encouraging excellence a lot more than in
promoting weak students).




                                                                                             37
Table S3: Student characteristics in teachers' descriptions, by student gender.

Characteristic               # boys      # girls   % boys      % girls      2           P          Cu-

Naturally talented             78          21        29%        14%      12.06**     <0.001        0.90

Lazy or unmotivated            88          29        32%        20%       8.57*       0.003        0.84

Messy                          47          12        17%        8%        7.01*       0.008        0.80

Having emotional
                               53          20        19%        14%        2.57       0.110        0.78
problems

Lacking help from adults       29          18        11%        12%        0.20       0.700        0.86

Lacking natural talent         40          37        15%        25%       6.89*       0.008        0.76

Diligent or motivated          89          71        33%        49%       10.25*      0.001        0.91

Getting help from adults       49          54        18%        37%      18.39**     <0.001        0.93

Notes. Significant statistics are bolded (*P<0.01 **P<0.001). We present both the number (#) and the
percentage (%) of boys and girls who were described with each characteristic. Each characteristic tested
for independence of student gender with chi-squared test for independence.




                                                                                              38
    Table S4. Descriptive statistics and t-tests for main variables in the study.

 Variable                                                     M         SD          T     DF         P

 1. Gender-Biased Grading Behavior                          -0.02       0.23    -0.86     92    0.389

 2. Gender-Science Stereotype                                0.16       0.52   3.00**     92    0.003

 3. Boy-Math Stereotype                                      0.34       0.59   5.67***    92    < .001

 4. Boys or Girls Work Harder in Math                        0.28       0.89   3.03**     92    0.003

 5. Math Teachers Invest More in Boys or Girls               0.20       0.60   3.28**     92    0.001

 6. Feminism                                                 0.25       1.26     1.88     92    0.062

 7. Day-to-day Exposure to Feminist Discourse                2.97       0.98              N/A

 8. Gender Essentialism                                      0.25       1.13    2.13*     92    0.036

 9. Field-Specific Ability Beliefs                           0.01       1.14     0.09     92    0.928

 10. Implicit Gender-Science Associations                    0.35       0.39   8.54***    89    < .001

 11. Implicit Gender-Brilliance Associations                 1.45       2.88   4.86***    92    < .001

 12. Awareness of Own Implicit Gender-Science
                                                            -0.71       1.68   -4.02***   89    < .001
 Stereotype

Notes. Bolded statistics are significant. Significance values refer to two-tailed one-sample t-tests
against zero (*P<0.05 **P<0.01 ***P<0.001). Positive = stereotypical views or behavior in all except
in the following variables: 5 (positive=boys) 6 (positive=feminist views) 7 (1=very little 5=a lot) 8
(positive=gender essentialist views) 9 (positive=valuing talent over effort) and 12
(positive=overestimating own stereotype).

t-test not applicable as exposure ranges from very little (1) to a lot (5).




                                                                                                39
Table S5. Logistic Regression Coefficients Indicating the Effects of Potential and Outcome
Categories on Gender of Mentioned Student

                                                                       Wald Test

 Predictor     Estimates      SE         OR          Z          2          df          p

(Intercept)      0.87        0.20        2.40       4.35      18.90         1       < .001

Potential        0.53        0.23        1.71       2.31       5.34         1        0.021

Outcome          -0.87       0.23        0.42      -3.76      14.11         1       < .001

Model
                                                              19.74       353       < .001
Summary

Note. Potential: High=1 Medium or Low=0. Outcome: Success=1 Failure=0. Gender: Boy=1
Girl=0.




                                                                                             40
Table S6. Hierarchical regression models predicting Grading and Assessment Gender Bias. N= 93 teachers except when stated. Significant statistics
           2
are bold. R comparisons are always with the preceding model (to the left).
                                                                                                                                                95.0%
                                                                                                                                                           Unstandardized
                                                                                                                                             Confidence
                                                                                Model 1            Model 2               Model 3            Interval for B
                                                                                                                                                            Coefficients
                                                                                                                                                             (Model 3)
                                                                                                                                              (Model 3)


                                                                                                                                            Lower Upper            Std.
Group                Predictor                                                     T      P             T     P               T      P
                                                                                                                                            Bound Bound
                                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                                                  Error



                     Year of birth                                       0.01     0.07 0.948   0.00    -0.02 0.987   0.02    0.13   0.899 -0.01    0.01   0.00    0.00




                     Education                                          -0.09 -0.79 0.430      -0.07 -0.55 0.582     -0.15 -1.27 0.208 -0.17       0.04 -0.07     0.05
 Demographics


                     Experience                                          0.13     0.91 0.364   0.08    0.51 0.612    0.22    1.50   0.139   0.00   0.01   0.01    0.00


                     Religiosity                                         0.05     0.49 0.628   0.07    0.55 0.587    0.09    0.80   0.424 -0.04    0.09   0.03    0.03


                     Gender-Science Stereotype                                                 0.00    -0.03 0.977   -0.03 -0.29 0.772 -0.13       0.09 -0.02     0.06




                     Boy-Math Stereotype                                                       0.08    0.64 0.521    -0.01 -0.07 0.943 -0.10       0.09   0.00    0.05




                     Boys or Girls Work Harder in Math                                         -0.07 -0.55 0.586     -0.12 -0.94 0.351 -0.09       0.03 -0.03     0.03



Explicit Variables
                     Math Teachers Invest More in Boys or Girls                                0.10    0.76 0.449    -0.04 -0.29 0.772 -0.11       0.08 -0.01     0.05




                     Feminism                                                                  -0.07 -0.54 0.591     -0.09 -0.77 0.446 -0.06       0.03 -0.02     0.02




                     Day-to-day Exposure to Feminist Discourse                                 0.04    0.33 0.745    -0.05 -0.38 0.704 -0.07       0.05 -0.01     0.03


                     Gender Essentialism                                                       -0.04 -0.32 0.752     -0.10 -0.84 0.406 -0.07       0.03 -0.02     0.02



                     Field-Specific Ability Beliefs                                                                  0.25    2.23 0.029* 0.01      0.10   0.05    0.02

     Implicit
    Variables
                     Implicit Gender-Science Associations                                                            0.26    2.24 0.028* 0.02      0.30   0.16    0.07


                     Implicit Gender-Brilliance Associations                                                         0.27    2.11 0.038* 0.00      0.04   0.02    0.01


                      2
                     R                                                           0.02                 0.05                  0.20**


                                       2
Model Statistics     F for change in R                                           0.45                 0.32                   4.78


                                         2
                     P for change in R                                          0.767                 0.943                 0.004

*P<0.05    **P<0.01
 N = 90




                                                                                                                                                                     41
Table S7: Invitations to participate in the study



Text of e-mail sent to elementary school management teams inviting their teachers to participate in
the study on campus (translated from Hebrew)

The following text was sent to local authorities with the request to forward it to primary school
principals and math coordinators.

Tel-Aviv University is happy to invite current and former teachers of 5th and 6th grade math to attend a
lecture on the topic of "Attention in Children of Primary School Age", to participate in a study about the
instruction of math, and to receive a gift certificate to Steimatzky bookchain!

The event will be held in Tel-Aviv University, on Wednesday, 26.10.2016, at 16:00-19:00, in Sharet
Building, room 110, and is designated for teachers who are currently teaching or have taught in the past
5th and 6th grade math. We will be grateful if you could forward this invitation to the relevant teachers
in your schools.

For full details of the event, please the attached flyer [Fig. S3]. In addition, in accordance with the Chief
Scientist of the Ministry of Education, I'm attaching a permit for conducting the study from the chief
scientist and an official letter for the school teachers.

For questions you're welcome to reach out to Eliana in the address [e-mail address].

Sincerely,
The research team




                                                                                                   42
Table S7: Invitations to participate in the study ­ continued



Text of e-mail sent to elementary school management teams inviting their teachers to participate in
the study online (translated from Hebrew)



Hi [name of staff member],

I'm happy to invite the math teachers of [name of school] to participate in a study conducted by Tel-
Aviv University. Participation will occur in the time and place which will be convenient for each teacher
(it's online). Every participant will receive a modest gift.

Participating in the study will help us expand the knowledge about math studies is Israel. We hope it
will add to the existing knowledge about the pedagogy of math instruction and therein lies its
importance. Participation is open for teachers who are currently teaching or have taught math in 5th
or 6th grade.

In accordance with the Chief Scientist of the Ministry of Education I'm attaching two documents: (1) a
permit for conducting the study from the chief scientist and (2) an official letter for the school
teachers. According to the Chief Scientist's regulations the permit is for the school management and
the letter is to be distributed to the teachers.

I'll be grateful if you could distribute the letter to teachers and of course you are also welcome to
participate.

For further details and for registration you can write to me at this e-mail address.

Best wishes,
Eliana, PhD student




                                                                                                 43
Table S7: Invitations to participate in the study ­ continued



Official letter to teachers (attached to the e-mail that was sent to the school management)

Dear Teachers,

Subject: Participation in "Math Studies in Elementary Schools"

I have asked the Inspector General of Math in elementary education to distribute this letter among the
math teachers for grades five and six.
Lately, the importance of math studies has come to the forefront of public discussion. The purpose of this
research study is to examine different characteristics of teacher feedback and evaluation in the field of
math, as well as the teachers' standpoints about different educational and social subjects. We hope that
this study will add to the existing knowledge in the scientific area of pedagogy of math, and therein lies its
importance. This study is being performed in the context of my doctoral studies in the psychology
department of Tel Aviv University, under the supervision of Prof. Daphna Joel.
For this study, we invite participation of teachers who teach or have taught math in grades five and six.
The data collection from the teachers will include these actions:
1. The teachers will assess and give feedback to a number of anonymous math exam papers.
2. The teachers will answer a questionnaire about their views on math pedagogy and about social
phenomena and movements and perform a short, computerized task of social categorization of words.
The data collection is projected to last 1.5-2 hours. As compensation for their participation in the study,
the subjects will receive a modest gift. Except for their email addresses (optional), participants will be
instructed to maintain anonymity and not reveal identifying information. The study administrators will not
record any identifying details. I would like to emphasize that:
-This study has been permitted by the Office of the Chief Scientist in the Ministry of Education, under the
conditions of its permit (a copy of the permit has been delivered to the Inspector General of Math and is
attached to this file for your perusal).
-The study results will be published in a way that will conceal the subjects' identities.
-Other than the distribution of this letter, the Inspector General will not be involved in the data collection
process so that, among other things, she will be unable to know which teachers agreed to participate in
the study. Teachers who are interested in participating in the study are requested to respond directly to
me at elianaa@mail.tau.ac.il to schedule a meeting in which they can receive a detailed explanation of the
plan for the study.
Additionally, there are also plans for a continuing study on this subject. Teachers who are interested in
receiving details about it are asked to write their email in the study questionnaire. The emails will be
erased forever shortly after details about the study are sent, or by December 31, 2018, whichever comes
first. When I email you the details, I will also attach the permit from the Chief Scientist's Office for the
continuing study.

Sincerely,
Eliana Avitzour
Primary Researcher



                                                                                                 44
Table S7: Invitations to participate in the study ­ continued



Text of invitation posts in math teachers' designated Facebook pages (translated from Hebrew)



Hi, as part of my PhD, I'm conducting a study about the instruction of math and am looking for
participants. It's a pleasant study that takes about two hours (online) and at the end you get a gift
card for Steimatzky [a bookstore chain] of NIS 200 and the knowledge that you have contributed to
the improvement of the quality of teaching in Israel 
You can register at the following link: (URL)




                                                                                                45
Table S8. Hierarchical regression models predicting Gender-Biased Grading Behavior controlling for number of
Gender-Brilliance statements. N= 93 teachers except when stated. Significant statistics are bold. R2 comparisons
are always with the preceding model (to the left).

                                                                 Model 1            Model 2           Model 3

Group          Predictor                                            T      P          T       P          T      P

               Year of birth                                 0.01 0.07 0.948   0.00 -0.02 0.987 0.01 0.08 0.939

               Education                                     -0.09 -0.79 0.430 -0.07 -0.55 0.582 -0.16 -1.28 0.206
Demographics
               Experience                                    0.13 0.91 0.364   0.08 0.51 0.612 0.22 1.43 0.158

               Religiosity                                   0.05 0.49 0.628   0.07 0.55 0.587 0.09 0.79 0.432

               Gender-Science Stereotype                                       0.00 -0.03 0.977 -0.03 -0.26 0.797

               Boy-Math Stereotype                                             0.08 0.64 0.521 -0.01 -0.09 0.930

               Boys or Girls Work Harder in Math                               -0.07 -0.55 0.586 -0.12 -0.96 0.341
Explicit
               Math Teachers Invest More in Boys or Girls                      0.10 0.76 0.449 -0.04 -0.33 0.740
Variables
               Feminism                                                        -0.07 -0.54 0.591 -0.09 -0.77 0.446

               Day-to-day Exposure to Feminist Discourse                       0.04 0.33 0.745 -0.04 -0.33 0.740

               Gender Essentialism                                             -0.04 -0.32 0.752 -0.10 -0.86 0.394

               Field-Specific Ability Beliefs                                                     0.25* 2.22 0.029

               Implicit Gender-Science Associations                                               0.26* 2.21 0.031
Implicit
               Implicit Gender-Brilliance Association                                             0.28* 2.06 0.043
Variables
               Total number of stereotypical and counter-
               stereotypical Gender-Brilliance Association                                        -0.03 -0.22 0.828
               Statements (control variable)

               R2                                                 0.02               0.05               0.20
Model
               F for change in R2                                 0.45               0.32              3.55*
Statistics
               P for change in R2                                 0.767              0.943             0.011

*P<0.05
 N = 90



                                                                                                         46
