                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           TOKEN-BASED PLATFORM FINANCE

                                       Lin William Cong
                                            Ye Li
                                          Neng Wang

                                      Working Paper 27810
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27810


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020

We thank our conference discussants and conference/seminar participants at ABFER/CEPR/
CUHK Financial Economics Symposium, AFA 2020, Carnegie Mellon University Tepper School
of Business, Central Bank Research Association 2019 Meeting, CEPR ESSFM Gerzensee,
Chicago Financial Institutions Conference, City University of Hong Kong, Cleveland Fed/OFR
Financial Stability Conference, Cornell University, Econometric Society North America Annual
Meeting (Atlanta), Erasmus Liquidity Conference, International Monetary Fund, Luohan
Academy First Digital Economy Conference, Maastricht University, Macro Finance Society 14th
Meeting, Midwest Finance Association (Chicago), SFS Cavalcade North America 2020, Stevens
Institute of Technology, Tokenomics International Conference on Blockchain Economics, 4th
Rome Junior Finance Conference, Security and Protocols, University of British Columbia
(Economics Theory), University of Florida, USI Lugano, and University of Washington Bothell
(Economics) for helpful comments and discussions. Will is grateful for the financial support from
the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. Ye is grateful for the financial support from
Studienzentrum Gerzensee. The contents of this publication are solely the responsibility of the
authors. The paper subsumes results from previous drafts titled "Token-Based Corporate
Finance" and "Tokenomics and Platform Finance." The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lin William Cong, Ye Li, and Neng Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Token-Based Platform Finance
Lin William Cong, Ye Li, and Neng Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 27810
September 2020
JEL No. E5,G3

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a dynamic model of platform economy where tokens derive value by facilitating
transactions among users and the platform conducts optimal token-supply policy. Token supply
increases when new tokens are issued to finance platform growth and to reward platform owners.
Token supply decreases when the platform buys back tokens to boost the franchise value
(seigniorage). Although token price is endogenously determined in a liquid market, the platform's
financial constraint generates an endogenous token issuance cost that causes under-investment
and conflicts of interest between insiders (owners) and outsiders (users). Blockchain technology
improves efficiency by enabling commitment to predetermined rules of token supply that address
the platform owners' time inconsistency and thereby mitigates under-investment.

Lin William Cong                                Neng Wang
Cornell University                              Columbia Business School
Ithaca, NY 14853                                3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
will.cong@cornell.edu                           New York, NY 10027
                                                and NBER
Ye Li                                           nw2128@columbia.edu
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
2100 Neil Ave
Fisher Hall 836
Columbus, OH 43210
United States
li.8935@osu.edu
1         Introduction
        Digital platforms are reshaping the organization of economic activities. Traditional plat-
forms rely heavily on payment innovations to stimulate economic exchanges among users. Re-
cently, blockchain technology offers alternative solutions by allowing the creation of crypto-
tokens as local currencies on platforms and the use of smart contracts that facilitate trans-
actions among users and the financing of ongoing platform development.


                                                                                            Issue new tokens
                                                  Platform                                  to buy resources
                                                  Owners                                       for platform
                                                                                                development


                                                                    Issue new tokens to
                  Spend consumption goods                          themselves as payouts
                     to buy back tokens                              and sell tokens for
                                                                    consumption goods


         Users                                 Token Market                                   Contributors

                       Use tokens to settle                            Sell tokens for
                   transactions with each other                      consumption goods
                         on the platform



Figure 1: Token Ecosystem. The red and blue arrows represent token demand and supply, respectively.

        We develop a dynamic model to capture key economic trade-offs of various platform
participants and analyze the equilibrium dynamics of token-based communities. Figure 1
summarizes the circulation of tokens in our continuous-time platform economy.1 All trans-
actions are settled with native tokens. Users demand tokens as means of payment, enjoying
convenience yields from token holdings while being exposed to the endogenous fluctuation
of the token price. The platform owners, which include founding entrepreneurs, engineers,
and key personnel, manage the token supply by solving a dynamic problem of investment,
financing, and payout. The platform invests in the stochastic growth of productivity by
issuing tokens to resource contributors (e.g., ledger validators and application developers).
The owners also receive new tokens as payouts, but, may raise costly external funds to buy
    1
        We thank our discussant Sebastian Gryglewicz for sharing with us this figure in his discussion slides.


                                                         1
back tokens and reduce the supply to sustain the token price. The token market-clearing
condition determines the law of motion of the token price.
   We focus on analyzing tokens as monetary assets that facilitate transactions in a fully
dynamic setting rather than tokens as dividend-paying assets and their difference from tradi-
tional securities (e.g., Gryglewicz, Mayer, and Morellec, 2020). Our paper builds upon Cong,
Li, and Wang (2020) (henceforth CLW). While CLW assume a fixed token supply (standard
in the literature), this paper analyzes the optimal token supply and explore new questions on
the dynamics of platform investment and financing, the conflict of interest between platform
owners and users, and the role of blockchain technology in platform economics.
   Our key contribution lies in providing a unified framework to jointly study the endogenous
determination of token price and the optimal token-supply policies of digital platforms.
The model setup applies to both traditional and blockchain-based platforms. The optimal
token-supply policies are set to balance a realistic set of considerations, including investment
in platform development, users' dynamic adoption, payouts to the owners, and potential
financing costs involved in controlling the token supply through buy-back. Therefore, our
results shed light on the rich variety of token-supply strategies in practice and offer normative
implications on the optimal design of token-based platforms.
   Our model delivers several unique insights on the economics of tokens and platforms.
First, tokens are akin to durable goods but defy the Coasian prediction (Coase, 1972; Stokey,
1981; Bulow, 1982). The marginal cost of producing digital tokens is zero, but the equilibrium
token price can be positive because the owners' concern over the franchise/continuation value
provides sufficient incentive against over-supply and even induces the owners to raise costly
external funds for token buy-backs. The key ingredients are the endogenous growth of
platform productivity and the resulting user-base expansion through the network effects.
Both are absent in the standard models of durable goods and stationary demand.
   Second, under-investment in platform productivity arises from the conflict of interest
between platform owners and users. In our model, token-financed investment in productivity
increases the token supply as illustrated in Figure 1, but the resulting change of productivity
is random. In equilibrium, the ratio of token supply to platform productivity, which is a
measure of excess token supply, determines whether the owners receive token payouts (when
the ratio is low) or pay the cost of external financing and buy back tokens (when the ratio
is high). Following good shocks, productivity is improved, benefiting both the owners and
users. Following bad shocks, the users are free to reduce token holdings or even abandon the
platform, while the owners face an increase of excess token supply and a higher likelihood

                                               2
of future token buy-back financed by costly external funds. Such asymmetry decreases
the owners' incentive to invest. Under-investment in turn reduces the users' welfare, the
equilibrium token price, and eventually, the owners' value from token payouts.
       The root of the under-investment problem is the owners' time inconsistency. If the owners
were able to commit against under-investment, the users would have demanded more tokens,
which then increases the token price and the value of owners' token payouts. However, a
predetermined level of token-financed investment can be deemed sub-optimal ex post as the
likelihood of costly token buy-back evolves. Therefore, the discretion in token supply can
destroy value. Discretionary token supply was the norm of traditional platforms.2
       Blockchain technology enables commitment to predetermined rules of token supply, and
thus, can address the platform owners' time inconsistency. We compare our baseline model
of discretionary supply with a case of predetermined token supply that is motivated by
Ethereum (one of the most popular blockchain applications by token market capitalization).
We find that the owners' value is indeed improved under the predetermined token supply.
       Our paper is the first to show the value of commitment enabled by the blockchain tech-
nology. That said, we recognize that in practice, blockchain commitment is far from perfect,
so it is important to consider both predetermined and discretionary token supply. While
some platforms restrict the maximum of token supply, such caps are typically large, leaving
the gradual release of token reserves under the discretion of platform designers. Moreover,
platform designers are often entitled to a significant fraction of total allocation, through
which they can influence token supply despite various vesting schemes.3
       Next, we further elaborate on the model mechanisms. The users' convenience yield from
token holdings increases in platform productivity. To capture network effect, a distinguishing
feature of platform businesses, we allow the convenience yield to depend on the aggregate
number of users ("user base"). The user base evolves endogenously for two reasons. First,
the stochastic growth of productivity directly affects users' participation. Second, users'
expectation of future token price varies over time. An intertemporal complementarity am-
plifies the effects of productivity growth on the equilibrium dynamics -- when potential
users expect productivity growth and more users to join in future, they expect token price
to appreciate and thus have stronger incentive to participate now.
       The platform's investment in productivity is financed by tokens. Therefore, tokens not
   2
    For example, Blizzard, the gaming behemoth, sets the maximum of tokens the game players can purchase.
The supply of QQ coins was continuously set by Tencent as well.
  3
    Appendix B illustrates the discretionary allocation with examples including that of the Kin foundation
which dynamically manages token distribution to the founders, app developers, marketers etc.


                                                    3
only enable users to transact with one another, but also serves as financing instruments. The
platform can increase token supply and pay the new tokens to a pool of dispersed contributors
for their efforts and resources that improve productivity.4 Because the contributors sell
tokens to users who value the convenience yield and thus are the natural buyers, the amount
of resources the platform can raise by issuing tokens depends on the token price. Token price
is determined endogenously by the users' token demand and the platform's token supply.
       The owners' value is the present value of tokens paid to themselves net of the costs of token
buy-backs. In a Markov equilibrium, the owner's value is a function of the current platform
productivity and token supply, which are the two state variables. The owners' marginal
value of productivity is positive, capturing the equilibrium dynamics of users' adoption and
valuation of tokens. The marginal value of token supply is negative due to the downward
pressure on token price. The owners derive value from future token payout, and thus, resist
against over supply that depresses the token price. The owners may even find it optimal
to buy back tokens and burn them out of circulation in order to protect their continuation
value.5 In equilibrium, the owners receive token payout when token supply is low relative to
platform productivity and buy back tokens when token supply is relatively high.
       A key friction in our model is that when buying back tokens, the platform owners have
to raise costly external funds. While token buyback occurs occasionally, the associated
financing cost propagates into a dynamic token issuance cost in every state of the world
because every time more tokens are issued, the platform owners' expectation of costly future
buyback changes accordingly. Specifically, the owners' cost of issuing one more token, i.e.,
the marginal decline of continuation value, is larger than the market price of tokens, i.e., the
users' valuation of tokens. This wedge causes the platform to under-invest in productivity.
       In our model, tokens are perfectly liquid. For example, newly issued tokens are not subject
to discounts due to informational asymmetry. They are simply valued by the marginal user's
indifference condition. Despite the perfect liquidity, tokens are not immune to financial
frictions. The token issuance cost emerges because the founders' optimal buy-back relies on
costly external funds. In other words, the optimal strategy of token management transmits
   4
     Our focus on decentralized contributions is consistent with the vision of major token-based platforms
that once the platform launches, the founding entrepreneurs' contributions tend to be limited relative to the
decentralized contributors', such as KIN, a blockchain-based social network, and TON, a payment network
   5
     Burning tokens means sending them to a public "eater address" from which they can never be retrieved
because the address key is unobtainable. Practitioners often burn tokens to boost token price and reward
token holders (e.g., Binance and Ripple). Some also use Proof-of-Burn as an environmentally friendly
alternative to Proof-of-Work to generate consensus (e.g., Counterparty (XCP) blockchain), or destroy unsold
tokens or coins after an ICO or seasoned token issuances for fair play (e.g., Neblio's burning of NEBL tokens).


                                                      4
the traditional costs of external financing into an endogenous cost of token issuance.
       The dynamic token issuance cost implies a conflict of interest between owners and users.
A productivity enhancement paid with new tokens benefits users via a higher convenience
yield. But more tokens in circulation now implies a higher likelihood of costly token buy-
back in the future. Therefore, while the owners bear the costs of future token buy-back,
the benefits of token-financed investment are shared with users. Admittedly, part of such
benefits flow to the owners through a higher token price (and higher value of token payout),
but the owners cannot seize all surplus from users -- users are heterogeneous in deriving
convenience yield from tokens, so only the marginal user breaks even while those who derive
more convenience yield enjoy a positive surplus.6 Token overhang, i.e., under-investment
due to the surplus leakage to users, is a fundamental feature of token-based financing.
       After characterizing the optimal token-management strategy (i.e., investment, payout,
and buyback), we analyze the value of introducing blockchain technology in our setting.
Blockchains distinguish themselves from traditional technologies in several aspects: im-
mutable record keeping due to time-stamping and linked-list data structure, smart con-
tracting for automating and ensuring execution, and distributed design for easier monitoring
and decentralized governance. These features enable the commitment of predetermined
token-supply rules that, we show, are valuable in addressing the under-investment problem.
       Specifically, motivated by Ethereum, we consider a constant growth of token supply that
finances investment. We find that commitment mitigates the under-investment problem by
severing the state-by-state linkage between investment and the dynamic token issuance cost.
While the increased amount of tokens issued for investment results in more frequent costly
token buyback, the owners' value is higher than the case with discretionary token supply,
because the token price is higher under faster trajectories of productivity and user-base
growth. Previous studies of tokens assume predetermined rules of supply. In contrast, our
analysis starts from the fully discretionary supply of tokens. By comparing the discretionary
case with the predetermined case, we are able to identify the value-added of commitment and
to partly explain the popularity of blockchain technology among the platform businesses.
       Finally, our model also has implications on the design of stablecoins. Different from the
existing approaches based on collateralization, the platform owners in our setting support
their franchise value by occasionally buying back tokens out of circulation. When the token
   6
    The intuition is related to the surplus that a monopolistic producer forgoes to consumers when price
discrimination is impossible. Here tokens are traded at a prevailing price among competitive users, so the
platform owners cannot extract more value from users who derive a higher convenience yield from tokens.



                                                    5
supply is high relative to the platform productivity -- precisely at the moment that token
price is low but the marginal value of reducing token supply is high -- the buy-back happens.
The resulting token supply dynamics moderate the token price fluctuations.
      Overall, by analyzing a token ecosystem, our model reveals key trade-offs in the dynamic
allocation of tokens. It also provides a guiding framework for practitioners: The various
token offering schemes observed in practice can be viewed as special (sub-optimal) cases.
Appendix B discusses the institutional background and offers a rich set of real-life examples.

Literature. The most related paper is Gryglewicz, Mayer, and Morellec (2020) which also
studies endogenous platform productivity but focuses on the founders' efforts rather than de-
centralized contributors'. Mayer (2020) further introduces speculators and study the conflict
of interests among various token holders. Our paper differs from Gryglewicz, Mayer, and
Morellec (2020) in the following aspects. While they consider hybrid tokens that facilitate
transactions and pay dividends, we study tokens that only serve as means of payment. We
also focus on a different stage of platform life-cycle and different forms of uncertainty. In
their paper, the uncertainty is in the exogenous Poisson time of platform launching and the
token price is constant post-launch. We study a post-launch platform with uncertainty from
Brownian productivity shocks, and we model the endogenous fluctuation of token price. Fi-
nally, while they consider a fixed token supply, we characterize the optimal state-contingent
supply of tokens and highlight the value of commitment brought by blockchains.
      We connect the literature on platform economics to dynamic corporate finance, especially
the studies emphasizing the role of financial slack and issuance costs (e.g., Bolton, Chen,
and Wang, 2011; D´
                 ecamps, Gryglewicz, Morellec, and Villeneuve, 2016). Instead of cash
management, we analyze platforms' token-supply management when platform investment
induces user network effects and, very importantly, the token price varies endogenously as
users respond to token-supply variation.7 From a methodological perspective, our paper is
related to Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2016) and Li (2017) who study the endogenous price
determination of inside money (deposit contracts) issued by banks. The key distinction is
that tokens are outside money instead of liabilities of the issuing platforms.
      Our paper contributes to the broad literature on digital platforms. Studies on traditional
platforms (e.g., Rochet and Tirole, 2003) do not consider the use of tokens as platforms'
native currencies (local means of payment).8 We share the view on platform tokens with
  7
      Related to Cagan (1956), the platform owner essentially maximizes the present value of seigniorage flows.
  8
      Stulz (2019) reviews the recent financial innovations by major digital platforms.



                                                       6
Brunnermeier, James, and Landau (2019) ­ a platform is a currency area where a unique
set of economic activities take place and its tokens derive value by facilitating the associated
transactions.9 Beyond this, we emphasize that a platform can invest in its quality, for
example, payment efficiency (Duffie, 2019), and thereby, raise token value. Our paper is the
first to formally analyze how platforms manage their investment and payout through token
supply, and provide insights into the incentives and strategies of platform businesses.
       Our paper adds to emerging studies on blockchains and cryptocurrencies. We endogenize
token supply and incorporate platform owners' long-term interests (franchise value).10 By
doing so, we are able to provide the first unified theory of optimal platform monetary,
investment, and payout policies with both token price and user base being endogenously
determined. We also demonstrate the commitment value of blockchains.11 Furthermore, our
paper adds to the discussion on token price volatility and stablecoins. On the demand side,
high token price volatility could be an inherent feature of platform tokens due to technology
uncertainty and endogenous user adoption (see CLW).12 Saleh (2018) emphasizes that token
supply under proof-of-burn (PoB) protocols can reduce price volatility. We endogenize both
the demand for platform tokens driven by users' transaction needs and dynamic adoption,
and the supply of tokens for platform development and the founders' to extract profits. We
show that the optimal token supply strategy stabilizes token price.
       Finally, our paper is broadly related to the literature on crowdsourcing and the gig
economy. Blockchain-based consensus provisions in the form of cryptocurrency mining and
resources (capital) raised via initial coin offerings (ICOs) are salient examples of decentral-
ized on-demand contributions. Existing studies on ICOs and crowdfunding focus on one-time
issuance of tokens before the platform launches (e.g., Garratt and Van Oordt, 2019; Chod
and Lyandres, 2018; Canidio, 2018), yet platforms increase token supply on an on-going
   9
      Our model differs from the majority of monetary-policy models because tokens are issued to finance
investment as in Bolton and Huang (2017) and reward platform owners rather than to stimulate nominal
aggregate demand or alleviate liquidity shortage.
   10
      The studies on the design issues of tokens (e.g., proof-of-work protocols) typically assume a fixed user
base (e.g., Chiu and Wong, 2015; Chiu and Koeppl, 2017). A fixed token supply is a common feature among
the models that study the roles of tokens among users and contributors (e.g., miners in Sockin and Xiong,
2018; Pagnotta, 2018) and the existing models of token valuation (e.g., Fanti, Kogan, and Viswanath, 2019).
   11
      Even though commitments through tokens can be valuable in various settings (e.g., Goldstein, Gupta,
and Sverchkov, 2019), in practice, the reliability of blockchain and the associated commitment value are not
free of costs (Abadi and Brunnermeier, 2018). As analyzed by Biais, Bisiere, Bouvard, and Casamatta (2019),
proof-of-work protocols can lead to competing records of transactions ("forks"). Saleh (2017) analyzes the
forks of proof-of-stake blockchains and finality of transactions. Ferreira, Li, and Nikolowa (2020) show that
blockchain governance can be compromised by dominant miners. Commitment is often implemented via
smart contracts, for which Cong and He (2018) provide some examples.
   12
      Hu, Parlour, and Rajan (2018) and Liu and Tsyvinski (2018) document the token price dynamics.


                                                      7
basis. Existing studies also center around the founders' hidden efforts or asymmetric in-
formation pre-launch, whereas we emphasize decentralized contributors' effort post-launch
that is highly relevant for digital platforms and the gig economy.13 This distinction is a key
consideration in determining whether tokens are securities or not based on the Howey Test.14


2        Model
       There are three types of agents in a continuous-time economy: an entrepreneur (used
interchangeably with "platform owner"), a pool of contributors, and a unit measure of users.
The owner designs the platform's protocol. Contributors, who represent miners (transaction
ledger keepers), app developers, and other providers of on-demand labor in reality, devote
efforts and resources required for the operation and continuing development of the platform.
Users conduct peer-to-peer transactions and realize trade surpluses on the platform. A
generic consumption good serves as the numeraire.


2.1       Platform Productivity and Contributors
       We study a dynamically evolving platform whose productivity (quality), At , evolves as

                                              dAt
                                                  = Lt dHt ,                                             (1)
                                              At

where Lt is the decentralized contribution (resources and labor) invested into productivity
growth by the platform and dHt is a shock to investment efficiency,

                                         dHt = µH dt +  H dZt .                                          (2)

Here Zt is a standard Brownian motion that generates the information filtration of this
economy. The platform productivity At broadly captures marketplace efficiencies, network
security, processing capacity, regulatory conditions, users' interests, the variety of activities
feasible on the platform, etc. It therefore affects directly users' utility on the platform, which
  13
     The entrepreneurs in the ICO models do not engage in dynamic token management for long-term platform
development, and thus, do not concern the franchise value. Despite newly issued tokens from platforms,
decentralized contributors such as miners can also receive transaction fees (Easley, O'Hara, and Basu, 2019;
Basu, Easley, O'Hara, and Sirer, 2019; Huberman, Leshno, and Moallemi, 2019; Lehar and Parlour, 2020).
  14
     For example, SEC sued Telegram/TON that raised US$1.7 billion through a private placement for not
complying with securities laws (Michaels, 2019). The issue boils down to whether investors in tokens post-
launch expect to profit from the entrepreneurs' effort or decentralized contributions discussed in our paper.


                                                     8
shall be made clear shortly. We consider a stochastic economy to better capture reality and
to explore the model's implications on the volatility of token price.
       Platform productivity grows through Lt , which may represent labor or capital inputs,
as described in Appendix B. The investment efficiency, dHt , may result from the the en-
trepreneur's effort in designing the platform before it was launched, and thus, it represents
the entrepreneur's essential human capital. As discussed in the literature review, in contrast
to studies on founders' pre-launch efforts, we take Ht as given and emphasize efforts and
resources, Lt , from decentralized contributors compensated with tokens post launch.
       Our focus is on the dynamic interaction between the owners and users, so we do not
explicitly model contributors' decision-making but instead specify directly the required nu-
meraire value of payment for Lt to be F (Lt , At ), which is increasing and convex in Lt and
may also depend on At . Let Pt denote the unit price of token in terms of the numeraire (con-
sumption goods). Given At , to gather a contribution of Lt , the platform issues F (Lt , At ) /Pt
units of new tokens to workers. Let Mt denote the total amount of circulating tokens (token
supply). The payment for Lt adds to the growth of token supply, dMt , by F (Lt , At ) /Pt .
       The functional form of F (·) depends on the structure of labor or capital markets that
the platform participates in. A distinguishing feature of labor supply in a "gig economy" is
that workers provide on-demand contributions and receive token payments instead of long-
term employment contracts.15 Here tokens facilitate the acquisition of labor by allowing
the platform to pay for labor on the spot and thereby avoiding the limited commitment
on the part of platform that arises in the implementation of deferred compensation and
may lead to complex legal enforcement issues especially when workers and the platform
belong to different judicial areas. Moreover, since digital tokens are often programmable
(via smart contracting), escrow accounts can be set up and enforced automatically so that
tokens are released to workers only if their inputs (e.g., programming codes or solutions to
cryptography puzzles) are received. Therefore, tokens also reduce the platform's exposure to
workers' limited commitment.16 Finally, Lt also represents the capital received from crowd-
based investors, for example through initial or seasoned token offerings. Investors receive
tokens immediately on the spot instead a promise of payoff in the future, thus avoiding any
  15
    Workers may represent miners in Proof-of-Work-based public blockchains or drivers on ride-sharing apps.
  16
    Another reason to introduce tokens as means of payment for Lt is the heterogeneity in labor quality.
Consider a subset of workers supply high-quality efforts because they understand better the technologies
behind the platform. Naturally, these capable workers assign a higher value to tokens because they are not
concerned about the adverse selection problem that low-quality workers face due to their lack of technological
knowledge. In other words, in contrast to cash-based compensation, token-based compensation screens out
high-type workers and thereby improves the match between employer (the platform) and employees (workers).


                                                      9
exposure to the platform's failure to deliver future payouts of traditional contracts.
       The concern of dilution naturally arises ­ workers and investors who receive tokens may
worry about token depreciation because the platform may issue more tokens in the future.
In other words, while tokens avoid limited commitments by facilitating spot payments, the
platform's lack of commitment against excess token supply is still a concern. Our analysis
of optimal token supply addresses this question, but first let us introduce platform users.


2.2       Platform Users
       In our model, after receiving tokens, workers and investors may immediately sell tokens
to users. Workers and investors who contribute Lt can also be users themselves, and the
model is not changed at all as long as the utility from token usage and the disutility from
contributing Lt (which gives rise to F (·)) are additively separable.
       As in CLW, users can conduct transactions by holding tokens. We use xi,t to denote the
value (real balance) of agent i's holdings in the unit of numeraire. By facilitating transactions,
these holdings generate a flow of utility (or convenience yield) over dt given by

                                                -            
                                             x1
                                              i,t (Nt At ui ) dt,                                              (3)

where Nt is the platform user base, ui captures agent i's idiosyncratic needs for platform
transactions, and ,   (0, 1) are constants. Following CLW, we provide a theoretical
foundation for this specification of transaction surplus in Appendix A. A crucial difference
from CLW is that we endogenize At and the token supply Mt .
       The flow utility of token holdings depends on Nt , the total measure of users on the plat-
form with xi,t > 0.17 This specification captures the network externality among users, such
as the greater ease of finding trading or contracting counterparties in a larger community.
       We assume that users' transaction needs, ui , are heterogeneous. Let Gt (u) and gt (u)
denote the cross-sectional cumulative distribution and density function respectively that are
continuously differentiable over a support [U t , U t ] and may vary over time. ui can be broadly
interpreted: For payment blockchains (e.g., Ripple and Bitcoin), a high value of ui reflects
user i's needs for international remittance; for smart-contracting platforms (e.g., Ethereum),
  17
    One is example involves a producer who accepts tokens as means of payment and earns net profits equal
to the full transaction surplus. The profits depend on the scale of operation, i.e., the sales xi,t , and variables
that determine the profit margin, which include the total outreach, Nt , the platform efficiency At , and the
producer's idiosyncratic productivity ui .



                                                        10
ui captures user i's project productivity, and token holdings facilitate contracting;18 ;or
decentralized computation (e.g., Dfinity) and data storage (e.g., Filecoin) applications, ui
corresponds to the need for secure and fast access to computing power and data.
       As Pt denotes the unit price of token in terms of the numeraire, we let ki,t denote the
units of token that user i holds so the real balance

                                              xi,t = Pt ki,t .                                         (4)

To join the platform (i.e., ki,t > 0), a user incurs a flow cost dt. For example, transacting
on the platform requires attention; account maintenance and data migration also take effort.
Therefore, agents with sufficiently high ui choose to join the platform, while agents with
sufficiently low ui do not participate.
       Let yi,t denote user i's cumulative utility from platform activities. We follow CLW to
assume that the users are well-diversified so that their transaction surpluses on the platform
are priced by an exogenous stochastic discount factor. Thus we can interpret the equilibrium
dynamics as dynamics under the risk-neutral measure, and write user i's objective as
                                                    
                                          E            e-rt dyi,t ,                                    (5)
                                                0


where we can write the incremental utility dyi,t as follows:


         dyi,t = max 0, max (Pt ki,t )1- (Nt At ui ) dt + ki,t Et [dPt ] - dt - Pt ki,t rdt       .    (6)
                          ki,t >0


The outer "max" operator in (6) reflects user i's option to leave and obtain zero surplus
from platform activities, and the inner "max" operator reflects user i's optimal choice of ki,t .
For the special case where users are risk neutral, the risk-neutral measure is the same as the
data-generating probability (physical measure).
       Inside the inner max operator are four terms that add up to give the incremental trans-
action surpluses from platform activities. The first term corresponds to the blockchain trade
surplus given in (3). The second term is the expected capital gains from holding ki,t units
of tokens. Users care about the sum of the on-chain transaction surplus and the expected
token appreciation given by the first two terms in (6). The third term is the participation
  18
     For example, in a debt contract, the borrower's Ethereum can be held in an escort or "margin" account,
which is automatically transferred to the lender in case of default. Posting more Ethereum as margin allows
for larger debt contracts, which in turn lead to projects of larger scale and profits.


                                                       11
cost, and the last term is the financing cost of holding ki,t units of tokens.
       It is worth emphasizing that platform users must hold tokens for at least an instant dt
to complete transactions and derive utility flows, and are therefore exposed to token price
change over dt. Appendix B contains motiving examples and institutional details.


2.3       The Entrepreneur
       The entrepreneur represents the founding developers and initial investors who own the
platform and design its protocol that includes the development strategy {Lt , t  0}. Over
time, the entrepreneur receives a cumulative number of tokens Dt as dividends and, similar
to users, evaluates the tokens with a risk-neutral objective function and discount rate r:
                                   +
                      max               E e-rt Pt dDt I{dDt 0} + (1 + ) I{dDt <0}      .                 (7)
                    {Lt ,Dt }t0   t=0


When dDt > 0, the entrepreneur receives token dividends that have a market value Pt per
unit.19 Note that in equilibrium, the entrepreneur immediately sells her tokens to users who
derive an extra convenience yield from token holdings. In line with our interpretation of
Ht resulting from the entrepreneur's design efforts prior to launching the platform, token
payout can be understood as a form of compensation for their essential human capital.
       We allow the entrepreneur to buy back and burn tokens to reduce the token supply (i.e.,
dDt < 0). By reducing token supply, the owner can boost token price, and consequently
increase the value of future token dividends. A higher token price also allows the platform to
gather more resources for productivity growth in the future. When dDt < 0, the entrepreneur
raises external financing (numeraire goods) at a proportional cost  to buy back tokens.20
       Considering both the token issued for investment Lt and the entrepreneur's dividend/buy-
back, we have the key accounting identity that describes the evolution of token supply:

                                                F (Lt , At )
                                        dMt =                dt + dDt .                                  (8)
                                                   Pt
  19
     For example, blockchain behemoth Bitmain Technologies Ltd and Founders Fund (known for early bets
on SpaceX and Airbnb) invest in EOS and hold ownership stakes that entitle them for future token rewards.
The gradual distribution of token dividends can be viewed as contingent vesting in reality ­ a certain amount
of total tokens Dt have been allocated by time t but are distributed over time (via dDt ) depending on the
stages of platform development and the tokens outstanding (i.e., different values of At and Mt ).
  20
     The parameter  may also represent the forgone consumption and other investment opportunities. It is
consistent with Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2011) who also model in reduced form the information, incentive,
and transactions costs that a firm incurs whenever it raises real resources from external equity market.



                                                     12
When the platform invests (first term of right side) or distributes token dividends (second
term of right side), the total amount of tokens in circulation increases; the token supply
decreases when the entrepreneur burns tokens out of circulation. Later we show that the
platform owner's financial slack varies with Mt due to the financing cost , so the token
stock is akin to the cash inventory in Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2011), except that the token
price is endogenous and the financial slack decreases in Mt .
     In what follows, we characterize a Markov equilibrium with the platform productivity At
and the token supply Mt as state variables.

Definition 1. A Markov equilibrium with state variable At and Mt is comprised of agents'
decisions and token price dynamics such that the token market clearing condition holds,
users optimally decide to participate (or not) and choose token holdings, contributors supply
resources for the compensation of F (Lt , At ) in numeraire value, and the platform strategies,
i.e., Lt and Dt , are optimally designed to maximize the owner's value.


3      Dynamic Equilibrium
     In this section, we first derive the platform owners' optimal investment and token payout
and buyback, which in turn pin down the token supply. We then derive platform users'
optimal decisions on adoption and token holding in order to aggregate token demand. Finally,
token market clearing yields the equilibrium dynamics of token price.


3.1      Optimal Token Supply
     At time t, the owner's continuation or franchise value Vt (i.e., the time-t value function)
satisfies the following Hamilton­Jacobi­Bellman (HJB) equation:

                                                                          F (Lt , At )
    rV (Mt , At ) dt = max Pt dDt I{dDt 0} + (1 + ) I{dDt <0} + VMt                    dt + dDt   (9)
                     Lt ,dDt                                                 Pt
                                                  1
                               + VAt At Lt µH dt + VAt At A2  2  H 2
                                                           t Lt ( ) dt.
                                                  2

     The first term in this HJB equation reflects the platform's dividend payout (dDt > 0)
and buyback (dDt < 0). When there are more tokens circulating, the token price tends to
be low, and so does the owner's continuation value. Therefore, we expect VMt < 0, which we
later confirm in the numerical solution. Payout occurs only if -VMt  Pt , i.e., the marginal


                                                   13
cost of increasing token supply is not greater than the market value of token. Buyback
happens when -VMt  Pt (1 + ), i.e., when the marginal benefit of decreasing token supply
is not less than the cost of burning tokens. The second term is the product of marginal
value of token supply, VMt , and the drift of token supply, which consists of tokens paid to
contributors and tokens distributed to or burned by the entrepreneur. The third term is the
marginal benefit of an At increase. The platform productivity increases in labor Lt , which is
the mean productivity of At µH dt. But hiring labor using tokens increases the token supply
                                            FLt
Mt , which has a marginal cost of VMt        Pt
                                                dt   as VMt < 0. Moreover, labor productivity is
uncertain, so the fourth term captures how such risk enters into the choice of Lt . The next
proposition summarizes the platform's optimal policies.

Proposition 1 (Optimal Token Supply). The optimal token supply strategy is given by
the optimal Lt solved implicitly as a function of state variables, At and Mt , by

                                                          2                     -VMt
                    V A t At µ H + V A t A t A2
                                              t Lt 
                                                    H
                                                              = FL (Lt , At )               (10)
                                                                                 Pt

                                                                 
and the optimal dDt --the entrepreneur receives token payouts (dDt > 0) only if Pt  -VMt ,
                                                     
and buys back and burns tokens out of circulation (dDt < 0) only if -VMt  Pt (1 + ).

   Equation (10) equates the marginal benefit of investment to the marginal cost. The left
side is the marginal impact on the drift of At , evaluated by the entrepreneur's marginal value
of At growth and adjusted for the risk of productivity shock via the second term.
   The right side is the marginal cost of investment. Since the entrepreneur's marginal cost
of token supply can be larger than the market value of tokens, the physical marginal cost FL
is multiplied by -VMt /Pt . This multiplier reflects a token issuance cost. Here the platform
pays for investment with "undervalued" tokens. The payout/buy-back policy in Proposition
1 implies that VMt /Pt  [1, 1 + ]. Because the entrepreneur incurs a financing cost  > 0
when burning tokens, there exists a region of (Mt , At ) such that VMt /Pt > 1, i.e., a token
issuance cost exists. As will be shown in the solution, the condition -VMt  Pt holds in
strict inequality almost everywhere. We have the following corollary that highlights the link
between off-platform capital markets and the platform's token issuance cost.

Corollary 1 (Token Issuance Cost). The entrepreneur's off-platform financing cost 
leads to a token issuance cost: When  > 0, there exists a positive measure of (Mt , At ) such
that the token issuance cost is positive, i.e., -VMt /Pt > 1. This issuance cost distorts the
investment policy by amplifying the marginal cost of investment as shown in Equation (10).

                                                     14
   Token issuance cost arises even though the token market is perfectly liquid. The fi-
nancing cost creates conflict of interest between insiders (entrepreneur/platform owners)
and outsiders (users). Productivity enhancement paid with new tokens benefits users via a
higher convenience yield. More tokens in circulation now implies a higher likelihood of token
buyback and incidence of financing cost in future. While the owners bears the financing
cost, the benefits are shared with users. Admittedly, part of such benefits flow to the owners
through a higher token price (and higher value of expected token payout), but the owners
cannot seize all surplus from users. Users are heterogeneous in deriving convenience yield
from tokens, so only the marginal user breaks even after token price increases while those
who derive more convenience yield enjoy a positive surplus.
   The intuition is related to the surplus that monopolistic producer forgoes to consumers
when price discrimination is impossible. Here tokens are traded at a prevailing price among
competitive users, so the platform owners cannot extract more value from users who derive
a higher convenience yield than the marginal token holder.
   Token overhang, i.e., under-investment due to the leakage of surplus to users, is the
fundamental characteristic of token-based financing. Uncertainty also plays a critical role
here. Without dZt , the productivity shock, Lt , always increases At . Then, with a sufficiently
efficient investment technology F (·) (so that very few new tokens are needed to pay for Lt ),
we arrive at a situation where, following investment, At always grows faster than Mt , and
thus, the platform always moves away from costly buyback. As a result, the financing cost is
never a concern given this sufficiently efficient F (·). However, in the presence of uncertainty
in investment outcome, there always exists a probability that Mt increases faster than At
after investment, moving the platform closer to costly buyback.
   In sum, the mechanism of token overhang relies on three ingredients in the model. First,
when platform owners raise consumption goods to buy tokens out of circulation, they face
a financing cost. Second, users are heterogeneous in deriving convenience yield from token
holdings, and a single token price is formed in a unified token market through competitive
trading. Third, the outcome of platform investment is uncertain. The first ingredient creates
a private cost of investment for platform owners, and the second implies a surplus leakage
to users. Together, they generate conflict of interest between owners and users. Finally, the
third ingredient, uncertainty, is needed so that in spite of the specification of F (·), token
overhang always exists.
   Before ending the analysis of token supply, we emphasize that our characterization of the
optimal investment and payout/buyback policies allays the concern over fraudulent designs

                                              15
by founding developers and the resulting explosion of token supply that destroys token value.
One might worry that the entrepreneur has strong incentive and ample opportunity to build
"back doors" in the protocol that allow them to steal tokens when tokens become valuable.
The stolen tokens are likely to be sold in secondary markets for dollars, and thus, depress the
token price. However, as shown in Proposition 1, our setup already allows the entrepreneur
to extract token as dividends and the optimal payout policy maximizes the owner's value, so
it is an incentive-compatible rewarding scheme for the founding designers. In other words,
we characterize a subgame perfect equilibrium between a large player (the platform) and a
continuum of small players (users). From a regulatory perspective, any proposal of blockchain
or platform design should disclose the schemes of payout to the founding developers and they
should be broadly in line with the above characterization.


3.2    Optimal Token Demand
   We conjecture and later verify that in equilibrium, the token price, Pt , evolves as

                                    dPt = Pt µP         P
                                              t dt + Pt t dZt ,                              (11)

where µP     P
       t and t are endogenously determined. Agents take the price process as given under
rational expectation. Conditioning on joining the platform, user i chooses the optimal token
           
holdings, ki,t , by using the first order condition,

                                                         
                                             Nt At ui
                                 (1 - )           
                                                            + µP
                                                               t = r,                        (12)
                                              Pt ki,t

which states that the sum of marginal transaction surplus on the platform and the expected
token price change is equal to the required rate of return, r.
   Rearranging this equation, we obtain the following expression for the optimal token
holdings:
                                                                 1

                                           Nt At ui      1-      
                                  ki,t   =                           .                       (13)
                                             Pt         r - µP
                                                             t
 
ki,t has several properties. First, agents hold more tokens when the common productivity,
At , or agent-specific transaction need, ui , is high, and also when the user base, Nt , is larger
due to network effects. Equation (13) reflects an investment motive to hold tokens, that is
 
ki,t increases in the expected token appreciation, µP
                                                    t .
          
   Using ki,t , we obtain the following expression for the user's maximized profits conditional

                                                 16
on participating on the platform:
                                                            1-
                                                             
                                                1-
                                   Nt At ui                         - .                   (14)
                                               r - µP
                                                    t


User i only participates when the preceding expression is non-negative. That is, only those
users with sufficiently large ui participate. Let ut denote the type of the marginal user, then
                                                                             1-
                                                                              
                                                                    r - µP
                                                                         t
                         ut = u Nt ; At , µP
                                           t   =                                  .       (15)
                                                Nt A t               1-

The adoption threshold ut is decreasing in At because a more productive platform attracts
more users. The threshold also decreases when agents expect a higher token price appreci-
ation (i.e., higher µP
                     t ). Because only agents with ui  ut participate, the user base is then



                                         Nt = 1 - Gt (ut ) .                              (16)

Equations (15) and (16) jointly determine the user base Nt given At and µP
                                                                         t . Note that zero
adoption is always a solution, and trivially leads to zero token price.

Proposition 2 (Token Demand and User Base). Given At and µP
                                                          t , the platform has
a positive user base if Equations (15) and (16) have solutions for ut and Nt . Conditional
                                                   
on participating, User i's optimal token holding, ki,t , is given by Equation (13). The token
          
holding, ki,t , decreases in Pt and increases in At , µP
                                                       t , ui , and Nt .


   To obtain the numerical solution, we later specify Gt (u) and explicitly derive Nt .


3.3    Token Market Clearing
   Clearing the token market determines the token price. Let us define the participants'
aggregate transaction need as
                                      Ut :=          ugt (u) du,                          (17)
                                               uut

the integral of ui of participating agents.
   The market clearing condition is

                                                          
                                        Mt =             ki,t di.                         (18)
                                                i[0,1]



                                                 17
Substituting optimal holdings in Equation (13) into the market clearing condition in Equa-
tion (18), we arrive at the Token Pricing Formula.

Proposition 3 (Token Pricing). The equilibrium token price is given by
                                                                   1
                                           Nt Ut At        1-      
                                      Pt =                             .                                (19)
                                             Mt           r - µP
                                                               t



       The token price increases in Nt ­ the larger the user base is, the higher trade surplus
individual participants can realize by holding tokens, and stronger the token demand. The
price-to-user base ratio increases in the platform productivity, the expected price appreci-
ation, and the network participants' aggregate transaction need, while it decreases in the
token supply Mt .21 Equation (19) implies a differential equation for Pt on the state space
of (Mt , At ). This can be clearly seen once we apply the infinitesimal generator to the token
price, Pt = P (Mt , At ), in the Markov equilibrium to express µP
                                                                t into a collection of first and
second derivatives of Pt by It^
                              o's lemma. Note that the equilibrium user base, Nt , is already a
function of At and µP
                    t as shown in Proposition (2). Therefore, the collection of token market
clearing conditions at every t essentially characterize the full dynamics of token price.
       Equations (8) and (18) describe the primary and secondary token markets. The change
of Mt is a flow variable, given by Equation (8), that includes the new issuances from platform
investment and payout and the repurchases by the entrepreneur. The token supply Mt is a
stock variable, and through Equation (18), it equals the token demand of users.

Discussion: durable-good monopoly. The problem faced by token-based platform rem-
inisces the classical durable-good monopoly problem (e.g., Coase, 1972; Stokey, 1981; Bulow,
1982). Indeed, token-based platforms share several characteristics with durable-good mo-
nopolists. First, token issuance permanently increases the total supply, so when issuing
tokens to finance investment or payout, platform owners are competing with future selves.
Second, the physical cost of creating tokens is zero, so it seems that platform owners can
be tempted to satisfy the residual token demand by ever lowering token price as long as the
price is positive, i.e., above the marginal cost of production. Given that users rationally form
  21
    The formula reflects certain observations by practitioners, such as incorporating DAA (daily active
addresses) and NVT Ratio (market cap to daily transaction volume) in token valuation framework, but
instead of heuristically aggregating such inputs into a pricing formula, we solve both token pricing and user
adoption as an equilibrium outcome. See, for example, Today's Crypto Asset Valuation Frameworks by
Ashley Lannquist at Blockchain at Berkeley and Haas FinTech.


                                                     18
expectation of future token price, users may wait for lower prices, which in turn implies that
platforms flood the market with tokens immediately after launching, driving token price to
zero. This is the classic Coase intuition. However, in our model, platforms pay out tokens to
owners gradually, only at the payout boundary, and voluntarily buy back and burn tokens
out of circulation. Such token-supply policies result in a positive and stationary token price.
    Our model differs from the Coasian setting in two aspects. First, even though the physical
cost of producing tokens is zero, the dynamic token issuance cost increases in the token supply
as will be shown in the next section. This reminisces the result in Kahn (1986) that the Coase
intuition does not hold in the presence of increasing marginal cost of production. Second, in
contrast to theories of durable-good monopoly, token demand in our model is not stationary;
in fact, given the geometrical growth of At due to platform investment, token demand grows
exponentially. Therefore, users cannot expect lower token price in the future. Moreover,
because reversing token issuance through burning incurs a financing cost, the real-option
consideration under uncertainty in At further deters excessive token supply. In sum, what
distinguishes our model from models of durable-good monopoly is the endogenous growth
of platform productivity. As will be shown in Section 4, At and Mt are cointegrated in
the Markov equilibrium, so the platform does try to take advantage of the expanding token
demand driven by productivity growth but does not over supply.


4     Equilibrium Characterization
    We further characterize the equilibrium by analytically deriving and numerically solv-
ing the system of differential equations concerning token price and platform owners' value
function. To streamline exposition and focus on core economic insights, we make some
simplifying parametric assumptions.


4.1    Parametric Choices
    Following the literature on investment in finance and macroeconomics (e.g., Bolton, Chen,
and Wang, 2011), we assume a convex (quadratic) investment cost function of F :

                                                      
                                F (Lt , At ) =    Lt + L2 At ,                            (20)
                                                      2 t




                                                 19
where  > 0 can depend on the elasticity of labor and capital supply. In comparison with tra-
ditional contracts, token-based compensation may enlarge the supply elasticity and thereby
reduce  by alleviating the problem of limited commitment as previously discussed.

Lemma 1 (Parameterized Optimal Investment). Under the parametric restriction
given by Equation (20), the platform's optimal investment is

                                                                         VMt
                                                            VA t µ H +    Pt
                                             Lt   =        VMt
                                                                                      ,             (21)
                                                       -    Pt
                                                                  - V A t A t At  2


       To obtain closed-form solutions, we assume that ui follows the commonly used Pareto
distribution on [U t , +) with cumulative probability function (c.d.f.) given by

                                                                               
                                                                        Ut
                                                Gt (u) = 1 -                      ,                 (22)
                                                                        u

                                                                                                    U t
where   (1, 1/ ) and U t = 1/ (At ) ,  > 0,   (0, 1). The cross-section mean of ui is                -1
                                                                                                        .
       Note that U t decreases in At , which reflects the competition from alternative platforms
that are inspired by the platform's success (i.e., a high value of At ). For example, this speci-
fication captures the reality that after the success of Bitcoin, alternative blockchains emerge
as competitors in the area of payments. Similarly, there now exist alternative platforms to
Ethereum for smart contracting. The effects of competition are small when  is close to
zero. As At increases, the mass of ui is shifted towards lower values.22

Lemma 2 (Parameterized User Base). Given At and µP
                                                 t , from Proposition 2, we have
a unique non-degenerate solution, Nt , for Equations (15) and (16) under the Pareto distri-
bution of ui given by Equation (22):
                                                                                1-
                                             A1
                                              t
                                                -
                                                           1-
                                                                    1 -  ( 1- )(  )
                                Nt =                                                ,               (23)
                                                                   r - µP
                                                                        t

                            - 1-        1-        
if ut      1
           A
               ,   i.e., A1
                          t  ( r-µP )             
                                                   ;   otherwise, Nt = 1.
             t                    t


       Our later discussion focuses on  < 1 so that the user base, Nt , is increasing in the
platform productivity in spite of platform competition. This is realistic because a technol-
ogy leader usually benefits from its innovation despite the presence of potential competing
  22
    Platform competition can also be captured by the depreciation of At . The current specification lends
technical convenience.

                                                                20
followers. Moreover, we focus on low values of At such that Nt < 1 in the Markov equilibrium
so as to examine how token allocation interacts with user base dynamics. Under the Pareto
distribution, the aggregate transaction need is given by
                                                                -1              -1  1-
                     ut                                A1
                                                        t
                                                          -
                                                               1-
                                                                        1 -  ( 1- )(  )
         U t = Nt               =                                                       .    (24)
                     -1               ( - 1) At                        r - µP
                                                                            t


   We adopt the following parameter restriction, which helps reduce the dimension of state
space in our numerical analysis and convey economic intuitions.
                    2 -1        
Assumption 1.       1-
                           =   1-
                                  .

   The assumption implies  > 1/2 given that  > 0 and  < 1. Moreover, Nt increases
in At while Ut decreases in At , and the effects of At on Nt and Ut exactly cancel out each
other in the token pricing formula (Equation (19)). The intuition is that even though higher
platform productivity induces more users to adopt, individual users' needs are now weaker
because they have access to alternative platforms. The token pricing formula then simplifies.

Lemma 3 (Parameterized Token Price). Under Assumption 1, the equilibrium token
price in Proposition 3 when Nt < 1 is given by
                                                                     1
                                                                       + 1-
                                                                       (           
                                                                               )( 1- )
                         At                       1-        1-            
                    Pt =             1                                                   .   (25)
                         Mt ( - 1)  1-                     r - µP
                                                                t



   In the following, we characterize a Markov equilibrium in a transformed state space. The
equilibrium variables depend on (mt , At ), where

                                                    Mt
                                             mt =      .                                     (26)
                                                    At

By inspecting Equation (25), we can see that mt is the only state variable driving the token
price ­ in such an equilibrium µP
                                t is a function of mt only and so is Pt .
   For the parameters that affect user activities, we follow CLW to set  = 0.3,  = 1,
r = 0.05, and the volatility parameter,  H = 2. For the mean productivity growth, we set
µH = 0.5, which generates a µP
                             t in line with the values in CLW. We set the rest of parameters
to illustrate the qualitative implications of the model:  = 10, 000 so the highest level of
investment, Lt , is about 25% higher than the lowest level for illustrative purpose;  = 2,
 = 0.8 and  = 100 for the distribution parameters of ui ;  = 20% for the financing cost.

                                                  21
The model's qualitative implications are robust to the choice of these parameters. Finally,
we set  = 1/8 to satisfy Assumption 1.


4.2    Solving the Equilibrium
   We numerically solve the model in the space (mt , At ), where mt = Mt /At , instead of
the original space (Mt , At ), because given the parametric choices in Section 4.1, mt shall be
the only state variable driving the token price Pt and the platform investment Lt . By It^
                                                                                         o's
Lemma, the dynamics of mt is given by:

                                 dmt   dMt dAt
                                     =     -    + L2  H 2
                                                   t ( ) dt,                                  (27)
                                 mt     Mt   At

where the last term is a quadratic variation term from It^
                                                         o's calculus. We conjecture that
                                       Mt
the value function V (Mt , At ) = v    At
                                            At , so the derivatives are given by:

                                                                                       m2
                                                                                        t
             VMt = v (mt ) ,     VAt = v (mt ) - v (mt ) mt ,       VAt At = v (mt )      .   (28)
                                                                                       At

In the interior region (dDt = 0), the HJB equation is:

                              2
                        Lt + 2 Lt                                  1
 rv (mt ) = max v (mt )           + [v (mt ) - v (mt ) mt ] Lt µH + v (mt ) m2  2  H 2
                                                                             t Lt ( ) . (29)
             Lt            Pt                                      2

To confirm the value function conjecture, we should show Pt and Lt are functions of mt .
   Substituting these derivatives of V (Mt , At ) into the optimal investment, we have:

                                                                    v (mt )
                                     [v (mt ) - v (mt ) mt ] µH +     Pt
                            Lt   =                                          .                 (30)
                                       -v ( mt )
                                                  - v (mt ) m2      H 2
                                          Pt                 t ( )


Therefore, Lt is a function of mt as long as Pt is a function of mt . Equation (25) implies that
Pt is a function of mt because when Pt is a function of mt , so is µP
                                                                    t . Hence the conjecture of
mt being the only the state variable driving Pt and Lt is internally consistent.
   The optimality conditions for dDt give us the boundary conditions for solving v (mt ). We
conjecture that v < 0 because when mt increases, more tokens are supplied and the current
and future token prices decline, which reduces the owner's continuation value. There exists
                                        
a lower bound for mt such that mt  m, dDt  0. At this payout boundary, the marginal



                                                  22
value of retained token must be equal to the market value, i.e.,

                                       -v (m) = P (m) .                                  (31)

Since the payout boundary is optimally chosen, we also have the usual "super contact"
condition:
                                      -v (m) = P (m) .                                   (32)

Moreover, because the payout boundary is a reflecting boundary, to rule out arbitrage in the
token market, we have:
                                          P (m) = 0.                                     (33)

Intuitively, the distribution of token dividends happens when the token supply is sufficiently
small relative to the platform productivity, i.e., low mt .
   The upper bound for mt is the buyback boundary. As mt increases, the token supply is
large relative to the platform productivity, and the token price declines, so the owners buy
back and burn tokens out of circulation. At mt = m,

                                   -v (m) = P (m) (1 + ) .                               (34)

Since the buyback boundary is optimally chosen, we also have the "super contact" condition:


                                  -v (m) = P (m) (1 + ) .                                (35)

Moreover, because the payout boundary is a reflecting boundary, to rule out arbitrage in the
token market, we have:
                                          P (m) = 0.                                     (36)

At the boundaries, the amount of payout and buyback exactly offsets the variation in mt
from Lt and the shock dZt that would otherwise drive it beyond the boundaries.

Proposition 4 (Markov Equilibrium). With Lemmas 1, 2, and 3, there exists a Markov
equilibrium with At and mt = Mt /At as state variables and the following properties:
(i) P (mt ) and v (mt ) uniquely solve the system of ordinary differential equations given by
Equation (25) and (29) subject to boundary conditions given by Equations (31) to (36).
(ii) Platform investment Lt and the payout/buy-back policy Dt all depend on mt only.
(iii) Users' optimal token holdings and participation decisions together with the user base


                                               23
depend on both mt and At according to Proposition 2.

Discussion: token supply limit. Blockchain platforms often feature a maximum total
token supply. One way to incorporate this is to have an absorbing upper bound of mt , say
m. In such case, once reaching a multiple of the platform productivity, i.e., mAt , the supply
would grow proportionally with At forever, and according to Lemma 3, token price will then
be a constant. As for newly issued tokens, they are divided between the entrepreneur and
contributors, and here the entrepreneur faces a standard consumption-savings trade-off ­ if
she takes a larger share of the new tokens, the productivity grows slower.


4.3    Endogenous Platform Development
   Panel A of Figure 2 plots v (mt ). Because the value function, V (Mt , At ) = v (mt ) At ,
Panel A shows that the platform owners' value, scaled by productivity, declines in the
productivity-adjusted token supply (a form of platform "inflation"). Intuitively, when more
tokens are circulating relative to platform productivity, it is more likely for the owner to
reach the buyback (upper) boundary and pay the financing cost, and in the less likely event
of token payout, the owner receives a lower value due to the depressed token price when
mt is high. Note that the value function is always positive in Panel A, suggesting that the
platform owner never abandons the platform. The curve starts at the payout boundary and
ends at the buyback boundary where the owner actively devotes real resources to buy back
and burn tokens out of circulation in order to support token price and her franchise value.
   Panel B of Figure 2 plots the optimal platform investment against the productivity-
adjusted token supply. The declining pattern is largely driven by the rising cost of token
issuance (Panel C), even though as mt increases, the marginal value of productivity enhance-
ment rises (Panel D). The economic force of token overhang dominates.
   The optimal Lt decreases in -VMt /Pt , the ratio of the marginal cost of token issuance,
-VMt , to the token market price, Pt . This ratio measures the valuation gap that exists
between platform owners (insiders) and the workers and users (outsiders), i.e., the token
issuance cost. When the gap is high, it is costly from the owners' perspective to gather
resources using tokens. The ratio starts at one, as implied by the value-matching condition
of the payout boundary. The gap widens as the token supply outpaces the growth of plat-
form productivity, i.e., as mt increases, and eventually, when the gap reaches (1 + ), the
platform owner's optimal buy back tokens. The increasing -VMt /Pt largely contributes to


                                             24
         Figure 2: Optimal Platform Investment Financed by Token Issuances.


the decreasing pattern of Lt.
       The optimal Lt increases in VAt , the marginal value of At , because on average, investment
has a positive productivity, i.e., µH > 0, more resources gather by token payments, Lt , means
a higher expected growth of At . Near the buyback boundary, VAt is high because an increase
of At reduces mt and the likelihood of costly buyback.
       Finally, according to Equation (10), the second-order derivative of the value function with
respect to productivity also affects the choice of investment, which essentially represents a
precautionary motive in the choice of Lt . It is not presented here because under the current
parameterization, its quantitative contribution to the dynamics of Lt is small. However, the
intuition of precaution towards investment risk is still interesting. The token distribution
is largely a real-option decision. While it is not completely irreversible, reversing it (i.e.,
buying back tokens) incurs a cost of .23 The probability of incurring such costs increases
  23
   Fpr example, the Synereo team has to hold multiple meetings and incur effort cost to explain to users
when the team burned 33% of its cryptocurrency reserves. https://synereo.com/burn-amps/



                                                  25
as mt approaches the buyback boundary, so the platform becomes increasingly cautious on
making large investment that also brings in large exposure to investment productivity shock
in Equation (2). Therefore, the platform owner may choose to invest less in order to preserve
some slack, i,e., the flexibility to issue more tokens in the future.
   Overall, our model reveals a rich set of trade-offs in the choice of token-compensated
contributions for platform development. The model has the potential to explain various
features of token distribution to open-source engineers, miners (ledger maintainers), and
crowd-sourced financiers in practice.


4.4    Token Price and User Adoption
   The dynamics of token price is directly linked to that of token supply. As shown in
Panel A of Figure 3, the token price, Pt , declines in mt , the productivity-adjusted token
supply. From Equation (27), the diffusion of mt is -mt Lt
                                                          H
                                                            (through -dAt /At ), which is
negative. Therefore, a positive shock in labor productivity decreases mt by increasing At ,
moving the economy closer to the payout boundary. The token price increases in response
and is procyclical with respect to the shock.
   That said, in stark contrast to the 200% per annum volatility of labor productivity that
                                            P
we input, i.e., the fundamental volatility, t is surprisingly small (below 0.2% in Panel B
of Figure 3) due to the stabilizing effect of the endogenous cumulative token process Dt .
The platform owners' incentive to pay out when mt is low and buy back when mt is high
moderate the variation of token price through the control over token supply.

                                                                         1
Corollary 2. From Proposition 1, the token price is bounded in -        1+
                                                                             VMt , -VMt .

   Here the token value has two anchors. First, users need tokens for transactions. Second,
when token price declines significantly below the marginal cost of having one more unit of
token circulating, i.e., Pt  -VMt / (1 + ), the owner optimally chooses to exchange real
resources (i.e., dollars) for tokens to reduce the supply.
   Panel C of Figure 3 shows the expected token price change against mt . When mt is low,
the expectation is negative, reflecting the likely token-supply increase due to payout and
labor demand (Panel A of Figure 2). The expected token price change gradually increases
and eventually becomes positive because the expected token-supply change is increasingly
dominated by the declining investment (Panel A of Figure 2) and the possibility of token
buyback by the platform owners.


                                                26
         Figure 3: Token Price Dynamics, Stablecoin, and User Adoption.


   In Proposition 2, unlike other variables in the model that only depends on mt , the user
base Nt depends on both mt (through µP
                                     t ) and At . Panel D of Figure 3 plots the user base
dynamics with different values of At to show that as the the risk-adjusted token appreciation,
µP
 t , increases, the user base also increases.



Discussion: stablecoins. Although price volatility does not necessarily invalidate the
medium-of-exchange function of tokens (Schilling and Uhlig, 2018), achieving stable values
has become a holy grail in the cryptocurrency industry. Practitioners have proposed several
candidate designs for stablecoins as a powerful alternative to fiat money and even digital
payments through the commercial banking system (e.g., Duffie, 2019).
   A popular approach is to mimic open market operations done by central banks. When
token price is low, the platform issues token bonds to buy back tokens. Token bonds promise
to pay the principal with interest in the future, but all payments are in tokens. The problem
with this design is that an inter-temporal substitution between current and future tokens tilts


                                                27
the schedule of token supply over time, but it does not introduce any real resource to support
token price, nor does it provide any incentive to economic agents to devote such resources. A
champion of this design, the Basis stablecoin project that attracted $133 million of venture
capital in April 2017, has closed down all operations, citing US securities regulation as the
reason for its decision.24
       An alternative design is collateralization, backing token value with real resources such
as dollar (e.g., Tether, Circle, Gemini, JPM coin, and Paxos), oil reserves (e.g., Venezuelas
El Petro, OilCoin, and PetroDollars). A derivative of such design is to further tranche the
claims on real resources, so tokens as means of payment are the most senior tranche, which
is less information-sensitive and thus has a stable secondary-market value. Such designs are
often subject to frauds and market manipulations (e.g., Griffin and Shams, 2018).
       The way the buyback policy stabilizes token value in our paper differs from these ex-
isting proposals. First, we introduce the value of platform ownership -- the continuation
or franchise value -- that derives value from token dividends which are optimally chosen.
Then, given the economic cost of buying back tokens, , we characterize the incentive for the
platform owners to voluntarily buy back tokens using the numeraire goods (real resources).
The parameter  may change, and can even be a function of macroeconomic state variables
to better represent the cost of token buyback.
       Note that it is in the interest of platform owners such as the founders to buy back
tokens, which provides an incentive-compatible support for token price. Later we introduce
commitment using smart contracting which can further help creating stablecoins.


5        Blockchain and the Value of Commitment
       The rise of tokens as means of payment on digital platforms is a recent phenomenon with
many applications inspired by the success of Bitcoin, Ethereum, and other blockchain-based
startups. So far, we have focused on discretionary token-supply policies of the platform ­
depending on the state of the world, platform owners can freely adjust the token issuance to
finance platform development or to pay the themselves or to buy back tokens.
       The blockchain technology allows consensus protocols and token supply rules to be im-
mutable. Next, we study how commitment to predetermined token-supply rules addes value.
Our analysis sheds light on why tokens become a viable payment solution after the blockchain
  24
    https://icoexaminer.com/ico-news/133-million-basis-stablecoin-project-ceases-and-desists-citing-
regulatory-concerns/


                                                    28
technology becomes available and the welfare gains for platform owners and users. In Ap-
pendix B, we summarize the three aspects of blockchain technology that are critical in en-
abling commitment, including data structure, smart contracting, decentralized data storage
and governance. We highlight both the advantages of blockchain-based commitment over
traditional approaches (e.g., collateral) and its limitations.

Constant growth of token supply. To illustrate the impact of commitment brought
forth by the blockchain technology, we consider a specific case in which F (Lt , At ) /Pt dt =
µM Mt dt, which implies a constant growth of token supply in the interior region (dDt = 0)
to finance the enhancement of platform productivity:

                                 dMt = F (Lt , At ) /Pt dt = µM Mt dt,                                (37)

which is popular among blockchain applications as a way to create scarcity and avoid inflation
of tokens.25 This rule of token supply implies that the resources a platform gathers, Lt , is
fixed given the current productivity At , token price Pt , and token supply Mt . In our numerical
solution, we use µM = 10, which is the average level of token growth in the baseline model.
       We still allow the platform owners to receive token dividends and buy back tokens, but
with Lt fixed, the owners' only control variable is dDt and the HJB equation directly specifies
a differential equation for the value function:

       rV (Mt , At ) dt = max Pt dDt I{dDt 0} + (1 + ) I{dDt <0} + VMt µM Mt dt + dDt                 (38)
                         dDt
                                           1
                        + VAt At Lt µH dt + VAt At A2  2  H 2
                                                    t Lt ( ) dt.
                                           2

Comparing it with Equation (9), the token paid for Lt is replaced by µM Mt dt. Under the
parametric choices in Section 4.1 and in the interior where dDt = 0, we have

                                                                     1
           rv (mt ) = v (mt ) mt µM + [v (mt ) - v (mt ) mt ] Lt µH + v (mt ) m2  2  H 2
                                                                               t Lt ( ) ,             (39)
                                                                     2
  25
    Blockchains often feature supply increments commensurate with the platform productivity change.
Ethereum has roughly fixed increments while Bitcoin's minting rate is a constant that halves as the system
matures via a longer transaction chain (specifically, every 210,000 more blocks). Because we model platform
productivity as driven by geometric Brownian shocks in investment efficiency and contribution payment
F (Lt , At ) is linear in At, the constant growth of token supply is the natural analogy with the practice.




                                                    29
     Figure 4: Constant Growth of Token Supply for Platform Development.

where Lt is given by
                                        
                                    Lt + L2    M
                                          t = µ Pt m t .                               (40)
                                        2
The boundary conditions are the same as those of the baseline model. Because the left-
hand side increases when Lt > -1/ and Lt  0, platform investment increases in Pt and
mt . Intuitively, when tokens are more valuable, the platform gathers more decentralized
contributions; when the token supply is high, the amount of newly issued tokens is also high
per unit of time, leading to a larger payment for Lt .

Proposition 5 (Predetermined Token Growth). Under the commitment to constant
growth of token supply for productivity enhancement, platform investment given by Equation
                                                                
(40) increases in Pt mt . The owner receives token dividends (dDt > 0) only if Pt  -VMt ,
                                                     
and buys back and burns tokens out of circulation (dDt < 0) only if -VMt  Pt (1 + ).
Token price is determined by Equation (19) as in the baseline model.

   Figure 4 plots the key variables from the solution under the commitment of token growth.
Comparing Panel A of Figure 4 with Panel A of Figure 2, we can see that commitment

                                              30
significantly increases the platform owners' value. By comparing Panel B in the two figures,
we see that such an increase mainly comes from an about five times larger level of investment.
Therefore, commitment to token supply policy mitigates the problem of under-investment
under token overhang.
   Commitment adds value because the financing costs  creates a conflict of interest be-
tween the platform owner and users, which manifests itself when we examine the usage value
and the investment value of tokens. To the owner, the value of tokens is -VMt , while to
the users, it is Pt . The wedge between -VMt and Pt widens as the productivity-adjusted
token supply, mt , increases and reaches  at the buyback boundary. Therefore, as shown
in Equation (10), the financing cost translates into a dynamic cost of token issuance to
contributors that discourages investment. Intuitively, under-investment occurs because the
platform owner fully bears this dynamic token issuance cost, -VMt /Pt > 1, yet the resulting
productivity enhancement benefits both the owners (by decreasing mt and thus increasing
v (mt )) and the users (via the token usage value -- a larger flow of convenience yield). More-
over, at the buyback boundary, the platform owner bears  while the token buyback benefits
both the owner (also by decreasing mt and increasing v (mt )) and the users (through the
token investment value -- the resulting token appreciation).
   Commitment mitigates the under-investment problem. With commitment, the constant
growth of token supply in the interior region isolates investment from the influence of fi-
nancing cost. As a result, investment depends directly on the state variable mt as shown in
Equation (40). When mt increases, the declining token price (Panel C of Figure 4) drives
down Lt but the increasing token supply drives up Lt . In Panel B of Figure 4, the latter
force dominates, so the larger mt is, the higher platform investment, exhibiting a pattern of
investment opposite to that in the baseline model (Panel B of Figure 2).
   Commitment also creates more frequent token buyback. The range of mt in Figure 4 is
reduced by one hundred times in comparison with that in Figure 2 and 3. In other words,
the platform owner is more willing to buy back and burn tokens at a much lower threshold
level of productivity-adjusted token supply. As mt increases, the ratio of owner's token
value, -VMt , to users' token value, Pt , increases and reaches 1 +  at the buyback boundary.
A tighter range of mt suggests that the ratio rises faster in mt under commitment. When
investment increases in mt , an increasing amount of tokens are issued at the expense of
platform owner to boost productivity that benefits users. Therefore, as mt increases, the
divergence of owner's and users' interest, -VMt /Pt , becomes increasingly large, reaching 1+ 
fast and justifying token buyback at a low level of mt .

                                              31
       Even though the platform owner ends up paying more frequently the financing cost 
under commitment, the owner's value is higher than the discretionary case because the higher
level of platform investment translates into a higher token value through users' expectation
of productivity growth. The value added from commitment is analogous to that in other
settings of corporate finance. For example, firms' ability to commit to future capital-structure
choices improves the firm's value (Demarzo, 2019). By demonstrating the role of commitment
in mitigating the under-investment problem of using tokens, our model helps rationalize the
explosive growth of token usage after the advent of blockchain technology.

Stablecoins under commitment. Many blockchain applications aim for creating tokens
with stable value so that tokens may perform the roles of both means of payment and unit
of account. From a theoretical perspective, there are various merits to a unit of account
whose value is stable (e.g., Doepke and Schneider, 2017). A rigid token supply rule is
often considered as a contributing factor to price volatility because volatile demands directly
translate into price fluctuations. However, as shown in Panel D of 4, the annual volatility
of token return, dPt /Pt , is less than one basis point in spite of the 200% annual volatility of
productivity shock. The commitment to constant token growth thus brings further stability
on top of the volatility reduction that we see in the baseline model (Figure 3).26
       The intuition is straightforward. Because commitment increases the sensitivity of -VMt /Pt
to mt , buyback happens at a low threshold level of productivity-adjusted token supply. As
shown in the baseline model, token buyback reduces the token volatility. When the owner
buys back tokens more frequently under commitment, volatility is reduced accordingly.
       The commitment to constant token growth brought by blockchain technology not only
achieves stability of token price but also simplifies the protocol design. Moreover, since
the platform investment increases in the token market capitalization (Equation (40)), the
expected growth of platform productivity is relatively easy to calculate. In other words,
under commitment, there exists an one-to-one mapping between token market capitalization
and the enhancement of platform productivity, suggesting a simple way to rank token-based
platforms by their quality.

  26
   If the end goal is price stability, one can even trivially achieve perfect stability by committing to have
Mt = At always, because then the driver for price dynamics, mt , becomes a constant. Here our analysis is
motivated by the tokens with constant growth rate of supply, for example, Ether.




                                                     32
6     Conclusion
    We develop a dynamic model of platform economy, where tokens are used as means of
payment among users and issued by the platform to finance its growth. Tokens facilitate
user transactions and compensate distributed ledger-keepers, open-source developers, and
crowdfunders for their contributions to platform development. Platform owners maximize
their seigniorage by managing token supply, subject to the conditions that users optimally
decide on token demand and rationally form expectation of token price dynamics.
    We characterize the optimal token-supply strategy and its implications on user-base dy-
namics, endogenous platform growth, and token price dynamics. A key mechanism is the
wedge between insiders' (entrepreneurs') token valuation and that of outsiders (users and
workers) ­ when the valuation wedge falls to zero, the platform owners optimally issue to-
ken dividends to themselves; when it rises to an endogenously determined threshold, they
optimally burn tokens out of circulation to stabilize token value. The wedge creates under-
investment in platform productivity. As commitment devices, blockchains enable rule-based
token supply, and thereby, overcome platform owners' time inconsistency to mitigate under-
investment. We also discuss important implications of optimal dynamic token allocation for
token price, user adoption, stablecoins, among other issues.




                                             33
References
Abadi, Joseph, and Markus Brunnermeier, 2018, Blockchain economics, Discussion paper, mimeo
  Princeton University.
Bakos, Yannis, and Hanna Halaburda, 2019, When do smart contracts and iot sensors improve effi-
  ciency? automated execution vs. finer information, Automated Execution vs. Finer Information
  (May 26, 2019). NYU Stern School of Business.
Basu, Soumya, David Easley, Maureen O'Hara, and Emin Sirer, 2019, Towards a functional fee
  market for cryptocurrencies, Available at SSRN 3318327.
Biais, Bruno, Christophe Bisiere, Matthieu Bouvard, and Catherine Casamatta, 2019, The
  blockchain folk theorem, The Review of Financial Studies 32, 1662­1715.
Bolton, Patrick, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang, 2011, A unified theory of tobin's q, corporate invest-
  ment, financing, and risk management, The Journal of Finance 66, 1545­1578.
Bolton, Patrick, and Haizhou Huang, 2017, The capital structure of nations, Review of Finance 22,
  45­82.
Brenner, Claire, 2018, 15 most popular social media networks and sites, G2 Crowd p. July 18.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Harold James, and Jean-Pierre Landau, 2019, The digitalization of
  money, Discussion paper, Princeton University.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2016, The I theory of money, Working paper
  Princeton University.
Bulow, Jeremy I, 1982, Durable-goods monopolists, Journal of political Economy 90, 314­332.
Buterin, Vitalik, et al., 2014, A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application plat-
  form, white paper 3.
Cagan, Phillip D., 1956, . The monetary dynamics of hyperinflation, (University of Chicago Press).
Canidio, Andrea, 2018, Financial incentives for open source development: the case of blockchain,
  working paper IMT School of Advanced Studies.
Cao, Sean, Lin William Cong, Meng Han, Qixuan Hou, and Baozhong Yang, 2020, Blockchain
  architecture for auditing automation and trust building in public markets, IEEE Computer 67.
Cao, Sean, Lin William Cong, and Baozhong Yang, 2018, Financial reporting and blockchains:
  Collaborative auditing, mis-statements, and regulation, Working Paper.
Chen, Long, Lin William Cong, and Yizhou Xiao, 2019, A brief introduction to blockchain eco-
  nomics, Working Paper.
Chiu, Jonathan, and Thorsten V Koeppl, 2017, The economics of cryptocurrencies­Bitcoin and
  beyond, Working Paper.
Chiu, Jonathan, and Tsz-Nga Wong, 2015, On the essentiality of e-money, Discussion paper, Bank
  of Canada Staff Working Paper.
Chod, Jiri, and Evgeny Lyandres, 2018, A theory of ICOs: Diversification, agency, and asymmetric
  information, Working paper Boston University Questrom School of Business.

                                                34
Coase, R. H., 1972, Durability and monopoly, The Journal of Law and Economics 15, 143­149.

Cong, Lin William, and Zhiguo He, 2018, Blockchain disruption and smart contracts, Forthcoming,
  Review of Financial Studies.

Cong, Lin William, Ye Li, and Neng Wang, 2020, Tokenomics: Dynamic adoption and valuation,
  Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.

Davydiuk, Tetiana, Deeksha Gupta, and Samuel Rosen, 2019, De-crypto-ing signals in initial coin
  offerings: Evidence of rational token retention, Working paper Carnegie Mellon University and
  Temple University.

D´
 ecamps, Jean-Paul, Sebastian Gryglewicz, Erwan Morellec, and Stphane Villeneuve, 2016, Cor-
  porate Policies with Permanent and Transitory Shocks, The Review of Financial Studies 30,
  162­210.

Demarzo, Peter M, 2019, Presidential address: Collateral and commitment, The Journal of Finance
  74, 1587­1619.

Doepke, Matthias, and Martin Schneider, 2017, Money as a unit of account, Econometrica 85,
  1537­1574.

Duffie, Darrell, 2019, Digital currencies and fast payment systems: Disruption is coming, working
  paper Stanford University Graduate School of Business.

Easley, David, Maureen O'Hara, and Soumya Basu, 2019, From mining to markets: The evolution
  of Bitcoin transaction fees, Journal of Financial Economics.

Fanti, Giulia, Leonid Kogan, and Pramod Viswanath, 2019, Economics of proof-of-stake payment
  systems, Working paper.

Ferreira, Daniel, Jin Li, and Radoslawa Nikolowa, 2020, Corporate capture of blockchain gover-
  nance, Working Paper 593/2019 ECGI.

Gans, Joshua S, and Hanna Halaburda, 2015, Some economics of private digital currency, in
  Economic Analysis of the Digital Economy . pp. 257­276 (University of Chicago Press).

Garratt, Rodney, and Maarten R.C. Van Oordt, 2019, Entrepreneurial incentives and the role
  of initial coin offerings, working paper University of California at Santa Barbara and Bank of
  Canada.

Goldstein, Itay, Deeksha Gupta, and Ruslan Sverchkov, 2019, Initial coin offerings as a commitment
  to competition, Available at SSRN 3484627.

Griffin, John M, and Amin Shams, 2018, Is Bitcoin really un-tethered?, Working Paper.

Gryglewicz, Sebastian, Simon Mayer, and Erwan Morellec, 2020, Optimal financing with tokens,
  Working paper EPFL, Erasmus University Rotterdam, and Swiss Finance Institute.

Holden, Richard, and Anup Malani, 2018, Can blockchain solve the holdup problem in contracts?,
  .

Howell, Sabrina T, Marina Niessner, and David Yermack, 2018, Initial coin offerings: Financing
  growth with cryptocurrency token sales, Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

                                               35
Hu, Albert, Christine Parlour, and Uday Rajan, 2018, Cryptocurrencies: Stylized facts on a new
  investible instrument, Working paper University of California Berkeley and University of Michi-
  gan.
Huberman, Gur, Jacob D Leshno, and Ciamac C Moallemi, 2019, An economic analysis of the
  Bitcoin payment system, .
Kahn, Charles, 1986, The durable goods monopolist and consistency with increasing costs,
  Econometrica 54, 275­294.
Kajpust, Dave, 2019, Examining funding token allocation of blockchain foundations, Medium Jan
  22.
Kocherlakota, Narayana R, 1998, Money is memory, Journal of Economic Theory 81, 232­251.
Lehar, Alfred, and Christine A. Parlour, 2020, Miner collusion and the bitcoin protocol, Working
  paper University of Calgary and University of California Berkeley.
Li, Ye, 2017, Procyclical finance: The money view, Dice center working paper, The Ohio State
   University Fisher College of Business.
Liu, Yukun, and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2018, Risks and returns of cryptocurrency, Working Paper 24877
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Livingston, Ted, 2017, Announcing kin, a cryptocurrency for an open future, Medium p. May 25.
Mayer, Simon, 2020, Token-based platforms and speculators, Working paper Erasmus University
 Rotterdam.
Michaels, Dave, 2019, U.s. regulators sue crypto startup telegram over initial coin offering, The
  Wall Street Journal October 11.
Pagnotta, Emiliano, 2018, Bitcoin as decentralized money: Prices, mining rewards, and network
  security, Mining Rewards, and Network Security (October 26, 2018).
Rastegar, Mohammad, Mahmud Fotuhi-Firuzabad, and Farrokh Aminifar, 2012, Load commitment
  in a smart home, Applied Energy 96, 45­54.
Rochet, Jean-Charles, and Jean Tirole, 2003, Platform competition in two-sided markets, Journal
  of the european economic association 1, 990­1029.
Saleh, Fahad, 2017, Blockchain without waste: Proof-of-stake, working paper, New York University.
       , 2018, Volatility and welfare in a crypto economy, Available at SSRN 3235467.
Schilling, Linda, and Harald Uhlig, 2018, Some simple Bitcoin economics, Discussion paper, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research.
Sockin, Michael, and Wei Xiong, 2018, A model of cryptocurrencies, Working Paper.
Stokey, Nancy L, 1981, Rational expectations and durable goods pricing, The Bell Journal of
  Economics pp. 112­128.
Stulz, Ren´
          e M., 2019, Fintech, bigtech, and the future of banks, Working Paper 2019-03-020 OSU
  Fisher College of Business and Dice Center.
Tinn, Katrin, 2019, Blockchain and the future of optimal financing contracts, Available at SSRN
  3061532.


                                               36
Appendix A - A Model of Platform Transaction Surplus
   We adopt the following theoretical foundation for the specification of platform transaction
surplus from CLW. Time, t  R+ , is continuous. The economy is populated with a unit
measure of infinitely lived risk-neutral agents who have a discount rate r > 0. Agents have
                                                                     
investment opportunities that occur at Poisson arrival times, {Tn }+
                                                                   n=1 , with time-varying and
agent-specific intensity, i,t . At a Poisson time, Tn , agent i is endowed with a technology,
i F (·), that transforms labor into goods, and is matched with another agent who can supply
the labor input. Agent-specific productivity is captured by i . To simplify the exposition,
we assume that the labor supply has a constant marginal cost of one, and the supplier breaks
even, so the trade surplus accrues to agent i.
   Agent i's labor demand, denoted by h, is not restricted by the real balance of token hold-
ings, Pt ki,Tn - , where ki,Tn - denotes the units of tokens carried to Tn . Since the focus of this
paper is not on financial constraints, we allow the agent to borrow dollars (an instantaneous
loan) at zero cost, so h may exceed agent i's wealth at the moment. Once the production is
complete, the loan is repaid immediately by the goods produced.
   The lumpy payment for labor incurs a transaction cost that is proportional to the total
payment value, h ( > 0), but using tokens as means of payment save the transaction
cost by U (Pt ki,Tn - ) (U > 0, U < 0) because agent i does not need to exchange dollars
for tokens, the required means of payment on the platform. This transaction cost can be
interpreted as the cost of traditional bank transfer service, legal costs of contracting. Native
tokens in many cases allow transaction parties unknown and untrusted to still complete a
value transfer remotely, or to contract on simple terms, thanks to the blockchain ledger and
smarting contracting functionalities. For these reasons, platforms such as Kin require all
on-platform transactions to be mediated using Kin tokens.
   Agent i maximizes the investment profit, which is a jump in wealth,

                            max i F (h) - h - (h - U (Pt ki,Tn - )) ,                          (41)
                              h


where the last term is the transaction cost. The optimal labor demand, h , is given by

                                        i F (h ) = 1 + ,                                       (42)

so that the marginal value of production is equal to the marginal cost of labor plus the



                                                37
transaction cost,  . We can substitute the constant h into the investment profit to have

                                 i F (h ) - (1 +  ) h + U (Pt ki,Tn - ) .                   (43)

We assume that i is sufficiently high so h  Pt ki,Tn - . The conversion between the local
currency (token) and other assets can be costly, especially when a lumpy transaction is
required within a short period of time. By holding tokens, agents save such costs.
      Therefore, at time t, agent i has an expected gain of i,t U (Pt ki,t ) dt by holding ki,t
units of tokens for dt. To obtain a tighter analytical characterization of the equilibrium,
we specify i,t = (Nt At eui ) (  (0, 1)). A larger community (Nt ) makes it easier to find
transaction counterparties. A higher platform quality (At ) makes matching more efficient.
And ui captures agent-specific transaction needs. We specify U (Pt ki,t ) =  (Pt ki,t )1- , so
the expected transaction costs saved are

                              i,t U (Pt ki,t ) = (Nt At eui ) (Pt ki,t )1- dt.              (44)

We normalize  = 1 because its scaling effect can be subsumed by the level of At .
      We may reinterpret h as goods or services other than labor, and the investment profit as
a burst of consumption or utility value from transactions. The features our micro-foundation
captures are two-fold: (i) the arrival of transaction opportunities depends on the user base,
the platform quality, and agent-specific factors; (ii) holding tokens on the tokenized platform
saves transaction costs for lumpy payments. In essence, we model the flow utility of token
holdings as a form of convenience yield, as emphasized by John Cochrane.27
      We have many applications of native tokens as means of payment on platforms. In the
case of Kin, entrepreneurs obtain information from consumer surveys that helps improve
product quality. Consumers are rewarded by the native currency, Kin tokens. In our model,
we do not differentiate buyers and sellers among users because in reality, entrepreneurs and
service providers are often consumers of other sellers' products in the platform market place.
They can simultaneously take on different roles (investor, user, developer or operator), and
actively participate in a sharing economy.




 27
      Please refer to https://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2017/11/bitcoin-and-bubbles.html


                                                    38
Appendix B - Institutional Background
       This section provides the institutional background of token-based platforms. We discuss
how platforms, blockchains, and the use of tokens are all connected in practice, using the
Kik/Kin system and various other real-life examples. First, the platform token plays dual
roles ­ it serves as local means of payment among users, and as a platform financing tool (con-
tributors' compensation), it gathers efforts and resources for platform development. Second,
platform designers (owners and entrepreneurs) increasingly utilize token-supply strategies to
manage platform development dynamically, and derive benefits by issuing tokens to them-
selves and actively managing the total amount of tokens in circulation. We highlight that, on
traditional and blockchain-based platforms, platform owners exercise significant discretion
in dynamic token allocation, which is a salient feature of our baseline model. Finally, we
discuss how blockchain technology can limit discretion and enable commitment.
       To start, we note that in the past few years, over 1000 cryptocurrencies have been intro-
duced on digital platforms. In these applications including Bitcoin and Ripple, blockchains
provide decentralized consensus that helps avoid double-spending and enables digital curren-
cies to act as media of exchange among platform users. In terms of (crowd-based) financing,
blockchain-based crypto tokens have also emerged as a popular means to raise funds for
startups (e.g., Howell, Niessner, and Yermack, 2018; Davydiuk, Gupta, and Rosen, 2019).
In Initial Coin Offerings (ICOs), Security Token Offerings (STOs), and Initial Exchange Of-
ferings (IEOs), entrepreneurs sell "tokens" or "AppCoins" to dispersed investors around the
globe.28 Moreover, tokens are routinely used as compensation for talents joining the startup
teams. Kik/Kin constitutes a well-known example.

Kik/Kin case. Kik Interative Inc. is a social media messaging company founded in Wa-
terloo in 2009 and is currently under a well-publicized lawsuit by the SEC for violations
of the Securities Act. Kik introduced a messaging app "Kik Messenger" in 2010 that later
became one of the most popular social media applications (Brenner, 2018).
       To better compete with larger players in the advertising market and to allow its users
monetize their participation, Kik launched Kik Points, a virtual currency within Kik Mes-
  28
    While the first ICO in 2013 raised a meager $500k and sporadic activities over the next two years.
2016 saw 46 ICOs raising about $100m and according to CoinSchedule, in 2017 there were 235 Initial Coin
Offerings. The year-end totals came in over $3 billion raised in ICO. In August, 2017, OmiseGO (OMG) and
Qtum passed a US$1 billion market cap today, according to coinmarketcap.com, to become the first ERC20
tokens built on the Ethereum network and sold via an ICO to reach the unicorn status.



                                                  39
senger in 2014. Advertisers can exchange fiat money with Kik for points to pay consumers
for answering surveys and polls and consumers can pay for purchases and usage with the
points. Kik Points while in operation created an average of 300,000 daily transactions, but
advertisers and users are concerned that nothing prevents Kik from creating more Kik Points
or not accepting them entirely in future.
      The company therefore conceived towards the end of 2016 a new blockchain-based plat-
form, Kin, which issues native tokens for user transactions and compensations for dispersed
contributors in an ecosystem for digital services and social network wherein Kik is a key
founding member.29 The Kin project is overseen by the Kin foundation and aims to offer
Kik and similar developers a way to monetize their businesses which was previously difficult
without a large initial scale or potentially abusing user data. The blockchain-based token can
credibly have a limited supply. Moreover, token demand can be boosted by token usage not
only on Kik Messenger but also for potentially unlimited number of applications, services,
products offered by participating developers. Therefore, Kin has the potential to overcome
the concern of over supply and value destruction.
      Importantly, even though the maximum supply of Kin is at $10 trillion USD, the found-
ing team and the Kin Foundation actively manage the dynamic token allocations (e.g., using
smart contracts): 30% is pre-allocated to the original Kik platform for being a founding
member of Kin and early adopter, 10% (1 trillion) of Kin tokens are issued to dispersed
investors in a 2-week initial coin offering (ICO) in 2017, raising about US$100 million, 60%
is initially allocated to the Kin foundation and is to be gradually distributed to early users
and contributors through the Kin Rewards Engine schema or used to cover operation and
marketing expenses. Every year, 20% of the remaining token reserves at the Kin Foundation
is released to corporate partners to be used, for example, as incentive payments for decen-
tralized contributions. While it is unclear if Kik and Kin optimally designed the allocation,
they apparently thought about issues related to promoting user adoption, incentivizing third-
party contributors to the system, controlling inflation, and compensating key personnel and
partners while growing the platform.
      The case of Kik/Kin leads to the following three observations that apply generally to
(blockchain-based) platforms.

(i) Token embedding. It should be clear from the example that tokens are used as a
platform currency/local medium of exchange -- a "Token Embedding" phenomenon first
 29
      Facebook's role in the creation of Libra coins is similar.


                                                        40
highlighted in CLW. Indeed, in many existing blockchain applications, native tokens are the
required or favored medium of exchange.30 For example, it is cheaper to make international
payments and settlements using Ripples (RXP) on the Ripple network; to make profit by
providing validation services, OmiseGo (OMG) tokens are required as stakes on the OmiseGo
blockchain; even though the Ethereum platform allows other AppCoins and cryptocurrencies,
many transactions and fundraising activities are still carried out using Ethers (ETH) because
of the convenience and popularity. Moreover, platform owners actively design the rules for
token supplies and attributes and use tokens to compensate resource contributors (investors,
developers etc.) as well as to manage the platform development.
       We note that it is natural and common in practice to introduce platform tokens that
agents hold and use because transfers in fiat currencies inevitably rely on centralized third
parties such as banks that are subject to the confines of physical locations and jurisdictions.
Tokens, in contrast, can be used not only for peer-to-peer exchanges, but also for compen-
sating miners, validators, and other contributors who work to improve the stability and
functionality of the ecosystem. This is especially convenient because cryptocurrency miners
who maintain network securities under the Proof-of-Work protocol and liquidity providers in
a staking-based system are not long-term employees of the platform and demand on spot, re-
liable payments. Moreover, native coins can be directly linked to the history of transactions
and events on the blockchain, a feature other currencies cannot provide.31
       There are many examples other than the Kin project. Filecoin (FIL) is used as the sole
means of payment in the network marketplace to reward miners for block creation in the
Filecoin consensus process. Another example is Basic Attention Token (BAT). As Strategic
Coin explains in its BAT token launch research report, BAT also functions as a medium
exchange between users, advertisers, and publishers who participate in the Brave browser
ecosystem. Advertisers purchase ads using BAT tokens, which are then distributed among
both publishers and browser users as compensation for hosting the ads and viewing them,
  30
      See also Brunnermeier, James, and Landau (2019) who conclude, "Payments are at the center of any
economic platform, and all other activities would organize themselves around the central payment function-
ality." Even though policy makers often generically refer to non-cash-flow-based tokens as "utility tokens,"
we note that the majority of them are not for redeeming a product or service from the platform owner per
se at fixed prices. They simply represent the right to use the platforms to conduct business. These include
many of the high-profile projects: Filecoin, Golem, 0x, Civic, Raiden, and Basic Attention Token (BAT).
Prices are not pre-set but emerge from markets where the users' token demand meet the platforms' supply.
   31
      Kocherlakota (1998) models money as an object that does not enter utility or production functions. He
then shows that from a technological point of view, money is equivalent to a primitive form of memory. With
the blockchain technology, money is indeed memory. Tokens are useful as means of payment and stores of
value precisely because of agents' knowledge of full histories of token-based transactions.



                                                    41
respectively.
    The fact that platform ecosystems including blockchain-based ones tend to be mediated
by native tokens is only one aspect of token embedding. In principle no one needs to hold
the native token if its velocity is infinite, i.e., people can instantaneously exchange other
currencies with the native tokens. The second aspect of token embedding is that agents
actually need to hold the tokens to conduct transactions and perform economic activities.
While this is also true for fiat money in practice, blockchain-based systems add at least three
more reasons.
    First, to incentivize and allocate service flows to decentralized miners or service providers,
many tokens are designed such that these agents have to hold the native tokens to earn the
right to perform work to maintain the system, be it service provision or recordkeeping. Proof-
of-Stake protocols typically fall in this category. These tokens are sometimes referred to as
work tokens or staking tokens, and notable implementations include Keep (off-chain private
computation), Filecoin (distributed file storage), Truebit (off-chain computation), Livepeer
(distributed video encoding), and Gems (decentralized mechanical Turk).32
    Second, blockchains enable the use of smart contracts--digital contracts allowing terms
contingent on decentralized consensus that are typically self-enforcing and tamper-proof
through automated execution. Smart contracts need to automate transactions once certain
contingencies are fulfilled, which in turn requires a certain amount of tokens to be "escrowed"
during the episode that such contingencies may be triggered.
    Third, because the generation of decentralized consensus takes time, there exist technical
and economic limits on how quickly transactions can be validated and recorded (Chiu and
Koeppl, 2017). While many protocols such as the Lightening Network and Ethereum process
transactions significantly faster than Bitcoin (seconds versus 10-11 minutes), the decentral-
ized nature of the validation means it takes time to ensure robustness and synchronization
of the consensus. During the confirmation period, agents have to hold tokens.

(ii) Dynamic token supply and platform management. Admittedly, much of the
discussion on cryptocurrency has focused on its role as a competitor for fiat currency for
general payments. In a way, fiat currencies are also an extreme form of platform tokens in
  32
     To enforce a mechanism to penalize workers who fail to perform their job to some pre-specified standard,
work tokens have to be held as collateral. For example, in Filecoin, service providers contractually commit
to storing some data with 24/7 access and some minimum bandwidth guarantee for a specified period of
time. During the contract term, service providers must "escrow" some number of Filecoin, which can be
automatically slashed (taken away) should they fail to perform the service.


                                                     42
that people "join" the platform by recognizing their value and accepting them (Gans and
Halaburda, 2015), and the platform being the broader economy. What distinguishes tokens
on digital platforms is that the adoption is no longer dictated by physical constraints: it
is way more costly to adopt a different fiat currency by emigrating to a different country,
but switching among digital platforms are relatively easy, which implies that the adoption
of digital platforms are more endogenous than the adoption of a fiat currency.
       Not only is user adoption on platforms endogenous, the development of platforms is as
well. Just like executives manage firms' hiring and investment dynamically, tokens allow
platform owners to manage the contributions from dispersed agents in the network and thus
manage the evolution of the platform. It is not only about a one-time ICO. Blockchain-based
platforms often pay workers (contributors) on the spot with their tokens on an on-going basis
instead of a contract that promises the typical deferred compensation.33
       For example, Kin tokens were issued to allow broad adoption and contribution by de-
velopers and users to foster a "virtuous cycle in which the ecosystem grows in both size
and quality" (Livingston, 2017). Through measures such as capping individual purchases at
$4,400, Kik structured the offering to encourage actual usage of the tokens as a medium of
exchange instead of hoarding and speculation. It is believed that a token-based ecosystem
of independent users and developers would have the right incentives to grow the platform.
Indeed, by the end of 2018, Kin exceeded Ether and Bitcoin in blockchain user activities
according to blocktivity.info. Both the Apple App and Google Play Stores accept Kin as a
digital currency; the Kin ecosystem has also integrated dozens of third-party apps including
Perfect 365, a top-rated augmented-reality app for photo makeup with over 100 million users,
and Nearby, a popular app with millions of users for meeting new people. The Kin Rewards
Engine schema dynamically incentivize dispersed agents in the system to grow the platform,
so that founders' effort needs not play a central role after launching the platform.
       We should remind the readers that the use of platform tokens is not necessarily decen-
tralized or blockchain-based. Even a traditional, centralized transaction platform may see
the opportunity to create open interfaces - APIs (e.g., Uber has opened up APIs to enable
third parties to add value) and use platform tokens. Before the Kin project, Kik was using
a platform local currency even though it was not blockchain-based; many community-based
  33
    Gathering resources through spot payment instead of deferred compensation is a salient feature of
blockchain-based platforms. Deferred compensation is common in traditional firms and economic theories.
Note that even in the simplest setting of production where firms combine labor and capital into output (often
through a Cobb-Douglas function), there exists an implicit assumption that firms obtain inputs and then
pay workers and investors after production.


                                                     43
companies such as Facebook, Tencent, Microsoft, and Amazon have also introduced platform
tokens before (see Gans and Halaburda, 2015, for an excellent discussion). Other notable
examples of non-blockhain tokens include those introduced in online games, such as Linden
dollar for the game Second Life and WoW Gold for the game World of Warcraft.

(iii) Entrepreneurs' token payouts and buy-back. How entrepreneurs get compen-
sated through tokens is under-discussed in academic studies yet is important in practice. In
the Kik/Kin example, founders, early investors, and key personnel get tokens which they can
sell in secondary markets. This is a form of seigniorage.34 What distinguishes blockchain-
based platforms is that the issuance of tokens can be rule-based whereas inflation presents
a perennial concern with fiat money run by central banks that are potentially under politi-
cal influences. Indeed, many token designs specifically guard against inflation, for example,
by pre-specifying the level or growth rate of token supply. Bitcoin supply is capped at 21
million and Dfinity, at 469.21 million. Platforms like Kin also employs more sophisticated
token-supply policies, balancing the rule-based and discretionary approeaches, in order to
optimally incentivize the platform participants and compensate the founders.
       Precisely because tokens are used to compensate platform owners, founding entrepreneurs
and designers care about how "inflated" the ecosystem is because they care about the plat-
form's franchise value going forward. This leads to many platforms also burning tokens to
reduce inflation. Kin burned about 10% of tokens during the migration from Etherem to its
own blockchain.35 Another recent example of discretionary reduction of token in supply is
the Synereo team which burned 33% of its cryptocurrency reserves on March 31, 2018 after
meeting development goals with fewer tokens (AMP) than initially projected.36
       Burning tokens out of circulation by buying tokens back from the secondary market
requires cash reserves held by foundations or other entities that are in charge of platform
operation. To bolster community activity and maintain the stability of token market, TRON
Foundation announced a $20 Million token buy-back plan on June 25, 2019 (one of the largest
token buy-back plan at the that time).37 Its cash reserve was partly built by the $70 million
raised in an initial coin offering in 2017. Such cash reserves comes from operating profits,
  34
     Entrepreneurs earn seigniorage for building infrastructure for and promoting platform networks. Even
for stablecoins such as JPM Coin and Libra, the core networks of powerful institutions the founders foster
add to attracting users. Key members in Libra are also compensated through Libra Investment Tokens.
  35
     https://medium.com/kinblog/blockchain-strategy-update-next-steps-in-migrating-to-the-kin-
blockchain-aed99e209654
  36
     https://synereo.com/burn-amps/
  37
     https://cointelegraph.com/news/tron-foundation-announces-20-million-buyback-plan


                                                   44
(initial) coin offerings or venture capital backing.38 Spending cash incurs both a direct cost
and a shadow price that is ultimately attributed to the standard costs of external financing
(e.g., Bolton, Chen, and Wang, 2011; D´
                                      ecamps, Gryglewicz, Morellec, and Villeneuve, 2016).
In our model, the parameter  captures this economic force.
       Finally, as in our model, token burning in practice often depends on the stages of platform
development. In preparation for a technical upgrade of its tokens, the Swiss-based crypto
platform Eidoo announced in June 2020 a burning of 28 million $EDO tokens. Binance,
which is a cryptocurrency exchange financed by VCs such as Sequoia, burned 2.5 million
BNB tokens in July 2018 (worth approximately $30 million).39 The company also planned
to burn tokens worth 20 percent of its profits each year, and then stopped such operation in
January 2020. Next, we discuss the discretion and commitment in token supply.

(iv) Discretion in dynamic token allocation. The platform owners' discretion is a
salient feature of our baseline model. Many traditional centralized platforms and blockchain-
based platforms allow the designers and owners to dynamically decide token allocations.
While public blockchains assign relatively little tokens under the control of platforms, for
example, less than 1% of Ether is owned by the Ethereum platform, many other platforms
do have discretion in token supply.40 While many crypto-tokens have pre-specified long-run
maximum supply and certain rules against inflation, the numbers are often ad hoc. Moreover,
the maximum token supply is large and relevant only in the distant future, not to mention
that token burning renders the caps on supply effectively non-binding (except in extreme
market conditions). So its impact on short-term platform development and user activities
is limited. Some platforms do not even have a maximum supply specified (Ethereum being
the most notable example).
       Therefore, not all token supply is pre-set. The Kin foundation's Rewards Engine schema
discussed earlier is just one example of discretionary dynamic token allocation. An excellent
article by Kajpust (2019) documents that in general, token foundations' operations are
not very transparent, disclosure practices/requirements are only gradually introduced, and
token allocation allows much discretion. For example, as of Jan 2019, Stellar is effectively in
  38
     Notable blockchain-focused venture capital firms include include A16z Crypto (a subsidiary of Andreessen
Horowitz), Pantera Capital (a U.S.-based investment fund), Coinbase Ventures (VC arm of crypto exchange
Coinbase), and Yeoman's Capital (active early-stage angel investor), IDG Capital (angel and seed investments
in Ripple, Circle, etc.).
  39
     https://binance.zendesk.com/hc/en-us/articles/360007242192-Binance-4th-Quarter-Token-Burn
  40
     https://www.cryptocompare.com/media/1383735/pdfs-termsandconditionsoftheethereumgenesissale.pdf.



                                                    45
control of over 85% of Lumen tokens. The future token distribution is fully centralized, and
is by no means not written in stone. Moreover, Stellar Operational Fund and Development
Foundation (Stellar.org) manage over 10% of Lumens through the Build Challenge that
distributes millions of Lumens to is proposed challenge.41
       As another example, the complaint of Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) against
Telegram Group Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiary TON Issuer Inc. (allegation No. 74)
describes the firm's discretion over the release of unsold Grams,42 The primers issued to
investors in 2017 and 2018 explain that "[f]our percent of the supply (200 million Grams)
will be reserved for the development team with a 4­18 year vesting period" and at least 52%
of the supply will be "retained by the TON Reserve to protect the nascent cryptocurrency
from speculative trading." It also explained that the TON Reserve would transfer its Grams
to the TON Foundation, and that the "founders of Telegram will be responsible for the
efficient use of funds resulting from any [additional] sale[s]."
       Related, YouNow, also currently sued by the SEC, has 10% of their tokens (100,000,000
Props Tokens) allocated to wallets controlled by Props Foundation Public Benefit Corpora-
tion (PBC) and is "distributed by Props PBC on a discretionary basis in the form of grants
or expense reimbursements to developers building either applications on the Props Network
or Network infrastructure, strategic content partners, and other entities directly supporting
the growth of the Props Network or sold for cash proceeds."43
       Yet one more example is that 3 million of Polkadot's DOT tokens, which is 30% of
the total number eventually in circulation, are allocated to the Web3 Foundation (led by
Gavin Wood, co-founder of Ethereum), and are retained or distributed upon the foundation's
discretion.44
       The key takeaway here is that even though the blockchain technology facilitates com-
mitment as highlighted in Section 5, many current practices do not fully implement such
commitment, leaving a significant portion of tokens under the discretion of the platform
designers and entrepreneurs. Our analysis starts from the baseline model of discretionary
token supply to capture such practice and then moves on to analyze the value added from
commitment enabled by blockchain technology.
  41
     See also https://www.stellar.org/blog/bitcoin-claim-lumens/ and https://www.stellar.org/blog/bitcoin-
claim-lumens-2/.
  42
     https://www.sec.gov/litigation/complaints/2019/comp-pr2019-212.pdf.
  43
     https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1725129/000162827918000249/filename2.htm.
  44
     See, e.g., https://polkadot.network/faq.




                                                   46
Blockchain-based commitment: advantages and limitations. Finally, we summarize
the three aspects of blockchain technology that are critical in enabling commitment, including
data structure, smart contracting, decentralized data storage, and governance. Then we
highlight the advantages of blockchain-based commitment over traditional approaches (e.g.,
collateral) and discuss the limitations of blockchain-based commitment.
       First, the blockchain technology entails a linked-list data structure such that each block
of records is time-stamped. Along the consensus chain of blocks, no agent can retroactively
modify the information, which prevents ex post tempering and manipulation of data and
information. The immutability and distributed structure makes blockchains promising in-
frastructures for commitment schemes.45 Cao, Cong, and Yang (2018) and Cao, Cong, Han,
Hou, and Yang (2020) provide use cases of such data structure in financial reporting and
auditing.
       Second, building on the aforementioned data structure, many blockchains allow smart
contracts, which utilize computer scripts that automatically execute spot transactions or
future contractual promises. Smart-contracting enables certain levels of automation and
commitment, without relying on a centralized authority for execution (Buterin et al., 2014;
Rastegar, Fotuhi-Firuzabad, and Aminifar, 2012; Tinn, 2019; Holden and Malani, 2018;
Bakos and Halaburda, 2019). Cong and He (2018) discuss the applications of smart con-
tracting and industrial organization. Chen, Cong, and Xiao (2019) provide a broader survey
on the related issues and applications.
       Execution and renegotiation of traditional contracts can be costly. Revelation mecha-
nisms and renegotiation designs rarely show up in practice because they are too complex to
implement using traditional technologies and legal methods as they often require multiple
stages of structured bargaining. In contrast, the future transactions coded in smart contracts
are automatically executed thanks to the immutability of blockchain records. Thus, smart
contracts, when applicable, induce less costs than traditional contracting and commitment.
       Multi-signature smart contracts are particularly effective in mitigating frauds. For exam-
ple, escrow Bitcoin wallets (e.g., the system employed by blockchain-based retail platform
OpenBazaar) are effective in allowing buyers and sellers to commit to transaction execution.
       Third, we should note that blockchain commitments do not come from data structure
and smart contracts alone. The decentralized storage and governance of data play important
  45
    A commitment scheme is a cryptographic primitive that allows one to commit to a chosen value (or
chosen statement) while keeping it hidden to others, with the ability to reveal the committed value later.
Commitment schemes such as zero-knowledge proofs are designed to be binding.



                                                   47
roles. Due to the distributed nature of blockchain ledger, abandoning historical records,
changing governance protocols, forfeiting existing contracts, etc., all require great efforts of
coordination, which makes deviations from pre-committed actions difficult.
   Whether consensus is generated in a centralized way or not, the distributed storage
also provides greater transparency and monitoring. For example, uncertainty and lack of
information that afflict traditional contracting apply to smart contracts as well. But public
witness on blockchains makes smart contract less prone to uncertainty in execution and
verification of state contingency. It has less interpretation ambiguity too.
   Finally, note that the conventional commitment mechanisms, often applied to debt con-
tracts, such as seniority provisions, restrictive covenants, and relationship banking, may
reduce firms' financial flexibility and suffer from issues such as reduced capital-market com-
petition and systematic financial fragility. While blockchain-based commitment has its ad-
vantages, it is not a panacea for commitment. The space for smart contracting is limited.
Information feed from oracles and the Internet of Things (IoTs) is still being developed.
That said, the blockchain-based commitment does have its unique applications, especially
the lack of reliance on a centralized third party for legal or other enforcement.




                                              48
