                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                CHILD DEVELOPMENT IN THE EARLY YEARS:
PARENTAL INVESTMENT AND THE CHANGING DYNAMICS OF DIFFERENT DIMENSIONS

                                         Orazio Attanasio
                                          Raquel Bernal
                                         Michele Giannola
                                          Milagros Nores

                                       Working Paper 27812
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27812


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2020




 We are grateful to many colleagues for a number of conversations. In particular, we would like to
 thank Sarah Cattan, Costas Meghir and Emily Nix for useful discussions on measuring child
 development at different ages. We would also like to thank AEIOTU's staff for the support.
 Attanasio's research was partially funded by ERC Advanced Grant AdG-695300. Bernal and
 Nores are also grateful to the Jacobs Foundation, Grant No. 209-805-1, and the UBS Optimus
 Foundation for their financial support to the aeioTu Longitudinal Trial. Bernal acknowledges
 financial support from "Convocatoria Facultad de Economía-Vicerrectoría de Investigaciones
 2017" Universidad de los Andes. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
 necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research

 At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
 research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27812.ack

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Orazio Attanasio, Raquel Bernal, Michele Giannola, and Milagros Nores. All rights
 reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
 permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Child Development in the Early Years: Parental Investment and the Changing Dynamics of
Different Dimensions
Orazio Attanasio, Raquel Bernal, Michele Giannola, and Milagros Nores
NBER Working Paper No. 27812
September 2020
JEL No. I15,I25,I32,J13,J24,O15

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper uses the data on child development collected around the evaluation of a nursery
program to estimate the details of the process of human development. We model development as
made of three latent factors, reflecting health, cognitive and socio-emotional skills. We observe
children from age 1 to age 7. We assume that, at each age, these factors interact among
themselves and with a variety of other inputs to determine the level of development at following
ages. Relative to other studies, the richness of the data we use allows us to: (i) let the dynamics be
rich and flexible; (ii) let each factors play a role in the production of any other factor; (iii)
estimate age-specific functional forms; (iv) treated parental investment as an endogenous input.
We find that the dynamics of the process can be richer than usually assumed, which has important
implications for the degree of persistence of different inputs in time. Persistence also changes
with age. This has important implications for the targeting of investment and interventions, and
the identification of windows of opportunities. The endogeneity of investment is also important.


Orazio Attanasio                                  Michele Giannola
Department of Economics                           University College London (UCL)
Yale University                                   Economics Department
37 Hillhouse Avenue                               London WC1E 6BT
New Haven, CT 06511                               United Kingdom
and Institute for Fiscal Studies,                 michele.giannola.12@ucl.ac.uk
FAIR, BREAD and CEPR
and also NBER                                     Milagros Nores
orazio.attanasio@yale.edu                         Rutgers University
                                                  73 Easton Av
Raquel Bernal                                     New Brunswick, NJ 08901
Universidad de los Andes                          mnores@nieer.org
and CEDE
rbernal@uniandes.edu.co
1       Introduction

It is well established that human capital constitutes an important factor of production
and development. Fostering the process of human capital development can be crucial
for growth and economic prosperity. From the point of view of poor families, the devel-
opment of human capital can be an important factor in breaking the intergenerational
transmission of poverty and poverty traps. The process through which individuals ac-
quire different skills in the first part of the life cycle is very important in determining
the level of inequality observed in a given society.
   The characterization of the process of human development is therefore important.
Over the last few decades, we have learned much about this process. For instance,
we know that what happens in the early years is particular important for long term
outcomes.1 At the same time, it is now pretty much accepted that human capital is a
multidimensional object. Its different dimensions are important both for the different
roles they play in the process of development and as final outcomes, as they are related
to different aspects of well-being and their combination determines the remuneration
individuals get in the labour market.
   However, there are still many aspects of human capital formation that are not fully
understood. In particular, we still have an imprecise idea about the dynamic properties
of such a process, and how they vary during the first few years of life. In particular, the
degree of persistence of various dimensions of human capital and the role they play in
the growth process is still not characterized completely. Researchers often assume that
the process is of the Markov type, so that outcomes at age a + 1, after conditioning
for outcomes at age a, do not depend on previous realizations of the process. While
this assumption is often made for convenience and for the lack of accurate data, it is
not an innocuous assumption. Deviations from a Markov process could explain, for
instance, the fade-out in the impact of some intervention, followed by a subsequent
re-emergence of the impacts. More generally, a flexible dynamic specification might be
key in the identification of important ages in the process of development and windows
of opportunities for specific interventions.
    How different dimensions of development interact in the process of formation and
how they can be affected by external factors is also key for the design of appropriate
policies and for the identification of the role played by different inputs in the process.
A full characterization of these causal links might be of extreme importance to set

    1
        See Almond and Currie (2011) for a review of the literature.

                                                    1
the basis for the design of interventions that improve child development in difficult
situations. If one were to establish that certain skills can be influenced by certain
factors at a specific ag, and that those skills play an important role in the process
of human capital formation, interventions that target those specific skills at that age
should be the focus of policies that intend to foster child development.
   In recent years, several studies have developed this research agenda. In a seminal
paper, Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010) specify a model of child development
where different dimensions of human capital depend of past realizations of the process
and some additional inputs, both observables and unobservables. Importantly, Cunha,
Heckman, and Schennach (2010) allow the possibility that some variables of interest in
the theoretical model are not observable. Researchers, however, have access to noisy
signals of these latent variables of interest. Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010)
show the conditions under which such a model is non-parametrically identifiable. In
their benchmark specification, they consider a flexible specification for the functional
form that links the various components of the process and allow some inputs to be
chosen by certain agents (such as parents) and therefore being related to unobservable
variables.
   The explicit recognition of the existence of measurement error proposed by Cunha,
Heckman, and Schennach (2010) is important for several reasons. Such an approach
spells out explicitly the assumptions about the available measures that permit to map
observable variables into concepts that are relevant for the questions researchers are
asking. It provides an effective way to summarize the available measures to obtain
efficient estimates of the parameters of interest. Furthermore, it allows to choose a
metric for measurement, making the summary of a set of measures comparable over
time and, possibly, across contexts.
   Attanasio, Meghir, and Nix (2020) develop Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010)'s
contribution and explore alternative specification of the estimation procedure to anal-
yse the development of children in India, using the Young Lives data. In addition to
specifying a simpler and more flexible estimation procedure, they pay particular at-
tention to the potential endogeneity of parental investment. Attanasio, Meghir, Nix,
and Salvati (2017) also use the Young Lives data, but for Peru and Ethiopia. They
use the innovations introcuced by Attanasio, Meghir, and Nix (2020) to explore the
implication of alternative functional forms for the process of child development.
   Attanasio, Cattan, Fitzsimons, Meghir, and Rubio-Codina (2020) apply the same
methods and use the model they estimate, which includes the production function of


                                           2
human capital and parental behaviour, to interpret the evaluation findings of an early
childhood intervention in Colombia.2 Their paper develops at a more formal level the
mediation analysis proposed by Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (2013).
    More recently, Agostinelli and Wiswall (2016a,b), have considered the issue of the
metric to be used when modelling child development over different ages and stressed
the risk of making strong assumptions in this respect. Repeated normalisations for
the same factors at different ages may lead to important biases in the estimates of the
exogenous growth process of child development (the equivalent of exogenous technical
progress in a production function). In this paper, we address these normalization issue
explicitly, as we are considering an extended time period of the early life cycle. As we
discuss below, we have to be explicit about the normalization issues even because we
do not have the same measures of child development available at all ages.
    One of the reasons for the limited evidence on the dynamic properties of the process
of human capital formation is the paucity of rich data that would allow researchers to
identify the dynamic interactions among the various dimensions of human development,
both during the early years and in subsequent periods. Moreover, one of the challenges
researchers face even when longitudinal data are available, lies in the fact that avail-
able measures vary with children's age, so that the direct comparison and modelling
interactions between different dimensions of development is not trivial. In this paper,
we exploit the availability of a rich longitudinal data set that follows children every
year from age 1 to age 7. At each age, several measures related to different dimensions
of development are available. In what follows, we discuss the methodological problems
we face to combine effectively this wealth of measures and how we tackle this problem.
    This paper makes some original contributions to the literature that tries to quantify
the process of child development. First, the fact that we have access to a set of high
quality measures about several dimensions of child development covering a relatively
long period of time at an annual frequency allows us to estimate processes of human
capital formation in the early years that are much dynamically richer than those so
far analysed in the literature. In particular, we are not forced to impose a Markov
structure on the process, and we can allow for several lags to be relevant at different
points in time.
    2
     Interestingly, they notice that, while the intervention was randomly allocated across a number of
localities and evidently influenced parental investment, it cannot be used in their context to identify the
causal link between parental investment and child development. Indeed that paper tries to identify
the origin of the observed impact of the intervention and concludes that it has worked mainly by
increasing parental investment. Posing this question cannot rule out that the intervention has a direct
impact on child development.

                                                    3
   Second, the fact that we have high quality information on several dimensions of child
development allows us to study possible interactions among these dimensions and their
effect in the process of human capital accumulation. Third, we also model the impacts
of parental investment and estimate a rich and holistic process of child development
that is of special utility in the design of early child development policies. A complete
characterisation of the process allows us to identify windows of opportunities that can
be of particular relevance for policy. The fact that we can model the impact of parental
investment and establish its medium run effects tells us at what ages policies aimed at
improving parental behaviour should be targeted. As we discuss below, this is relevant
for at least two reasons: parental investment may particularly effective at specific ages
and, given its short run effectiveness, its medium run impacts depend on the dynamic
features of the process. We show that it is better to improve parental investment when
is most effective and before the process of development becomes too persistent.
    The paper also makes a small but important methodological contribution. Because
for some particular skills we do not have a single measure available for all ages covered
by our data, we need to link different measures over time. This involves some issues
with the normalisation of the parameters of the measurement system we estimate
below. Given the importance of the dynamics of the process for the results we discuss,
these issues are particularly important.
    The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents our model for
the production of cognitive skills, socio-emotional skills, and health over the child's
life-cycle, and describe how we deal with the endogeneity of parental investments. In
that section, we also discuss in detail the dynamic properties of the process, paying
particular attention to the issues of persistence and non-stationarity. Section 3 de-
scribes the latent factor approach that we use to summarize the available information
and take care of measurement error in the data. We pay particular attention to the
issues related with the normalisation of the parameters of the measurement system,
and propose a methodology to solve those issues. Section 4 describes the data and
give some background of the intervention. The main results are presented in Section
5, while the conterfactual exercises are presented in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.


2    The Production Function of Human Capital

In this section, we discuss our formulation of the dynamic process and sketch the way
we model it. In particular, we start with a discussion of the dimensions we model. We
then discuss the dynamics of the process and how we allow for a flexible specification.

                                           4
Finally, we discuss the role of different inputs and, in particular, that of parental
investment. To do so, we use a simple model of investment which brings about the
main assumptions that will drive our empirical strategy.

2.1     Different Dimensions: Cognition, Health and Socio-emotional Skills

As we mentioned above, it is well established that human capital is a multidimensional
object. In the context we study, we decided to model the dynamic evolution of three
different dimensions: cognitive skills, socio-emotional skills and health. Our choice
is partly driven by the measurements available to us that are presumably related to
such skills. Richer data sets might allow an even richer specification of the process.
For instance, one could consider cognition separately from language development or,
more importantly, one could model separately `internalising' and `externalising' socio-
emotional skills, as in Attanasio, Blundell, Conti, and Mason (2018). In any case, ours
specification is one of the richest in the literature, especially with data from developing
countries.3
      As we discuss in Section 3, we map specific available measures to the three factors we
model. The availability of detailed and high quality measures of development relevant
for different measures is not easy, especially for socio-emotional skills. Having done that
we can study the (dynamic) interactions among these different factors in the process
of development. Such a structure is useful both from an academic and a policy point
of view as it allows us to identify which specific skills might be more important at
different ages in the process of child development. Such knowledge is possibly relevant
for the design of specific interventions that might target one or another dimension of
development.

2.2     The Dynamics of Human Development: Persistence and Non-stationarity

The other important and so far relatively inexplored features of the process of develop-
ment are its dynamic properties. Often, again for data availability, researchers focus on
models where the level of human capital in various dimentions at age a depends only
on the level of human capital at age a - 1 (and other variables). Such assumptions on
the nature of persistence of the process are very strong and may be inconsistent with

   3
     Attanasio, Meghir, and Nix (2020) and Attanasio, Meghir, Nix, and Salvati (2017), for instance,
use the well-known Young Lives data to model simultaneously cognitive skills and health. Cunha,
Heckman, and Schennach (2010) use data from the NSLY to model (at much older ages than those
we consider here) cognition and socio-emotional skills. Rubio-Codina, Araujo, Attanasio, Munoz, and
McGregor (2017) discuss some of the issues in measuring child development during the early years.

                                                 5
the evidence from certain interventions that seem to show an effect in the short run
that seems to disappear in the medium run and re-appear in the long run.4 Moreover,
very few data set give the possibility of studying how the persistence of the process
changes through various ages. And yet these key parameters are crucial to determine
the existence of windows of opportunities for child development, and the optimal timing
for policies aimed at improving the life chances of disadvantaged children.
      In what follows, we consider flexible functional forms for the process of human
development, allowing for two lags of the developmental process and letting the coef-
ficients that determine persistence vary with age. The rich data set we have available,
with several observations during the first few years, allows us to estimate these models.
Armed with these estimate, we can evaluate the medium run effectiveness of different
interventions targeting specific stages of the child's life cycle.

2.3     The Production Function of Human Capital

The model we have in mind for the process of human development can be represented
by the following equation:


                                 t+1 = ft (t , t-1 , Xt , Zt ,      t+1 )                              (1)

where the subscript t represents age. t is a vector which represent different dimensions
of human development, Xt and Zt are vectors of (potentially) observable variables. The
reason we differentiate them is that the variables in vector Xt are assumed to be chosen
by some relevant agent, for instance parents, and could be reacting to the evolution
of the process itself and would therefore be endogenous. The variables in Zt , instead,
are environmental factors, including, possibly, parental background factors. The vector
 t+1 represents unobservable (by the researcher) factors that affect the evolution of the
various dimensions of human development.
      The obvious endogenous variable Xt is parental investment. Parental behaviour
and parental choices are recognised to be important determinants of child development.
However, they clearly must depend on the evolution of child development. The identifi-
cation of their effect on child development is, therefore, difficult. The variables Zt that
we consider include family composition and parental backgrouond, such as education.
      We keep the fuction ft , which determines the evolution of human development over

    4
      See, for instance, Gertler et al. (2014) for the long run effect of an intervention in Jamaica, whose
effects in the medium run had partly fade out or Heckman et al. (2010) for the long run impact of the
well-known Perry Preschool Program.

                                                    6
time, purposely vague, with the idea of wanting to use a flexible specification where
different inputs may play an important role. We note the subscript t to the function f
to stress the fact that we let this function change with age. Indeed, one of main goals
of this study is to establish how the function f changes over time.
   The empirical characterisation of the function ft in equation (1) faces different
challenges. First, t , Xt and Zt are not observable directly or without measurement
error. Second, we need to make some functional form assumptions about ft . While a
non-parametric approach might be conceivable, the dimension of the problem will in
practice prevent such an approach. We therefore need to add some parametric spec-
ifications that preserve a degree of flexibility while making the production function
estimable. Finally and most importantly, as we mentioned above, some of the argu-
ments of the function ft are chosen in reaction to the evolution of human capital and
are therefore endogenous. This issue makes estimating their role in the production
function particularly hard. In this section, we discuss the second and third issue, while
the discuss how we deal with the measurement of the various variables in equation (1)
in Section 3.

2.3.1   Functional Form Assumptions

Given the data available, we model three factors, which we denote as `cognitive skills'
(which we label C ), `socio-emotional skills' (labelled S ) and `health' (labelled H ). For
each of these factors and for each age considered, we estimate different functional
forms for the production function. The first specification we consider for each of the
three human capital dimensions considered is the Constant Elasticity of Substitution
specification (CES). According to this specification, dimension k of child human capital
at age t + 1 is given by:
                           
                         k,t             
                                        k,t              k,t             
                                                                       k,t
  k,t+1 = Ak,t [k,C1 ,t C,t  + k,C2 ,t C,t -1 + k,S1 ,t S,t + k,S2 ,t S,t-1 +               (2)
                         k,t            k,t            k,t         k,t 1/k,t
                                                                   
                k,H1 ,t H,t  + k,H2 ,t H,t -1 + k,I,t I,t + k,P,t P ]           k  {C, S, H }
      I
where t are parental investments and P represent parental skills, which are assumed
to be fixed over time. Ak
                        t is a factor-neutral productivity parameter, which is allowed to
depend on observable characteristics (such as family composition and gender), denoted
by Gt ) and unobserved shocks according to:

                              Ak,t = exp(k,0,t + k,G,t Gt +      k,t )                      (3)

   Several comments on equation (2) are in order. Such a specification allows for a
large number of inputs, including two lags of each of the dimension of human capital

                                                7
considered. The effect of these input on the total outcome is not additive or separable.
One can impose the assumption of constant return to scale by imposing that the sum of
the  coefficients is equal to 1, but it is not necessary. The CES allows for interactions,
and the parameter k,t governs the elasticity of substitution among the various inputs,
which is given by 1+1
                    k,t
                        . When the parameter k,t converges to zero, the expression in
equation (2) converges to a Cobb-Douglas and the elasticity of substitution among the
various inputs is unity. This writes as follows:
                  
                 k,C1 ,t  k,C2 ,t k,S1 ,t        
                                           k,S2 ,t       
                                                   k,H1 ,t      
                                                            k,H2 ,t   
                                                                    k,I,t k,P,t
  k,t+1 = Ak,t [C,t      C,t -1 S,t       S,t -1 H,t       H,t -1 I,t P         ] k  {C, S, H }   (4)
   All the arguments of the production function in these equations are potentially not
observable directly. In Section 3, we discuss how to estimate the parameters of these
functions when we have some noisy signals of these variables.
   Although equation (2) is reasonably flexible (and contains as a special case the Cobb
Douglas case), it does impose a fair amount of restictions on the production function.
In particular, the assumption that the degree of substitability among all the inputs is
the same and governed by a single parameter (k,t ) is a very strong one. For this reason
we also experimented with a Trascendental Logarithmic production function (translog
for short) which has both linear and quadratic terms and allows to capture different
degrees of substitutability between inputs flexibly (Christensen, Jorgenson, and Lau
(1973)). The translog specification (with some abuse of notation) is given by:
      ln k,t+1 = k,C1 ,t ln C,t + k,C2 ,t ln C,t-1 + k,S1 ,t ln S,t + k,S2 ,t ln S,t-1            (5)
                                   H
                       +k,H1 ,t ln t + k,H2 ,t ln H,t-1 + +k,I,t ln I,t + P,t ln P
                           1
                          +2    q    r   k,qr,t ln q,t ln r,t + k,0,t + k,G,t Gt +   k,t

                                         k  {C, S, H };     q, r  {C, S, H, P, I }
with i,j = j,i . The translog production function reduces to the Cobb-Douglas when
all i,j = 0 . Equation (5), as it is written, does not allow interactions with the lag-2
dimensions of human capital. In practice, we experiment with those interactions as
well.
   The main focus of the empirical analysis is going to be in assessing the extent of
the persistence of the process, as measured by the coefficients on the lagged human
capital variables, the extent of the dynamic interactions between different dimensions of
human capital (for instance, what role socio-emotinal skills play in the development of
cognition) and in the role of parental investment. We will also assess how these effects
change over time. As discussed above, the size of these parameters has important
policy implications.

                                                    8
2.3.2   The Endogeneity of Parental Investment

Parents make choices reflecting their resources (financial and time), their tastes and
their beliefs. An implication of this statement is that the correlation between parental
investment and children outcomes does not necessarily have a causal interpretation.
In other words the estimates of the  coefficients in equations (2), (4), or (5) obtained
by simple OLS or NLS regressions can be biased. Indeed, the nature of the bias of
such coefficients, if it can be estimated, is informative of the motives behind parental
behaviour. For instance, a negative bias in the estimation of the marginal product
of investment might be indicating compensatory behaviour, where parents react to
negative shocks to their offspring's development by increasing investments.
   To estimate the coefficients of the production function is necessary to specify a
model of parental behaviour, which can be used to derive the conditions under which
the coefficients can be identified, and the variables that is necessary to observe to
obtain such estimates. In what follows, we assume that parents maximise a certain
objective function subject to a resource constraint and their perception of the human
capital production function. To clarify the main ideas we sketch here a simple (and
unrealistic) model of parental behaviour. In particular, we assume that couples choose
investment to solve the following problem:

                                       M axc,X U (c, H )                             (6)
                               s.t.      c + pX = Y
                                      H = g (X, H0 , W, )

where c is parental consumption, H child's human capital, X parental investment, p
the price of investment in terms of consumption (whose price is normalised to 1) and
Y represents parental financial resources. The function g is the parental perception of
the human capital production function. The shock is observed by parents but not by
researchers.
   In such a model, parental investment will depend on parental tastes, as represented
by the utility function U , parental resources Y , the price of investment p and by the
parental perceptions of the production function of human capital g . We note that
the function g does not necessarily coincide with the "true" production function, as
represented, for instance, in equation (2) or (5).
   A feasible approach to estimate the parameters of the production function in this
context would be the use of an IV or, in the non-linear case of equation (2), a control
function approach. For such an approach to work, it is necessary to identify variables

                                             9
that drive investment, but that can be plausibly excluded from the production function.
Once again, we note that, if the objective is only to estimate the parameters of the
"true" production function, rather than the complete model, which would include taste
parameters, the parameters of the "perceived" production function, one does not need
to specify a completely accurate investment function or assume that parents know
the "true" production function. Instead, one can estimate an investment function
that includes some variables that drive investment and are not direct determinants of
human capital.5 This approach leads us to estimate the following approximation to
the investment function:

         I,t = 0 + C,t C,t + S,t S,t + H,t H,t + P,t P + G,t Gt + Z,t Wt + ut                          (7)

where the vector Gt are variables that affect the production function, while Wt are
the instruments that do not enter the production function directly. Such an equation
should be interpreted as a reasonable approximation (not necessarily consistent) to the
investment function. Estimating it allows to obtain estimates of ut , which can then be
used to construct a control function to add to the production function equation.
    In the context of the model in equations (6), two natural candidate variables that
could be used as instruments are the price of investment p and the financial resources
Y . As discussed in Attanasio, Cattan, Fitzsimons, Meghir, and Rubio-Codina (2020),
prices could constitute a more attractive instrument than financial resources, as the
former are plausibly taken as given by households, while the latter could proxy for some
omitted input in the production function. Unfortunately, in the context that we will be
analysing, there is no variation in prices, as the children in our sample live in the same
city and even in the same neighborhood. We therefore decided to use variables related
to financial resources as an instrument and discuss possible biases and interpration of
results in Section 5. Our results on the effectiveness of parental investment, therefore,
should be taken with a grain of salt. It should be stressed that Attanasio, Cattan,
Fitzsimons, Meghir, and Rubio-Codina (2020), who performed an extensive analysis
of the instruments used to identify the effect of parental investment, obtain estimates
of the relevant coefficient that do not depend on whether they use prices or resources
as the source of identification and that are substantially different from the estimates
obtained by OLS, which ignore the endogeneity of investment.6
    5
      In linear models, the consistency of estimates so obtained can be easily proven. The issue is subtler
in non-linear model and one might have to show the robustness of the results with simulations.
    6
      Attanasio, Cattan, Fitzsimons, Meghir, and Rubio-Codina (2020) also discuss the possibility that
the instruments they use are `weak' and therefore introducing a bias in the estimates. They show that
instrument weakness is not an issue in their context.

                                                    10
3       Latent Factors and Measurement

As we mentioned above, several variables (or factors) that enter the production function
(or the investment function) are not directly observed. Instead, our data consists
of a set of measures that are related to the relevant latent factors. We follow the
approach used, among others, by Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010), Attanasio,
Meghir, and Nix (2020) and Attanasio, Cattan, Fitzsimons, Meghir, and Rubio-Codina
(2020) to estimate a measurement system that allows us to synthetise the available
information on these variables in a lower dimensional construct and account explicitly
for the presence of measurement error. To obtain estimates of the relevant parameters
governing the process of human capital formation, we need to address a number of
normalisation and location issues. These issues can be particularly important in this
context, as our focus is on the longitudinal and dynamic analysis of this process. As we
discuss below, it is crucial to use, at each stage or age considered, a consistent metric
and normalisation of the factors considered.
      Using the approach introduced by Attanasio, Meghir, and Nix (2020), we obtain
estimates of the joint distribution of the latent factors, which we then use in the estima-
tion of the production functions we consider. We consider as factors three dimensions of
human development (cognition and language, socio-emotional skills and health) as well
as parental cognitive skills and investment. We discuss the choice of these dimensions
and the measurements we use in detail in Section 4.2.
   In this section, we first discuss the measurement system and its estimation, includ-
ing the normalisation issues we tackle. We then move on to consider the estimation
of the production function, taking into account the process to obtain estimates of the
relevant latent factor and the endogeneity of parental investment.

3.1     The Measurement System

We specify the measurement system in terms of the log of the latent factors, ensur-
ing that the factors only take positive values, as required by the specification of the
production function. Let mj
                          k,t be a continuous measure at age t for factor k .
                                                                              7
                                                                                As-
suming a log-linear relationship between the measures and the factors with additive
measurement error, we can write:
                                  mj     j     j
                                   k,t = k,t + k,t ln k,t +
                                                                  j
                                                                  k,t                              (8)
    7
     If the available measure mjk,t is discrete (bynomial or otherwise), one can extend the discussion
here considering a single index model such as a (multinomial) probit, a logistic or some other discrete
variable model, which converts an equation such as (8) into a discrete measure.

                                                  11
         j
where k,t   is an intercept term and jk,t is a factor loading. The intercept captures the
                         j                                     j
difficulty of measure mk,t : a measure with a low value of k,t   is one that, for a given
level of the factor k,t , obtains a lower value. The factor loading captures the saliency
of variable j for factor k : a measure with a high value of j
                                                            k,t is one that varies much
with variation in the factor. Both the intercept and the factor loading are indexed by
t, reflecting the fact that these are allowed to vary by age as to capture the potentially
                                                                                  j
different informativeness of the same measure over time. The term                 k,t   represents the
measurement error for variable j . This is assumed to be mean zero and indipendent of
the latent factor. Furthermore, the error terms are assumed to be independent between
each other ( j     j
                     ) and over time ( t   t ).
                                               8
                |=




                                             |=
    The final and most important element in equation (8) is the latent factior k,t , which
represents child development in dimension k at age t. Estimation of the measurement
system in equation (8) allows to learn the distribution of the child development factor
in a population or sample. Moreover, estimates of such a system allows, for any set of
measures observed for a given child, to construct an estimate of their development.
    While, under certain conditions on the number of available measures, it is possible
to identify the parameters in equation (8) without any assumptions on the distribution
of the latent factor k,t , in practice researchers often make specific assumptions about
such a distribution.9 The parameters of the distribution of the latent factors constitute
another set of parameters to be estimated. Finally, we notice that the way equation
(8) is written, assumes that each measure correponds exclusively to one factor. Such
a system is referred to as dedicated system. While it is possible to relax a bit this as-
sumption, having some measures being affected by more than one factor, identification
requires a set of exclusion restrictions.
   Because the latent factors are not observable and have no natural metric, we need to
impose some normalizing restrictions to set their location and scale (Anderson and Ru-
bin (1956)). This issue is analogous to the discussion of anchoring in Cunha, Heckman,
and Schennach (2010). As discussed by Agostinelli and Wiswall (2016a), normalizing
the mean of the factor to be zero in each period can be an non-innocuous assumption
when one is interested in capturing the dynamic growth of the factors over time, as
it would restrict the set of admissible production functions to those that are mean

   8
      These assumptions can be somewhat relaxed, although we need to have some measures whose
measurement errors are independent to achieve identification of the model's parameters.
    9
      Log-normality is often assumed. Alternatively researchers have used more flexible specifications,
such as a mixture of log normal. See, for instance, the discussion in Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach
(2010)

                                                  12
stationary. Moreover, valid comparison of technology parameters over time, which is
key for the identification of window of opportunities, requires that the scale of the la-
tent factors is consistently expressed in the same metric over ages (see Agostinelli and
Wiswall (2016a)). Expressing the scale of the latent factor arbitrarily, by normalizing
the loading on a different measure in each period, would imply that the technology
parameters are themselves expressed in different metrics over time.
    One straightforward solution to both issues would be readily available if one had at
least one exact same measure spanning all time periods. One could then express the
location and scale of the factor in terms of this measure, which we label as measure
                  1
1, by imposing k,t   = 0 and 1  k,t = 1 t = 1...T . The assumption that one of the
           h
intercepts k,t is normalised to 0 is necessary if we want to estimate, for each age, the
mean of the latent factor k,t .10
    The assumption that the loading factors on one specific measure is set to 1 is a
strong one and defines the scale of the estiimated factors. This assumption says that
the saliency of the measured whose loading factor is normalised to 1 does not change
with age. As with the mean, this assumptions allows the variability of the latent factors
to change with age.
    Given these assumptions, we can estimate the measurement system in equation (8).
Both the mean and the scale of estimated latent factor is now comparable over time
as they are expressed in terms of this normalizing measure.
  Unfortunately, while we do have one such measure in our data for health, socio-
emotional skills and investments, we do not have it for cognitive skills. However, we can
exploit the fact that there is at least one time period where we have some "overlapping"
between different measures to express the location and scale of the cognitive factor
consistently over time. In the next subsection we provide the details of this procedure
with the help of an illustrative example.

3.1.1    Normalizations on the Location and Scale of the Latent Factors when
         no Measure is Available for all Ages

Our data consists of two sets of instruments that were used to measure child cognitive
skills over time: the first set is only appropriate at younger ages (0 to 3), while the
second set is only appropriate for older children (3+). Therefore the simple normaliza-
tion discussed above cannot be implemented. We extend that procedura in a relatively

  10                                           j
     Alternatively, some researchers leave the k,t unrestricted for every t and constraint the mean of
                     j
the distribution of k,t to zero. The two assumptions are observationally equivalent.

                                                 13
simple way.
   The basic intuition behind our procedure is the following: if there is at least one
measure from each set that overlap in at least in one time period then one can work
out a mapping between the location and scale parameters (the s and s in equation
(8)) of the two sets and impose these restrictions in subsequent periods, so to set the
location and scale of the latent factors in a common metric over time.
   The approach is explained simply with an example where we consider 3 time pe-
riods and four measures for a generic factor k : ma    a2  b1   b2
                                                  k , mk ,mk , mk . To explain our
                                                   1


scaling procedure, we only need one latent facot. For simplicity, therefore, we omit
the measurement equations relating to factors different from k from the discussion and
drop the subscript k in what follows.
   We assume that at age t = 1 ma1 and ma2 are available. At age t = 2, measures
ma1 and mb1 are available, while at age t = 3, mb1 and mb2 are available. At this point
the distribution of the (log) latent factor is left unspecified with mean µ and variance
2
  . With these assumption, the measurement system can be expressed as follows:


                                 ma   a1  a1
                                  1 = 1 + 1 ln 1 +
                                   1                      a1
                                                          1
                        t=1
                                 ma   a2  a2
                                  1 = 1 + 1 ln 1 +
                                   2                      a2
                                                          1




                                 ma   a1  a1
                                  2 = 2 + 2 ln 2 +
                                    1                      a1
                                                           2
                        t=2                                                          (9)
                                 mb   b1  b1
                                  k = 2 + 2 ln 2 +
                                   1                      b1
                                                          2




                                  mb   b1  b1
                                   3 = 3 + 3 ln 3 +
                                    1                     b1
                                                          3
                         t=3
                                  mb   b2  b2
                                   3 = 3 + 3 ln 3 +
                                    2                     b2
                                                          3

In this example, no measure is available throughout the 3 periods considered. However,
both measure ma1 and measure mb1 give a way to construct a metric for the factors
that can be used through the 3 periods. In particular, if we normalise the intercepts
and factor loadings of measures ma      a1                         a1  a1
                                 1 and m2 to 0 and 1 respectively (1 = 2 = 0
                                  1


and a       a1
      1 = 2 = 1), we can use the estimates of the intercept and factor loading of m2
       1                                                                             b1

to express the location and scale of the latent factor at age 3 in same metric. We can
do so by imposing that the location and scale coefficients pertaining to this measure
are constant across time periods. Alternatively, a similar exercise could be performed
normalizing the parameters of measure mb1 and use that measure as the metric for the
three periods. We notice that the parameters of the joint distribution of factors (µ and

                                          14
  2
    ) can be identified. Our procedure guarantees that these are constantly expressed
in the same metric and are, therefore, comparable over time. More formally, in our
example, we would use the following procedure:

Factor scale: We can set the scale of the (log) factor in the first two periods to be
equal to each other by setting a      a1
                                1 = 2 = 1. In this way the scale of the latent factor
                                 1


would be the same in the first two periods and would be given by the scale of measure
ma1 . As the factor loading on measure ma1 in period t = 2 is normalized to one, the
factor loading on measure mb
                           k in that period will be expressed in terms of measure
                             1


ma2 .11 We can then impose b         b1
                              2 = 3 to express the scale of the factor in t = 3 to be
                               1


the same as that of the factor in t = 1, 2.

Factor location: We can express the location of the (log) factor in t = 1 and t = 2
           a1   a1
by setting 1  = 2  = 0. Taking expectations of the first equation at t = 1 and
t = 2 we get E (ln 1 ) = E (ma                       a1
                             1 ) and E (ln 2 ) = E (m2 ), respectively. In this way the
                              1


factor mean in periods 1 and 2 is expressed in terms of the same measure. Using the
measurement equation for mb                                b1
                          2 , we can get an expression for 2 :
                            1



                                  b1
                                  2  = E (mb     b1
                                           2 ) - 2 E (ln 2 )
                                            1
                                                                                               (10)

Using the measurement equation for mb
                                    3 , we can then get an expression for E (ln 3 ):
                                      1




                                                 E (mb
                                                     3 ) - 3
                                                       1    b1
                                   E (ln 3 ) =                                                 (11)
                                                      b  3
                                                          1



                  b1   b1
Finally, imposing 2  = 3  and b   b1
                              2 = 3 and substituting (10), we get:
                               1




                                                   E (mb         b1
                                                       3 ) - E (m2 )
                                                         1

                           E (ln 3 ) = E (ln 2 ) +                                             (12)
                                                           b
                                                           2
                                                             1



so that the mean of the (log) factor in t = 3 will be equal to that of the (log) factor
in the previous period (which was expressed in terms of measure ma2 ), plus a term
that depends on the change in measure mb1 between periods 2 and 3, scaled by the
informativeness of this measure in terms of ma2 .




  11
    This approach is analogous to express the value of a currency in terms of another i.e. a nominal
exchange rate.

                                                 15
  This example can be easily generalised to additional time periods and additional
available measures. What we want to make clear is that the availability of two measures
in a given time period allows us to "covert" one to the other. We can then impose
these conversions in different periods and express the scale and location of the latent
factors in a way that is consistent throughout the periods considered. The resulting
factors can then be compared over time to establish the rate of growth over time
and to derive estimates of the parameters governing the growth process. The crucial
identification assumptions, again, is that the factor loadings and the intercepts of some
of the measures available at different ages are constant over time. In what follows, we
will be using the TVIP to express the scale and the location of the cognitive factor.

3.1.2   Estimation

In order not to impose strong restrictions on the technology of human capital forma-
tion, one needs to estimate the distribution of factors using a flexible specification.
Often used assumptions, such as joint normality, in practice impose very strong re-
strictions on the production function. For instance, the linear relatationship among
conditional means implied by joint normality would preclude any complementarity be-
tween the inputs in the production function. Thus flexibility in the specification of
the production technology requires flexibility in the parametric assumptions about the
joint distribution of factors.
   In this paper, we follow the approach introduced by Attanasio, Meghir, and Nix
(2020). This approach consists in assuming some flexible distributional assumptions
for the latent factors and measurement errors, and estimating the parameters of these
distributions (together with the parameters of the measurement system) using the
observable data. In practice, we assume that the factors are distributed as a mixture of
two log-normal distributions and that the measurement errors are normally distributed
with mean zero and diagonal variance-covariance matrix.
   These distributional assumptions, together with the specified measurement model,
imply that the measures will be distributed as a mixture of normal distributions. We
thus estimate the parameters of the joint distribution of measurements by maximum
likelihood, using the EM algorithm. Using these estimates we can recover the parame-
ters of the joint distribution of factors, the variances of measurement errors, the factor
loadings and the intercepts by minimum distance. Following Attanasio, Meghir, and
Nix (2020), we augment the measurement system for the latent factors reflecting child
development and parental investment, with additional equations, representing the con-


                                           16
trol variables we use as well as the instruments used in the investment equation to take
into account the endogeneity of such a variable, which we discuss below.
      Having obtained estimates of the joint distrubution of all the variables included in
the model. we use it to draw vectors of random variables from this distribution. As we
estimate the joint distribution, we reproduce the correlation oberved in the data and
use these synthetic data to obtain parameters of the structural model using a control
function approach we discuss in what follows.

3.2     Production Functions and Investment Functions: a Control Function
        Approach

An additional challenge we face in the estimation of a production function, is the fact
that some of the arguments are endogenous. In particular, parental investment is likely
to be chosen by parents in reaction to the evolution of child development. Moreover, the
measured factor might be correlated with other unobservable factors that are relevant
for child development. These issues make the identification of the causal link between
parental investment and child development challenging.
      We use the approach in Attanasio, Meghir, and Nix (2020), by first estimating
an investment function, which represents the reduced form of a model that relates
parental investment to (some of) its determinants. We then use the residual terms
of such an equation to construct a control function, which can be used to control
for the endogeneity of investment in the production function of human capital. The
identification assumption is that investment function includes some variables that are
important drivers of investment but that do not enter directly the production function.
Both the inverstment equation, its residuals and the production function augmented
with the relevant control function are estimated on the syntehtic data drawn from the
estimated joint distribution derived from the measurement system.


4      aeioTU : Available Data and Latent Factors

The longitudinal data set we use in this paper comes from a randomized controlled
trial used to evaluate a comprehensive, high-quality early education intervention in
Colombia. We use a sample of 1,073 disadvantaged children aged 0 to 5 at baseline
in two communities in northern Colombia from 2010 to 2014. Bernal, Giannola, and
Nores (2020) and Nores, Bernal, and Barnett (2019) provide additional details of the
intervention and its impacts on child development.



                                             17
4.1   Background on the Intervention and Its Evaluation

The data we use were collected within the evaluation of an important intervention
aimed at improving the quality of preschool attended by disadvantaged children in
Colombia. In particular, the intervention improves the infrastructure of relatively
large child care centres, while at the same time changing the curriculum used within
them. The curriculum, inspired by the celebrated Reggio Emilia model, is promoted
by an NGO, called aeioTU, which through a public-partnership with the Colombian
government, operated 28 centres by 2016, providing comprehensive early childhood
education to about 13,300 low-income children aged 05 throughout the country. The
program offers early education on a full-day schedule, five days a week and 11 months
per year, plus nutritional supplementation corresponding to 70% of childrens daily
calorie intake requirements.
   The evaluation of the intervention was designed as a randomized control trial,
which exploited the excess demand of places in two renewed child care centres on
the Caribbean coast in Colombia. The RCT study assigned the children of families
who applied to the two centres included in the study to treatment or control. The
two centres in the study had capacity for 320 children aged 0 to 5, with just over half
of that for children up to age 3. The randomisation stratified children by age (five
groups), gender and neighborhood within site (three groups). Slots were randomized
for 1,073 children aged 0 to 4. Of these children, 471 were offered slots in the centers
(the treatment group), and 602 children were allocated to the control group.
   Baseline assessments were conducted on children in late 2010, prior to random
assignment and to the beginning of the intervention. Children and their families were
assessed every subsequent year (roughly every 10 to 12 months) up until 2014. Baseline
data collection in Site 1 took place on July-September 2010 (Y1 henceforth) and the
program started in November 2010. Baseline in Site 2 was conducted on October-
December 2010 with the program starting in March 2011. The first follow-up (Y2) was
collected 8 months into the program, a second follow up (Y3) at 20-22 months later,
a third follow-up (Y4) at 32 months, and the last follow-up (Y5) at approximately 41
months since the start of the intervention.

4.2   Available Measures: Different Measures and Different Ages

The data we use is very rich, in that for each of the latent factors that enter the
production functions we estimate, we have several measures available. We use the
factor models described in Section 3 to summarize all the information they provide. In

                                          18
       Table 1: Measures of early development by developmental domain and wave

                                                              Baseline     Y2      Y3       Y4     Y5
        Health and Nutrition
        Height, weight, arm circumference                      0+ 0+       0+      0+       0+
        Cognitive Development
        Bayley 3rd edition                                       0-42      0-42 0-42        0-42    -
        Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (Spanish)                30+       30+ 30+          30+    30+
        ELSA Early Literacy Skills Assessment                    36+       36+ 36+          36+     -
        Woodcock-Mu~  noz III subscale 10a                       36+       36+ 36+          36+    36+
        Woodcock-Mu~  noz III (subscales 1b and 9c )               -         -    -         36+    36+
        Head Toes Knees and Shoulders (HTKS)                     48+       48+ 48+          48+    48+
        Socio-emotional development
        Ages & Stages socio-emotional domain                     6-60      6-60   6-60      6-60   6-60
        Behavioral and emotional screening system                  -         -    36+       36+    36+
        Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales-II                       -         -      -       36+    36+
        Notes: Each cell reports the ages for which the measure is available (in months).
        a
          Applied problems.
        b
          Word identification.
        c
          Text comprehension.


particular, the available data, an exploratory factor analysis and a-priori considerations
lead us to consider 3 latent factors of child development: cognition and language, socio-
emotional skills, and health.
    The instruments used in the evaluation have adequate psychometrics and been used
extensively in evaluations of early care and education including studies in developing
countries (Fernald, Prado, Kariger, and Raikes (2017)). Child assessments were col-
lected by graduates in psychology and students in their senior year in psychology, who
were trained to reliability standards (100% agreement with the trainer) by experienced
staff in a two-week training which included live reliability with young children.12 Data
collection was conducted in spaces rented and adapted for that purpose every year,
under identical conditions for treatment and control children, with parental informed
consent. Parent interviews were carried out in a separate room alongside the childs
assessment.
   Table 1 summarizes the child assessments used in the evaluation, by developmental
domains. These changed as children aged over the course of the study. For health
outcomes, we collected height, weight, and arm circumference following World Health
Organization (WHO) standards (WHO (2007)).
   Cognitive development was measured using the cognitive, motor, and language

  12
     Evaluators involved in child assessment at any given wave were offered a refresher training every
year, and new assessors (if any) were fully trained in similar conditions.

                                                      19
scales from the Bayley Scales of Infant Development III (BSID) (Bayley (2005)), for
children under 36 months of age. We administered the Test de Vocabulario en Imgenes
Peabody (TVIP) (Padilla, Lugo, and Dunn (1986)) to children over 30 months of age in
each wave. The TVIP measures receptive language. We used the Early Literacy Skills
Assessment (ELSA) (DeBruin-Parecki (2005)) to measure early literacy in children over
36 months of age in each wave (with the exception of Y5).
   Math and literacy skills were measured using three subtests of the Woodcock-Mu~
                                                                                 noz
III Tests of Achievement (WM-III): subtests #1 (letter-word identification), #9 (text
comprehension) and #10 (applied problems) (Mu~noz-Sandoval, Woodcock, McGrew,
and Mather (2005)). The applied problems subtest was used every year for children
above 3 years of age, while the literacy sub-tests were included only in Y4.
   Executive Function was assessed using the Head-Toes-Knees and Shoulders (HTKS)
which examines behavioral regulation in young children (Ponitz, McClelland, Jewkes,
Connor, Farris, and Morrison (2008), Ponitz, McClelland, Matthews, and Morrison
(2009)). HTKS requires children to remember, respond and inihibit behavioral com-
mands. We measured HTKS for all children older than 4 years of age in all waves.
   Socio-emotional development was assessed using The Ages and Stages Question-
naire: Socio-Emotional (ASQ:SE), a parent-completed assessment for children 660
months old measuring self-regulation, compliance, communication, adaptive function-
ing, autonomy, affect, and interactions with others (Squires, Bricker, and Twombly
(2002)). It was collected for children of all ages (up until 60 months of age) in all
waves. Higher scores represent higher levels of socio-emotional risk or negative be-
haviors. We also used the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales (Sparrow, Cicchetti,
and Balla (1984)) on children above age 3 starting Y4. The Vineland is a parent
questionnaire on personal and social skills, daily living skills, socialization, and motor
skills.
   As children outgrew the ASQ:SE (starting at Y3), we used the Behavior Assessment
System for Children, Second Edition (BASC-II) for all children older than 36 months
of age, which measures adaptive functioning and problem behaviors (Bracken, Keith,
and Walker (1998), Doyle, Ostrander, Skare, Crosby, and August (1997)).
   Finally, to assess the home environment parents were interviewed on: (1) discipline
strategies used at home, (2) nutritional and feeding habits at home, and (3) parental
engagement with children. Discipline strategies is an 8-item scale asking parents to
rate how often they use certain types of discipline strategies that range from physical
and verbal punishments to positive alternatives. The scale was collected for all children


                                           20
in all waves. Nutritional and feeding habits were assessed with questions about meal
contents which allows constructing a measure of balanced diets (i.e., all nutritional
elements in each meal or each day), and a measure of food insecurity (child skipped
at least one meal due to lack of resources). Both were collected for all children in
all waves but Y1. Parental engagement was assessed using questions regarding the
number of hours devoted by parents to childcare during weekdays and weekends, and
the frequency of activities with children such as reading, feeding them, playing with
them, and walking with them or visiting places. These were collected for all children
and in all waves.
   In addition to the outcome measures described above, we included a household
survey (primarily answered by mothers or the head of the household) inquiring on:
schooling attainment, maternal age at birth of the child, race, income and expendi-
tures, employment, assets, health insurance, number of children in the household, and
childcare experiences.

4.3   Impacts on Child Outcomes

Bernal, Giannola, and Nores (2020) reports strong positive effects on health throughout
the study which were concentrated on boys, and strong positive effects on cognition
from Y2 to Y4 for girls but not for boys. No significant program impacts were found
on socio-emotional development. The effects on health were around 0.12 standard
deviations throughout the study , and up to 0.3 standard deviations for boys in the
last wave. The effects were mostly observed in the subgroup of older children in the
2-4 cohort. The treatment on the treated effect was larger, as expected, with an
effect of about 0.12 standard deviations for each additional year of effective program
participation.
    The intent-to-treat effects on cognition started at 0.16 standard deviations at the
first follow-up (8 months into the program) and reached 0.36 standard deviations after
that, and were close to 0.5 standard deviations for girls. The effects are observed from
Y2 to Y4, but disappear in Y5. The treatment on the treated effect was around 0.3
standard deviations for each additional year of effective enrollment in the program.
These effects can be thought as percentages of the socio-economic development gap in
Colombia, which is close to one standard deviation in receptive vocabulary at age 5
(Bernal, Mart´
             inez, and Quintero (2015)). For a detailed discussion on the evaluation
results see Bernal, Giannola, and Nores (2020) and Nores, Bernal, and Barnett (2019).
   Of course, a finer decompositions of child development and a larger number of fac-


                                          21
tors could be possible. For instance, one could imagine to consider differnt dimensions
of cognitive development, including language, executive functions and other types of
cognitive skills. Or one could decompose what we call socio-emotional skills into "inter-
nalizing skills" (focus, motivation, drive and grit) and "externalising skills" (sociability,
the ability to work and communicate with others). However, given the data available
and the exploratory analysis we performed, the decomposition we perform seems rea-
sonable and feasible. These three factors, have been used in the literature on child
development extensively, although we are the first to model them jointly.

4.4     The Measurement System

Given the available measures, we specify the measurement system as a dedicated sys-
tem. In Table 2, we report the observable variables that we use as markers for each
of the unobservable factors we include (cognition, socio-emotional skills, health, and
parental investment).
   After estimating the measurement system for each factor and each age, following
the normalization and scaling procedures discussed above, we can estimate, for each of
the variables that we include in the system, the fraction of the variance of that variable
which is accounted for by variation in the relevant unobservable factor and the fraction
that is due to measurement error. These results are reported in Table 2.
      Starting with the cognitive measures, we notice that they change with the age of
the children, as it is normal practice. Fortunately, there is some overlap at each age,
so that we can follow the normalization and anchoring strategy we discuss above. At
early ages, from 1 to 3, the sample children are administered various sub-scales of the
Bayleys Scale of Infant Development, a test that is considered as the gold standard for
these ages. The quality of the Bayleys tests is reflected in the high signal to noise ratios
corresponding to these measures that we report in Table 2. We notice in particular,
the high signal to noise ratio for the cognitive and the two language scales (expressive
and receptive). Starting age 3, children are also administered the TVIP, which we use
as our metric. From age 4, children are also administered the Woodcock- Munoz test
and the ELSA test. While these measures perform reasonably well, the signal to noise
ratio is not as high as that of the Bayleys or the TVIP.
      For socioemotional skills, children are administered several ASQ sub-scales. Unfor-
tunately, the signal to noise ratio for several of these sub scales is relatively low. The
relative low information provided by these measures is one of the reason that prevents
us from having different socio-emotional factors.


                                             22
                                                                                                               23




                   Table 2: Share of total variance due to signal and noise

                                   % signal   % noise                                      % signal   % noise
Child cognitive skills                                  Child socio-emotional skills
Bayley cognition age 1               0.91      0.09     ASQ selfregulation age 1             0.12       0.88
Bayley expressive age 1              0.58      0.42     ASQ communication age 1              0.01       0.99
Bayley receptive age 1               0.61      0.39     ASQ adaptive functioning age   1     0.22       0.78
Bayley fine motor age 1              0.86      0.14     ASQ compliance age 1                 0.63       0.37
Bayley gross motor age 1              0.9       0.1     ASQ interaction age 1                0.01       0.99
Bayley cognition age 2                1         0       ASQ selfregulation age 2             0.11       0.89
Bayley expressive age 2              0.54      0.46     ASQ communication age 2              0.15       0.85
Bayley receptive age 2               0.44      0.56     ASQ adaptive functioning age   2     0.02       0.98
Bayley fine motor age 2               0.6       0.4     ASQ compliance age 2                 0.24       0.76
Bayley gross motor age 2              0.6       0.4     ASQ interactiona age 2               0.09       0.91
TVIP age 3                            1         0       ASQ selfregulation age 3             0.18       0.82
Bayley cognition age 3               0.89      0.11     ASQ communication age 3              0.2         0.8
Bayley expressive age 3               0.6       0.4     ASQ adaptive functioning age   3     0.19       0.81
Bayley receptive age 3               0.38      0.62     ASQ affection age 3                  0.16       0.84
Bayley fine motor age 3               0.5       0.5     ASQ compliance age 3                 0.34       0.66
Bayley gross motor age 3             0.43      0.57     ASQ interaction age 3                0.11       0.89
TVIP age 4                           0.71      0.29     ASQ selfregulation age 4              0.2        0.8
Woodcock-Munoz age 4                 0.26      0.74     ASQ communication age 4              0.26       0.74
ELSA age 4                           0.38      0.62     ASQ adaptive functioning age   4     0.15       0.85
TVIP age 5                           0.27      0.73     ASQ affection age 4                   0.5        0.5
Woodcock-Munoz age 5                 0.32      0.68     ASQ compliance age 4                 0.25       0.75
ELSA age 5                           0.36      0.64     ASQ interaction age 4                 0.3        0.7
TVIP age 6                           0.43      0.57     ASQ selfregulation age 5             0.15       0.85
Woodcock-Munoz age 6                 0.54      0.46     ASQ communication age 5              0.64       0.36
ELSA age 6                           0.23      0.77     ASQ adaptive functioning age   5     0.14       0.86
TVIP age 7                           0.42      0.58     ASQ affection age 5                  0.42       0.58
Woodcock-Munoz age 7                 0.44      0.56     ASQ compliance age 5                 0.23       0.77
ELSA age 7                           0.15      0.85     ASQ interaction age 5                0.34       0.66
                                                                                               continues...
Notes:  0 and 1 reflect rounding
                                                                                                     24




                 Share of total variance due to signal and noise (continued)

                                   % signal   % noise                                           % signal   % noise
Child socio-emotional skills                            Parental investments
ASQ selfregulation age 6              0.4       0.6     Child books ages 1-2                      0.05      0.95
ASQ communication age 6              0.28      0.72     Number of play materials ages 1-2         0.41      0.59
ASQ adaptive functioning age 6       0.17      0.83     Books at home ages 1-2                    0.93      0.07
ASQ affection age 6                  0.33      0.67     Toys ages 1-2                             0.08      0.92
ASQ compliance age 6                  0.4       0.6     At least 3 child books ages 1-2           0.08      0.92
ASQ interaction age 6                0.29      0.71     Learning materials (score) ages 1-2       0.07      0.93
Child health                                            Variety (score) ages 1-2                   0         1
Weight age 1                         0.67      0.33     Child books ages 3-4                      0.15      0.85
Arm circumference age 1              0.24      0.76     Books at home ages 3-4                    0.06      0.94
Height age 1                         0.79      0.21     Number of play materials ages 3-4         0.84      0.16
Weight age 2                         0.71      0.29     Toys to learn colors ages 3-4             0.73      0.27
Arm circumference age 2              0.09      0.91     Games ages 3-4                            0.52      0.48
Height age 2                         0.69      0.31     Soft toys ages 3-4                        0.69      0.31
Weight age 3                         0.88      0.12     Toys to learn numbers ages 3-4            0.59      0.41
Arm circumference age 3               0.1       0.9     At least 10 child books ages 3-4          0.73      0.27
Height age 3                         0.91      0.09     Mother activities with child ages 3-4     0.08      0.92
Weight age 4                         0.73      0.27     Child books ages 5-6                      0.13      0.87
Arm circumference age 4              0.25      0.75     Books at home ages 5-6                    0.05      0.95
Height age 4                          0.9       0.1     Number of play materials ages 5-6         0.82      0.18
Weight age 5                         0.67      0.33     Toys to learn shapes ages 5-6             0.57      0.43
Arm circumference age 5              0.24      0.76     Puzzles ages 5-6                          0.48      0.52
Height age 5                         0.98      0.02     Toys for music ages 5-6                   0.07      0.93
Weight age 6                         0.81      0.19     Games ages 5-6                             0.6       0.4
Arm circumference age 6              0.51      0.49     Soft toys ages 5-6                        0.62      0.38
Height age 6                         0.67      0.33     Toys to learn numbers ages 5-6            0.66      0.34
Weight age 7                         0.79      0.21     At least 10 child books ages 5-6          0.28      0.72
Arm circumference age 7              0.55      0.45     Toys to learn names ages 5-6              0.46      0.54
Height age 7                         0.64      0.36     Musical instruments ages 5-6              0.48      0.52
Notes:  0 and 1 reflect rounding
    For health, the three measures we have are weight, height and arm circumfference.
It is interesting to note that in the first few years of life, weight and height are very
informative, while arm circumference starts to be somewhat informative at age 4 and
becones more imprtante past age 5.
   Finally, for parental investment we have several measures from the FCI test. As we
can see from the table, these measures are good markers of parental investment and
contain a substantial amount of information. We notice that all the items we use refer
to material (rather than time) investment.

4.5     The Evolution of Child Development Over Time: Descriptive Evidence

As we estimate the measurent system for all the latent factors we consider and for all
the ages in our sample, we effectively estimate the distribution of the latent factors
we consider and how these distributions change with age. In Figure 1, we plot the
means of the cognitive, socio-emotional and health factors, as implied by the estimated
measurement system. We note that, while in estimating the measurement system we
normalised to 1 the loading factors corresponding to one of the measures at a certain
age for each of factors we are considering, we did not impose the same normalisation
at different ages. An analogous procedure, as discussed above, was followed for one of
the intercepts j , k 's. This implies that the means of the factors are allowed to vary
and possibly grow with age.
      We observe that the mean of the cognitive factor, as to be expected, grows with
age. The mean of the socio-emotional factor, however, is relatively flat: after a dip
after age 1, it recovers after age 4, but the observed changes are not major. Finally,
for health, the estimated means grow monotonically with age.
      The means of the three factors of child development are not the only interesting
moments to consider. Having estimated the entire distribution for our sample and how
that distribution changes with age, it is interesting to consider this piece of evidence.
In Figure 2, we plot the evolution of the distribution for the three factors we estimate
over age, while, in Table 3, we report how the standard deviations of these factors
change with age. We notice that, for the three factors and for all the ages considered,
the estimated distributions are uni-modal. It is worth noticing that this feature is
not imposed in estimation, as we assume that the distribution of the factors is given
by a mixture of normal distributions. We also notice that, for the three factors, the
dispersion of the distribution increases considerably at age 6. Interestingly, for the
cognitive factor, the distribution at age 3 and 4 is considerably tighter.


                                           25
                                            26




            (a) Cognitive factor




         (b) Socio-emotional factor




             (c) Health factor

Figure 1: Latent Factors' Means Over Time
                                                                                                                          27




              2.0
              1.5                                                                                                     7
    density



                                                                                                                  6
              1.0



                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                  4
              0.5




                                                                                      3

                                                                              2                               age
              0.0




                                                                      1
                    -6   -4      -2           0           2       4



                               (a) Cognitive factor
              2.0
              1.5
    density




                                                                                                                      6
              1.0




                                                                                                              5

                                                                                                      4
              0.5




                                                                                          3

                                                                              2
                                                                                                              age
              0.0




                                                                      1
                    -4    -2              0           2           4



                         (b) Socio-emotional factor
              2.0
              1.5




                                                                                                                      7
    density




                                                                                                               6
              1.0




                                                                                                      5

                                                                                              4
              0.5




                                                                                  3

                                                                          2                                   age
              0.0




                                                                  1
                    -4    -2          0           2           4



                                (c) Health factor

Figure 2: Latent Factors' Distributions Over Time
           Table 3: Evolution of the latent factors standard deviations with age

                               Age 1   Age 2      Age 3   Age 4   Age 5   Age 6   Age 7
     Cognitive factor           0.55   0.36       0.26    0.29    0.41    0.60    0.60
     Socio-emotional factor    0.45     0.35      0.43    0.51     0.47   0.65       -
     Health factor             0.39     0.29      0.32    0.34     0.39   0.58     0.73


5      Parental Investment and the Dynamics of Child Develop-
       ment

Having established what are the latent factors that we use in our empirical exercise, and
having estimated a measurement system, we can proceed to use estimates of the dis-
tribution of the relevant factors from the available measures to estimate an investment
function and a production function for the various dimensions of child development.
This production function establishes the role played by parental investment and other
factors in the process of development. Furthermore, it characterises the dynamics of
the process and the interactions of different factors at different ages.

5.1     Investment Functions

The first use we make of our estimates of the measurement system is to estimate the
investment functions (7) discussed in section 2.3.2. In particular, we assume that at
each age, parental investment is a function of the developmental status of the children
(as measured by the three factors we consider), of parental cognition, the number of
children in the house, the gender of the target child, as well as income and wealth,
household size and an indicator for the presence of the father. When interpreting these
coefficients we should stress that this is material investment in the home, and therefore
it excludes time investment as well as investments that parents might perceive their
children receive in the nursery or school they attend. The reults are reported in Table
4.
      Starting with the reaction of parents to their children conditions, we find that the
coefficient on cognition in the investment equations is not significantly different from
zero at ages 2 , 3 and 5 and it is marginally significant and negative at age 4. This
would seem to indicate that children with a lower cognitive development receive a bit
more investment at age 4. The coefficients at age 6 and 7, however, identify a strongly
significant and positive effect. It seems that at those ages, better developed children
receive higher investment.


                                             28
                                        Table 4: Investment equations

                                                               Investment   equations
                            Age 2          Age 3               Age 4              Age 5             Age 6           Age 7
Intercept                     0.11         0.071              -0.264              -0.103            -0.155          -0.266
                             0.206          0.165              0.097               0.103             0.085           0.077
                       [-0.254,0.417] [-0.221,0.327]    [-0.394,-0.071]      [-0.201,0.115]    [-0.252,0.028] [-0.352,-0.092]
Cognition t                  0.084          0.026             -0.099               0.115             0.147           0.093
                             0.078          0.087              0.054               0.091             0.077           0.062
                       [-0.045,0.205] [-0.081,0.202]     [-0.198,-0.01]      [-0.014,0.268]     [0.035,0.279]   [-0.01,0.179]
Socio-emotional t           -0.231          -0.05             -0.027               -0.01              0.11           0.022
                              0.29          0.114              0.036               0.051             0.07            0.049
                       [-0.392,0.491] [-0.163,0.199]     [-0.088,0.023]      [-0.071,0.088]      [0.027,0.25]  [-0.039,0.123]
Health t                     0.045          0.201              0.085               0.118             0.018           0.043
                             0.125          0.103              0.067               0.066             0.054           0.04
                       [-0.155,0.248] [-0.024,0.302]         [0,0.217]       [-0.001,0.216]    [-0.072,0.114] [-0.016,0.118]
Parental Cognition           0.062          0.059              0.233               0.229             0.35            0.357
                             0.125          0.114              0.067               0.064             0.092           0.095
                        [0.011,0.405]  [0.007,0.377]      [0.144,0.345]        [0.14,0.341]     [0.191,0.489]   [0.192,0.493]
Number of Children          -0.259         -0.296             -0.314              -0.317            -0.329          -0.347
                             0.115          0.083              0.058               0.059             0.072           0.071
                      [-0.445,-0.057] [-0.404,-0.143]   [-0.391,-0.197]     [-0.375,-0.177]   [-0.395,-0.157] [-0.409,-0.176]
Gender                          0           0.003              0.043               0.035             0.033           0.029
                             0.034          0.031              0.026               0.026             0.031           0.032
                       [-0.055,0.053] [-0.043,0.055]      [-0.01,0.077]      [-0.015,0.069]    [-0.029,0.081]   [-0.04,0.072]
Income                       0.185          0.197              0.233               0.232            0.175           0.179
                             0.067          0.061              0.044               0.043             0.043           0.044
                        [0.064,0.274]  [0.075,0.268]        [0.15,0.29]        [0.14,0.277]     [0.082,0.227]   [0.085,0.232]
Household size              -0.293         -0.295             -0.106              -0.091            -0.056          -0.063
                             0.077          0.065              0.044               0.043             0.067           0.067
                      [-0.414,-0.168] [-0.39,-0.184]    [-0.166,-0.015]     [-0.146,-0.002]    [-0.156,0.057] [-0.161,0.052]
Father present              0.149          0.145               0.126              0.135             0.104            0.12
                              0.04           0.04              0.023               0.024              0.03           0.028
                        [0.082,0.211]  [0.087,0.208]       [0.076,0.15]       [0.065,0.139]      [0.03,0.124]   [0.047,0.133]

     Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the investment functions at different ages. 90% confidence
     intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square brackets.


            The coefficients on current socio-emotional skills are never statistically different
     from zero, with the marginal exception of age 6, where the effect is positive but only
     significant at the 10% level. Finally, the coefficient on health is marginally statistically
     positive at age 5 and is not different from zero at all other ages.
            Parental cognition has a strong positive effect on investment, which is statistically
     significant at all ages. The coefficient increases with age and is particularly large at
     ages 6 and 7. The number of children in the household has a negative impact, which
     is significantly less then zero at alle ages until 5. We do not find any statistically
     significant effects of children gender on parental investment.
            The presence of the father has a strong positive effect on parentaly investment,

                                                           29
while total household size has a negative one. The coefficient on income is always
positive and statistically different from zero. The significance of the income variable
in the investment equation is important because income drives the identification of the
investment coefficient in the production function. While, as we have discussed, the
exclusion restriction that states that the impact of income on child investment only
works through parental investment might be questionable, at least our instrument in
not a weak one.

5.2     The Production Function of Human Development

Having estimated the investment function, we can move on to the estimates we obtain
for the production function for the three factors we consider. In what follows, we report
the results for the Cobb-Doublas specification. We have explored richer specifications,
such as a Translog and a CES specification, but, in most cases, we could not reject
the restrictions implied by the Cobb Douglas. And even when there were deviations
from the Cobb-Douglas specification, the rejections were marginally significant and
had relatively small quantitative implications. We therefore concluded that the Cobb-
Douglas specification constitutes a good approximation to our data.
    This approach allows us to focus on three important issues. First, whether allowing
for endogenous investment makes a difference in practice. Second, whether a Markov
structure, where child development depends on current development or a richer dy-
namic structure is necessary for the ages we consider. Third, we can study how the
parameters of the production function change over time. These issues are particularly
important to identify windows of opportunities for potential interventions.
      For the three dimensions of child development (cognition, socioemotional skills and
health) we have two tables: one in which we consider only the current level of the
relevant domain and one when we add an additional lag of the relevant domain. In
all cases we also consider the effect of other current domains on the relevant domain
(for instance the effect of current socio-emotional skills and health on cognitive devel-
opment). While we did explore the possibility of additional lags in these cross-effects,
as we did not find any significant effects of this type, we do not report those results to
avoid crowding the tables and making the estimates less precise.
      In each of the tables below, we consider two panels, the left one in which the endo-
geneity of investment is ignored and the right one where we use the control function
approach discussed above. This structure will allow us to consider both the impor-
tance of considering richer dynamics and the importance of considering endogenous


                                             30
investment. On this last issue, we should stress that we are limited by the nature of
the data in terms of the instruments we can sue. Effectivelly, our only alternative is to
take the model we sketched in Section 2.3.2 literally and use parental income (which
enters the budget constraint but not the production function) as an instrument. This
choice can obviously be criticised, as income might be correlated with omitted inputs
in the production function. Having said that, we notice that while in another data set
from Colombia, Attanasio, Cattan, Fitzsimons, Meghir, and Rubio-Codina (2020) use
prices and exposure to conflict (which vary across localities) as exclusion restrictions
to identify the impact of parental investment. Their results do not change much when
they use only household resources as an instrument.

5.2.1    Cognition at Different Ages

We start with a discussion of the results we obtain for the production function of
cognitive development. The estimation results are reported in Tables 5 and 6. The
left panel of the Tables contains the OLS estimates, which ignore the endogeneity
of maternal investment, while the right-hand-side panel reports the estimates of the
production function which include the control function derived from the investment
function in Table 4. Table 5 contains the estimates of a specification that, for each age,
allows only one lag of different dimensions of development in the production function
for cognitive skills, while Table 6 allows for an additional lag of cognitive skills.13
    Finally, we notice that the two panels report the estimates obtained at each age
between 2 and 7. The estimation of a production function for child development at
this frequency is an important novelty of our paper and it is important as it helps
to identify ages and periods in which investment might be particularly important, as
we discuss in the next session. It also identifies the ages when the current state of
development becomes particularly relevant for subsequent development.
    We first notice that the dynamics of the process changes considerably with age,
as can be deduced from the coefficient on lagged cognitive development. Up to age 4
included, the coefficient on lagged cognition are significantly different from zero, but
the process is far from being very persistent, with coefficients around 0.3. This result
holds both in the OLS and CF estimates and whether an additional lag is included
or not. At age 5, however, the coefficient on lagged cognition increases considerably
and become close to 1. At ages 6 and 7, the dynamics becomes more complex, as the
   13
     As mentioned above, we tried specifications with additional lags in the other two dimensions we
consider (health and socioemotional skills), but none of the coefficients was signiticantly different from
zero. These results are available upon request.

                                                   31
coefficient on the second lag is also significantly different from zero and negative. The
sum of the two coefficients is, from age 5 onward, close to 1.14
   The coefficients on lagged socioemotional skills are never significant. Instead, the
coefficient on lagged health status is, at some ages, significant and important: lagged
health seems to be important for cognitive development in particular at ages 2 and
4. At age 3, the coefficient on lagged health is also marginally significant, although
considerably smaller in size than at the two adjecent ages. As we will see in the next
section, these results turn out to be important for the dynamic targeting of investment
and interventions.
   Turning to the coefficients on parental investment, we notice that this variable
appears significant and important only between ages 2 and 4. At this ages, we notice
that the size of the coefficient at ages 3 and 4 doubles when we consider investment
as endogenous, a result that is consistent with those in Attanasio, Cattan, Fitzsimons,
Meghir, and Rubio-Codina (2020), Attanasio, Meghir, and Nix (2020) and Attanasio,
Meghir, Nix, and Salvati (2017). Perhaps surprisingly, the coefficient on parental
investment at age 5 and older is not significantly different from zero. This result holds
regardless of whether we treat investment as endogenous or not and regardless of the
dynamic structure imposed on the production function. Moreover, the fact that the
coefficient is not different from zero is not driven by an decrease in the precision of the
estimates, but by a clear reduction of the point estimates.
   Parental background does not seem to have a significant role in the production
function of cognitive development. We notice, however, that it does play an impor-
tant role in parental investment, so that its effect on child development is mediated
through investment, a result consistent with what reported by Attanasio, Cattan,
Fitzsimons, Meghir, and Rubio-Codina (2020). Finally, we notice that the interven-
tion that changed the nature of the care the children received in the nursery they were
attending, has a positive and significant, although moderate, effect at ages 4 and 5.
The point estimates of the effect at age 7 is of similar magnitude but, as the estimate
is less precise, it is not statistically significant.




  14
       At age 2, we cannot have two lags of cognitive development for obvious reasons.

                                                  32
                                                                            Table 5: Production functions for cognitive skills


                                                                                                              Cognitive t+1
                                                         Exogenous investments                                                                             Endogenous investments
                        Age 2            Age 3            Age 4          Age 5            Age 6            Age 7             Age 2            Age 3          Age 4           Age 5          Age 6         Age 7
TFP                      -0.19           0.155            -0.135         0.44             0.552            0.74              -0.29             0.027         -0.176          0.481           0.548         0.739
                          0.16            0.11             0.03          0.054            0.043             0.05             0.154             0.114          0.044            0.07           0.05          0.05
                    [-0.443,0.079]   [0.048,0.402]   [-0.191,-0.098] [0.341,0.517]    [0.486,0.624]    [0.651,0.811]    [-0.52,-0.037]   [-0.097,0.299] [-0.278,-0.145] [0.37,0.588]    [0.456,0.626] [0.649,0.813]
Control function            -               -                -             -                -                 -              -0.22            -0.268         -0.132          0.133          -0.028        -0.061
                                                                                                                             0.145             0.102          0.098           0.113          0.161          0.12
                                                                                                                        [-0.423,0.036]   [-0.43,-0.127] [-0.366,-0.053] [-0.017,0.333] [-0.272,0.193] [-0.223,0.158]
AeioTu                  -0.13          0.034              0.03             0.068           0.025              0.05           -0.11             0.046           0.03           0.068          0.026         0.056
                        0.081          0.056             0.013             0.018           0.045             0.042           0.078             0.051          0.013           0.018          0.046         0.045
                   [-0.217,0.038] [-0.048,0.125]     [0.007,0.047]     [0.026,0.09]   [-0.048,0.099]   [-0.004,0.122]   [-0.208,0.046]   [-0.036,0.129] [0.007,0.046] [0.026,0.088] [-0.051,0.093] [-0.005,0.134]
Cognitive t               0.3          0.501             0.436             1.021           1.138             0.908             0.3             0.494          0.423           1.051          1.133         0.898
                        0.067          0.081             0.039             0.085           0.059             0.048           0.067             0.082          0.042            0.1           0.072         0.054
                    [0.229,0.442] [0.449,0.692]      [0.372,0.498]    [0.879,1.141]    [1.01,1.205]     [0.805,0.954]    [0.221,0.442]    [0.421,0.678] [0.349,0.487] [0.901,1.207]      [0.982,1.22]  [0.79,0.969]
Socio-emotional t        0.08          0.158             0.058             -0.06           0.007            0.058             0.08             0.121          0.046          -0.043          0.002         0.053
                        0.103          0.075             0.023             0.031           0.036             0.043           0.101             0.074          0.028           0.035          0.049         0.044
                   [-0.007,0.335] [0.018,0.263]      [0.008,0.085]   [-0.089,0.014]   [-0.074,0.044]   [-0.001,0.133]   [-0.014,0.326]   [-0.022,0.215] [-0.017,0.071] [-0.071,0.038] [-0.1,0.063] [-0.012,0.139]
Health t                 0.39          0.238             0.293             0.006          -0.065            -0.062            0.35             0.161          0.267           0.024         -0.066        -0.066
                         0.12          0.103             0.048             0.063           0.044             0.034           0.116             0.097          0.055           0.063          0.045         0.035
                    [0.134,0.512] [0.051,0.366]      [0.193,0.362]   [-0.087,0.108]   [-0.119,0.021]   [-0.095,0.011]    [0.108,0.478]   [-0.003,0.319] [0.156,0.327] [-0.067,0.137] [-0.123,0.02] [-0.103,0.009]
Parental cognition       0.02          0.013             0.102            -0.011          -0.031             0.101              0             -0.008          0.061           0.025          -0.04         0.079
                        0.089          0.054             0.031             0.036           0.045             0.045           0.089             0.061          0.044           0.046          0.068         0.064
                   [-0.017,0.233] [-0.011,0.142]     [0.058,0.159]   [-0.051,0.065]   [-0.085,0.064]   [-0.008,0.142]   [-0.047,0.223]   [-0.103,0.063] [-0.027,0.118] [-0.023,0.121] [-0.138,0.086] [-0.045,0.16]
Investments              0.2           0.091             0.111             0.043           -0.05            -0.005            0.27             0.231          0.203          -0.057          -0.03         0.036
                        0.085          0.068             0.041             0.042           0.053             0.045            0.12             0.103          0.092           0.103          0.145         0.097
                    [-0.017,0.28] [-0.035,0.184]     [0.061,0.191]    [-0.06,0.081]   [-0.129,0.045]   [-0.032,0.106]   [-0.032,0.376]    [0.082,0.387] [0.134,0.418]    [-0.273,0.04] [-0.234,0.232] [-0.113,0.19]


 Notes: This table shows the estimates of the production function for cognitive skills. The left panel considers investments as exogenous, while the right panel
            allows investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square brackets. Controls also
            include child age, gender, and the number of children in the household (see Table 11 for coefficients on these covariates).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       33
                                                       Table 6: Production functions for cognitive skills with two self-productivity lags


                                                                                                                  Cognitive t+1
                                                          Exogenous investments                                                                                   Endogenous    investments
                         Age 2            Age 3            Age 4          Age 5              Age 6            Age 7             Age 2             Age 3             Age 4             Age 5             Age 6            Age 7
TFP                       -0.19           0.202            -0.056          0.44              0.422            0.483             -0.29              0.097            -0.098             0.484             0.389            0.478
                           0.16           0.102             0.043         0.047              0.073            0.109             0.154              0.101             0.047             0.062             0.083             0.11
                     [-0.443,0.079]    [0.1,0.426]     [-0.121,0.012] [0.353,0.505]      [0.342,0.575]    [0.527,0.876]    [-0.52,-0.037]    [-0.016,0.326]   [-0.199,-0.044]     [0.386,0.574]     [0.298,0.565]    [0.516,0.871]
Control function             -              -                 -              -                 -                -               -0.22             -0.303            -0.147            0.136             -0.135           -0.077
                                                                                                                                0.145              0.107             0.093             0.112             0.157            0.122
                                                                                                                           [-0.423,0.036]   [-0.459,-0.124]   [-0.361,-0.066]    [-0.011,0.327]     [-0.395,0.12]   [-0.235,0.145]
AeioTu                    -0.13            0.034             0.056            0.068           0.006             0.046           -0.11              0.048             0.057            0.068               0.01            0.054
                          0.081             0.057            0.016            0.018           0.046             0.043           0.078              0.051             0.016             0.018             0.047            0.045
                     [-0.217,0.038]   [-0.049,0.127]     [0.028,0.08]    [0.025,0.089]   [-0.061,0.085]   [-0.009,0.125]   [-0.208,0.046]    [-0.044,0.127]     [0.028,0.081]     [0.026,0.087]    [-0.055,0.087]   [-0.013,0.132]
Cognitive t                0.3             0.469             0.319            1.022           1.281             1.321            0.3               0.435              0.3             1.044             1.271             1.315
                          0.067             0.124            0.069            0.124            0.092            0.178           0.067              0.125             0.071             0.133             0.098            0.181
                      [0.229,0.442]    [0.379,0.741]    [0.204,0.427]    [0.808,1.215]    [1.072,1.365]     [0.69,1.211]    [0.221,0.442]     [0.348,0.707]     [0.161,0.403]      [0.834,1.27]     [1.046,1.362]    [0.683,1.213]
Cognitive t-1               -              0.046             0.155              0             -0.248           -0.507             -                0.084             0.162             0.011            -0.275           -0.514
                                           0.076             0.066            0.073            0.115            0.199                              0.075             0.065             0.073             0.117            0.202
                                      [-0.094,0.134]    [0.067,0.276]    [-0.12,0.101]   [-0.365,0.019]   [-0.377,0.205]                     [-0.077,0.147]     [0.071,0.279]    [-0.111,0.121]   [-0.402,-0.014]    [-0.39,0.202]
Socio-emotional t          0.08            0.161            0.049             -0.06            0.053            0.082           0.08               0.123             0.035            -0.043             0.034            0.076
                          0.103             0.077            0.023            0.031           0.044             0.042           0.101              0.075             0.027             0.035             0.052            0.043
                     [-0.007,0.335]     [0.02,0.264]   [-0.002,0.074]   [-0.088,0.014]   [-0.061,0.085]    [0.006,0.143]   [-0.014,0.326]    [-0.017,0.216]     [-0.027,0.06]    [-0.072,0.039]    [-0.096,0.067]    [-0.012,0.14]
Health t                   0.39             0.213            0.269            0.006            -0.03           -0.037            0.35              0.107             0.238              0.02            -0.032           -0.041
                           0.12              0.1             0.047            0.051            0.045            0.035           0.116              0.095             0.054             0.053             0.046            0.036
                      [0.134,0.512]    [0.034,0.355]    [0.178,0.339]   [-0.066,0.111]   [-0.099,0.044]   [-0.095,0.015]    [0.108,0.478]    [-0.017,0.271]     [0.132,0.309]    [-0.055,0.124]    [-0.105,0.044]     [-0.1,0.018]
Parental cognition         0.02            0.016             0.092           -0.011           0.006              0.12              0              -0.006             0.045             0.026            -0.035            0.092
                          0.089             0.059            0.029            0.036           0.048             0.048           0.089              0.062             0.041             0.046             0.067            0.067
                     [-0.017,0.233]    [-0.01,0.161]    [0.046,0.144]   [-0.054,0.064]   [-0.065,0.096]   [-0.009,0.149]   [-0.047,0.223]    [-0.092,0.087]    [-0.038,0.094]    [-0.023,0.117]     [-0.14,0.085]   [-0.048,0.171]
Investments                0.2             0.095             0.117           0.043             -0.06            0.02            0.27               0.258             0.221            -0.058             0.036            0.072
                          0.085             0.068            0.038            0.044           0.053             0.046           0.12               0.106             0.086             0.103             0.143            0.099
                      [-0.017,0.28]   [-0.038,0.176]    [0.066,0.194]   [-0.068,0.083]   [-0.131,0.049]   [-0.036,0.118]   [-0.032,0.376]     [0.088,0.401]     [0.147,0.416]    [-0.275,0.042]    [-0.165,0.297]   [-0.096,0.221]


 Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the production function for cognitive skills. The left panel considers investments as exogenous, while the right panel
             allows investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square brackets. Controls also
             include child age, gender, and the number of children in the household (see Table 12 for coefficients on these covariates).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     34
5.2.2   Socio-emotional Skills at Different Ages

We now move to the results obtained in estimating the production function for socioe-
motional skills. We report the results in Tables 7 and 8 in a fashion similar to the
results for the production function of cognitive skills, except for the fact that, due to
the availability of appropriate measures, we only consider socio-emotional skills up to
age 6. Before delving into a discussion of our estimates, it may be worth mentioning
that the quality of the available measures of socio-emotional skills is not as high as
that of other dimensions of development, as can be inferred from Table 2. For only
two measures (one at age 1 and one at age 5) the signal to noise ration is above 0.5.
As a consequence, our estimates are likely to be less informative and precise.
   Starting with the dynamics of the process, we notice that lagged cognitive skills
and health are never significant in either tables. As for lagged socio-emotional skills,
we notice that the persistence of the process does not increase monotonically with age
as with cognitive skills. In Table 7 the coefficient on lagged socio-emotional skills is
around 0.3, with the exception of age 3, where is estimated (rather imprecisely) at 0.7.
As for richer dynamics, Table 8 shows that the coefficient on the second lag is only
significant at age 5 and, unlike for cognitive skills, is positive, although not very large.
    Moving on to the investment coefficients, we see that the control function is almost
always significantly, providing evidence for the endogeneity of investment. As the
coefficient on the control function is negative, considering investment as endogenous
increases (considerably) the size of its effect. In Table 7, for instance, at age 4 the point
estimate of the investment coefficient goes from 0.135 to 0.506. Interestingly, the size
of the coefficient on parental investment does not decline significantly with age, unlike
with cognitive skills, where at age 5 and older, it was effectively zero. In this case, at
age 5 is still very high at 0.654. At age 6, it drop s to 0.354 but it is still significant.
   We also notice that when considering parental investment as endogenous, parental
cognition is not significant in the production function, a result that mirrors the one for
cognitive skills.




                                             35
                                                               Table 7: Production functions for socio-emotional skills


                                                                                               Socio-emotional t+1
                                                 Exogenous investments                                                                   Endogenous investments
                         Age 2            Age 3          Age 4         Age 5                 Age 6              Age 2             Age 3           Age 4          Age 5             Age 6
TFP                        0.4             0.104         0.217         0.312                 0.286               0.11              -0.12           0.054          0.09             0.236
                          0.303            0.408          0.07         0.064                 0.079              0.326              0.409           0.104          0.108             0.089
                     [-0.143,0.812]   [-0.596,0.706]  [0.1,0.327]  [0.222,0.451]         [0.158,0.407]     [-0.483,0.597]    [-0.893,0.355] [-0.141,0.175] [-0.102,0.251]      [0.102,0.377]
Control function            -                -              -            -                     -                -0.62             -0.471          -0.529         -0.728            -0.356
                                                                                                                0.279              0.263           0.237          0.273             0.348
                                                                                                          [-0.979,-0.097]   [-1.045,-0.244] [-0.955,-0.241] [-1.288,-0.368]   [-0.947,0.169]
AeioTu                    -0.12             0.13           -0.007            -0.115           -0.001            -0.08              0.151          -0.006         -0.117             0.017
                          0.181             0.162           0.038             0.031             0.1             0.173              0.156           0.037          0.031             0.106
                     [-0.375,0.234]   [-0.305,0.219]   [-0.072,0.05]   [-0.175,-0.072]   [-0.195,0.116]    [-0.343,0.244]     [-0.25,0.218]   [-0.07,0.046] [-0.172,-0.071]   [-0.201,0.154]
Cognitive t               -0.15            -0.007           0.216             0.099           0.217             -0.16             -0.019           0.167         -0.064             0.151
                          0.131             0.206           0.076             0.078           0.088             0.133              0.206           0.088          0.129             0.118
                      [-0.369,0.05]   [-0.552,0.138]   [0.062,0.319]    [-0.019,0.224]    [0.072,0.359]    [-0.391,0.035]    [-0.577,0.121] [-0.019,0.282] [-0.321,0.083]      [-0.044,0.33]
Socio-emotional t          0.28             0.77            0.41              0.436            0.378             0.26              0.707           0.361          0.345             0.316
                          0.159             0.216           0.077             0.067           0.092             0.148              0.229           0.089          0.075             0.109
                      [0.118,0.609]    [0.304,0.983]   [0.332,0.568]     [0.332,0.543]    [0.242,0.548]     [0.106,0.538]     [0.208,0.912]   [0.258,0.538]  [0.211,0.454]     [0.148,0.495]
Health t                   0.42              0.09           0.156             0.242            0.103             0.31             -0.044            0.05          0.144              0.09
                          0.176             0.198           0.082             0.068           0.073             0.184               0.21           0.087          0.086             0.077
                      [0.122,0.685]   [-0.106,0.556]   [0.051,0.315]       [0.16,0.38]   [-0.017,0.219]     [0.012,0.605]    [-0.287,0.425] [-0.077,0.208]   [0.022,0.296]    [-0.069,0.201]
Parental cognition         0.04            -0.021           0.083             0.115           0.206             -0.01             -0.058          -0.084         -0.079             0.088
                          0.111             0.129           0.068             0.056           0.089             0.152              0.146           0.095          0.094             0.149
                     [-0.071,0.291]    [-0.054,0.37]   [-0.068,0.15]      [0.03,0.217]    [0.054,0.336]    [-0.323,0.145]    [-0.309,0.103] [-0.309,-0.007]  [-0.231,0.06]    [-0.172,0.287]
Investments                0.41            0.167            0.135             0.108           0.095              0.6              0.415           0.506          0.654             0.354
                          0.163             0.137           0.068             0.083           0.099             0.232              0.246           0.203          0.243             0.286
                      [0.104,0.593]   [-0.052,0.386]   [0.043,0.264]    [-0.054,0.202]   [-0.049,0.257]     [0.259,0.944]     [0.223,0.989]    [0.256,0.92]  [0.368,1.136]    [-0.049,0.869]


Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the production function for socio-emotional skills. The left panel considers investments as exogenous, while the right
            panel allows investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square brackets. Controls
            also include child age, gender, and the number of children in the household (see Table 13 for coefficients on these covariates).




                                                                                                                                                                                               36
                                         Table 8: Production functions for socio-emotional skills with two self-productivity lags


                                                                                               Socio-emotional t+1
                                                  Exogenous investments                                                                  Endogenous investments
                          Age 2            Age 3          Age 4          Age 5                Age 6              Age 2            Age 3           Age 4           Age 5            Age 6
TFP                         0.4             0.03          0.175          0.316                0.31                0.11            -0.079            0.06           0.107            0.272
                           0.303            0.535         0.076          0.065                0.078              0.326             0.508           0.102           0.106            0.088
                      [-0.143,0.812]   [-0.997,0.783] [0.034,0.271]  [0.226,0.438]        [0.195,0.452]     [-0.483,0.597]   [-1.126,0.534] [-0.133,0.177]   [-0.053,0.268]    [0.159,0.424]
Control function             -                -             -              -                    -                -0.62            -0.258          -0.447          -0.683           -0.242
                                                                                                                 0.279             0.243            0.25           0.268            0.347
                                                                                                           [-0.979,-0.097]   [-0.747,0.012] [-0.935,-0.127] [-1.228,-0.303]   [-0.749,0.369]
AeioTu                     -0.12             0.147            0.035            -0.1             0.01             -0.08             0.158           0.012          -0.105            0.021
                           0.181             0.15             0.038           0.033            0.097             0.173             0.148           0.039           0.034            0.102
                      [-0.375,0.234]    [-0.222,0.24]   [-0.034,0.093]   [-0.158,-0.05]    [-0.18,0.125]    [-0.343,0.244]   [-0.217,0.271] [-0.058,0.062]   [-0.16,-0.059]   [-0.191,0.142]
Cognitive t                -0.15            -0.041            0.212           0.093             0.17             -0.16             -0.04           0.173          -0.059            0.133
                           0.131             0.272            0.077           0.081            0.094             0.133             0.266           0.088           0.124            0.116
                       [-0.369,0.05]   [-0.721,0.182]     [0.051,0.31]    [-0.032,0.23]   [-0.003,0.312]    [-0.391,0.035]   [-0.716,0.138] [-0.018,0.282]     [-0.286,0.1]   [-0.064,0.313]
Socio-emotional t           0.28             0.728             0.39           0.338            0.314              0.26             0.702            0.36           0.275            0.282
                           0.159             0.211            0.085           0.076            0.103             0.148             0.224            0.09           0.078            0.111
                       [0.118,0.609]    [0.245,0.918]    [0.293,0.557]    [0.193,0.448]    [0.149,0.484]     [0.106,0.538]    [0.173,0.887]   [0.248,0.534]   [0.116,0.369]     [0.099,0.46]
Socio-emotional t-1           -              0.087            0.171           0.114            0.164                -             0.066            0.075          0.088             0.139
                                             0.246            0.093           0.079            0.119                               0.246           0.096           0.078            0.125
                                        [-0.265,0.61]      [0.034,0.3]    [0.054,0.283]    [0.013,0.393]                     [-0.243,0.588] [-0.081,0.215]    [0.015,0.242]   [-0.024,0.383]
Health t                    0.42             0.078            0.118           0.263            0.093             0.31              0.005            0.05           0.166            0.086
                           0.176             0.203            0.083           0.071            0.072            0.184               0.21           0.085           0.087            0.074
                       [0.122,0.685]   [-0.121,0.555]    [0.003,0.268]    [0.162,0.397]   [-0.025,0.205]    [0.012,0.605]    [-0.246,0.468] [-0.073,0.203]    [0.031,0.318]   [-0.043,0.196]
Parental cognition          0.04            -0.024            0.065           0.111            0.178            -0.01             -0.044          -0.066           -0.07            0.102
                           0.111             0.112            0.066           0.055            0.088            0.152              0.122           0.097            0.09            0.144
                      [-0.071,0.291]   [-0.097,0.249]    [-0.084,0.13]    [0.016,0.203]    [0.007,0.302]   [-0.323,0.145]    [-0.256,0.101]   [-0.28,0.018]  [-0.227,0.062]   [-0.148,0.312]
Investments                0.41              0.173            0.044           0.082            0.081             0.6              0.311            0.409            0.6            0.259
                           0.163             0.15             0.071           0.089            0.095            0.232               0.22            0.22          0.247              0.28
                       [0.104,0.593]    [-0.029,0.45]   [-0.042,0.199]   [-0.101,0.171]   [-0.067,0.245]    [0.259,0.944]     [0.087,0.843]   [0.204,0.895]   [0.222,1.072]   [-0.189,0.697]


Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the production function for socio-emotional skills. The left panel considers investments as exogenous, while the right
            panel allows investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square brackets. Controls
            also include child age, gender, and the number of children in the household (see Table 14 for coefficients on these covariates).




                                                                                                                                                                                               37
5.2.3   Health at Different Ages

We now discuss the estimates of the production function of the health dimension of
child development. Again we report two different tables, Tables 9 and 10, the first with
just one lag of the three dimensions of development we are considering and the second
with an additional lag for health. In each of the two Tables, the left panel consider
parental investment as exogenous while on the right panel we use the control function
approach to account for the possible endogeneity of investments. As for cognition, we
estimate the function for ages 2 to 7.
   Starting with the discussion of the dynamic properties, we notice that at some ages,
both socioemotional and cognitive skills appear marginally significant. However, the
size of these coefficients is quite small, so that their effect is at best marginal. Lagged
health status, however, is very important, signaling a strong persistence of the process.
Already aat age 2, the coefficient is larger than 0.7. At older ages, the coefficient reaches
1. At ages 5, 6 and 7, the additional lag attracts a negative and sizeable coefficient,
which, for ages 6 and 7, is significantly different from zero. At these ages, the sum of
the coefficients on the two lags of health is close to 1. The process, therefore, seems to
have a complex dynamics.
   Moving to the effect of parental investment, we notice that the only age at which
it is productive is age 2, when it also seems to be the only age at which it should
be considered as endogenous. As with other estimates of production functions, the
control function takes a negative sign at age 2, so that its introduction increases the
estimate of the coefficient on parental investment from 0.27 to 0.37. Past age 2, parental
investment does not attract coefficients significantly different from zero.
   Finally, we notice that neither the aeioTU intervention nor parental cognition have
a direct effect in the health production function, except at ages 6 and 7, when the
intervention is marginally significant. For parental cognition, we remind the reader
that it has an important effect on parental investment, which in turn is significant at
age 2. We also notice that, given the high persistence of the process, an impact at an
early age, can be traced in subsequent outcomes.




                                             38
                                                                                  Table 9: Production functions for health


                                                                                                          Health t+1
                                                        Exogenous investments                                                                     Endogenous investments
                        Age 2           Age 3           Age 4         Age 5           Age 6           Age 7           Age 2          Age 3         Age 4           Age 5          Age 6            Age 7
TFP                      0.1            0.382           0.347          0.38           0.331           0.496            -0.06         0.402          0.368          0.353           0.35            0.497
                        0.145           0.062           0.017          0.021          0.026           0.026            0.135          0.071         0.021          0.025           0.033            0.027
                    [-0.14,0.319]   [0.252,0.449]   [0.323,0.379] [0.338,0.407]   [0.305,0.391]   [0.455,0.538]  [-0.288,0.166] [0.235,0.47] [0.341,0.409] [0.307,0.391] [0.323,0.425]         [0.455,0.539]
Control function          -               -               -              -              -               -              -0.33         0.042          0.067           -0.09         0.132            0.033
                                                                                                                       0.116          0.061         0.037          0.046           0.137            0.098
                                                                                                                [-0.473,-0.119] [-0.102,0.106] [0.015,0.128] [-0.13,0.011] [-0.012,0.433]     [-0.061,0.236]
AeioTu                   -0.03         0.004          0.005           0.005           0.069           0.105              0            0.002         0.005          0.005           0.062            0.102
                        0.061          0.042          0.005           0.007           0.032           0.028             0.05         0.041          0.005          0.007           0.032            0.03
                   [-0.104,0.086] [-0.069,0.059] [-0.002,0.016] [-0.009,0.014] [0.004,0.105]      [0.05,0.137]   [-0.076,0.076] [-0.068,0.06] [-0.002,0.016] [-0.01,0.014] [-0.005,0.097]       [0.04,0.133]
Cognitive t              -0.02         0.061          0.002           -0.13            -0.1          -0.122            -0.03          0.062         0.008          -0.151         -0.075           -0.117
                        0.063           0.1           0.022           0.033           0.038           0.033            0.062          0.098         0.022          0.036           0.049            0.036
                   [-0.108,0.096] [-0.043,0.268] [-0.037,0.037] [-0.191,-0.086] [-0.152,-0.031] [-0.177,-0.072] [-0.108,0.093] [-0.043,0.26] [-0.03,0.044] [-0.214,-0.093] [-0.126,0.026]     [-0.171,-0.05]
Socio-emotional t        -0.01         0.069          0.026           0.042          -0.037          -0.035            -0.02          0.075         0.032          0.031          -0.014           -0.032
                        0.098          0.052          0.011           0.014           0.036           0.027            0.087          0.05          0.014          0.016           0.049            0.028
                     [-0.1,0.225]  [0.003,0.18] [0.006,0.041] [0.009,0.055] [-0.088,0.028] [-0.085,0.005]          [-0.1,0.187]  [0.006,0.169] [0.012,0.057] [-0.005,0.052] [-0.07,0.079]     [-0.078,0.021]
Health t                  0.77         0.892           0.95           1.107           1.196           1.237             0.71          0.904         0.963          1.095           1.202            1.239
                        0.107          0.155          0.028           0.034           0.043           0.034            0.097          0.162          0.03          0.034           0.045            0.036
                    [0.533,0.872] [0.543,1.036] [0.914,1.009] [1.051,1.164]      [1.103,1.249]   [1.173,1.291]    [0.495,0.822] [0.522,1.056] [0.925,1.022] [1.047,1.159]      [1.11,1.263]    [1.181,1.301]
Parental cognition         0          -0.006         -0.023           0.029          -0.017          -0.071            -0.03         -0.002        -0.002          0.005           0.027            -0.06
                        0.071          0.029          0.015            0.02           0.035           0.032           0.058          0.031          0.018          0.023           0.063            0.049
                   [-0.017,0.189] [-0.026,0.062] [-0.047,0.003] [-0.013,0.052] [-0.075,0.031] [-0.123,-0.017] [-0.062,0.095] [-0.028,0.062] [-0.03,0.03]       [-0.04,0.036]  [-0.049,0.16]   [-0.118,0.034]
Investments              0.27         -0.017          0.045          -0.048          -0.043          -0.009             0.37         -0.039        -0.002            0.02         -0.139           -0.031
                        0.073          0.045          0.019           0.022           0.04            0.035           0.083          0.064          0.034          0.041            0.13            0.082
                    [0.061,0.301] [-0.061,0.082] [0.01,0.069] [-0.059,0.014] [-0.102,0.023] [-0.053,0.061]         [0.18,0.443] [-0.117,0.099] [-0.063,0.046] [-0.038,0.101] [-0.401,0.006]   [-0.196,0.061]


 Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the production function for health. The left panel considers investments as exogenous, while the right panel allows
            investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square brackets. Controls also include
            child age, gender, and the number of children in the household (see Table 15 for coefficients on these covariates).




                                                                                                                                                                                                               39
                                                             Table 10: Production functions for health with two self-productivity lags


                                                                                                                      Health t+1
                                                           Exogenous investments                                                                                     Endogenous   investments
                         Age 2            Age 3            Age 4          Age 5                Age 6            Age 7               Age 2            Age 3            Age 4             Age 5             Age 6             Age 7
TFP                       0.1             0.394            0.298          0.256                0.076            0.376                -0.06            0.407           0.318              0.222             0.08              0.371
                         0.145            0.065            0.026           0.072               0.095            0.059               0.135             0.068           0.028              0.079             0.097             0.062
                     [-0.14,0.319]    [0.252,0.472]    [0.261,0.347]   [0.298,0.53]        [-0.022,0.28]    [0.306,0.486]      [-0.288,0.166]    [0.249,0.479]    [0.282,0.369]    [0.266,0.517]       [-0.003,0.3]     [0.301,0.498]
Control function           -                -                -               -                   -                -                  -0.33           0.034             0.06               -0.1            0.204             -0.032
                                                                                                                                    0.116              0.07            0.038             0.048              0.12             0.099
                                                                                                                              [-0.473,-0.119]   [-0.112,0.101]     [0.002,0.12]     [-0.13,0.018]     [0.027,0.411]    [-0.125,0.184]
AeioTu                     -0.03            0.004            0.009            0.001             0.028              0.074               0             0.003            0.009             0.001             0.014              0.076
                          0.061             0.042            0.006            0.007              0.03              0.029              0.05            0.042           0.006              0.007              0.03              0.03
                     [-0.104,0.086]   [-0.068,0.058]      [0.002,0.02]   [-0.008,0.014]    [-0.026,0.068]     [0.029,0.121]    [-0.076,0.076]   [-0.069,0.059]    [0.002,0.021]   [-0.008,0.014]     [-0.034,0.061]     [0.027,0.119]
Cognitive t                -0.02            0.05             0.012            -0.092           -0.032             -0.092             -0.03           0.054            0.017             -0.113             0.012            -0.096
                          0.063             0.084            0.023            0.042             0.041              0.033            0.062             0.082           0.023              0.043             0.048             0.036
                     [-0.108,0.096]   [-0.069,0.212]    [-0.031,0.047]   [-0.22,-0.077]    [-0.091,0.042]   [-0.157,-0.045]    [-0.108,0.093]   [-0.062,0.203]   [-0.025,0.054]    [-0.24,-0.094]    [-0.054,0.095]   [-0.158,-0.044]
Socio-emotional t          -0.01            0.067            0.025             0.038           -0.007              -0.01             -0.02           0.072            0.031             0.025              0.031            -0.012
                          0.098             0.051            0.012            0.014             0.039              0.029            0.087             0.049           0.014              0.017             0.045             0.028
                       [-0.1,0.225]    [0.002,0.168]     [0.005,0.041]    [0.008,0.056]    [-0.058,0.063]    [-0.068,0.032]      [-0.1,0.187]    [0.005,0.153]    [0.008,0.053]   [-0.004,0.054]      [-0.03,0.113]    [-0.063,0.028]
Health t                    0.77            0.857             1.051            1.472            1.752              1.546              0.71            0.876             1.06              1.47             1.815             1.554
                          0.107             0.233            0.066            0.215             0.208              0.152            0.097             0.248           0.067              0.217             0.206              0.16
                      [0.533,0.872]    [0.381,1.119]     [0.955,1.175]    [0.639,1.327]     [1.278,1.97]       [1.26,1.744]     [0.495,0.822]    [0.334,1.132]    [0.965,1.186]    [0.654,1.335]      [1.323,2.006]     [1.226,1.743]
Health t-1                    -             0.041            -0.117           -0.385           -0.698             -0.396                -              0.03           -0.113            -0.397            -0.766            -0.409
                                            0.144             0.06             0.223            0.252              0.176                             0.149            0.061             0.228              0.249             0.191
                                      [-0.178,0.272]   [-0.214,-0.021]   [-0.219,0.491]   [-0.976,-0.155]   [-0.626,-0.066]                     [-0.192,0.286]   [-0.208,-0.02]   [-0.229,0.488]    [-1.005,-0.193]   [-0.635,-0.018]
Parental cognition          0              -0.006            -0.019            0.034            0.012             -0.063           -0.03             -0.003               0              0.007             0.082            -0.074
                          0.071             0.033            0.016              0.02            0.036              0.033           0.058              0.032           0.019             0.023              0.056             0.045
                     [-0.017,0.189]   [-0.026,0.079]    [-0.041,0.011]    [-0.015,0.05]    [-0.053,0.056]   [-0.116,-0.008]   [-0.062,0.095]    [-0.028,0.063]   [-0.027,0.034]   [-0.038,0.036]     [-0.015,0.172]    [-0.119,0.014]
Investments               0.27             -0.009            0.047            -0.068           -0.027              0.015           0.37              -0.029           0.005              0.007            -0.174             0.036
                          0.073             0.053            0.019            0.028             0.037              0.038           0.083              0.081           0.034              0.042             0.109             0.081
                      [0.061,0.301]   [-0.069,0.095]      [0.01,0.073]   [-0.065,0.025]    [-0.089,0.028]    [-0.039,0.076]    [0.18,0.443]     [-0.119,0.141]   [-0.059,0.053]   [-0.035,0.107]    [-0.382,-0.037]    [-0.122,0.122]


 Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the production function for health. The left panel considers investments as exogenous, while the right panel allows
            investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square brackets. Controls also include
            child age, gender, and the number of children in the household (see Table 16 for coefficients on these covariates).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
6      Windows of Opportunity

In this section, we use the model to better characterise the process of human devel-
opment in its various dimensions, focusing on aspects that might be relevant for the
design of policy. In particular, we want to establish whether the nature of the process
of development points to the existence of windows of opportunities, that is periods in
which interventions (or investment) could be particular effective and their effect sus-
tainable. To do so, we perform some simulations where we force some changes to the
inputs in the production function of human development and then study the long term
effects of such changes by looking at the impulse response function of these changes
for the variables we consider. This exercise is particularly useful because it takes into
account all dynamic interactions between the various components of development as
well as the effect of parental investment. Before performing the simulations, however,
we present some evidence on how well the model fits the data and some graphical
representation of the marginal productivity of parental investment at different ages.

6.1     Model Fit

We start to use our estimates of the production functions for the three dimensions of
human development we consider at the various ages, checking how well the model fits
the data on which it was estimated. In Figure 3, we plot the evolution of cognitive
skills, socio-emotional skills and health over time as predicted by our model estimates,
as reported in Tables 6, 8 and 9, as well as the average factor corresponding to each
dimension considerd, implied by the available measures and the estimated measurement
system. The figures are constructed assigning the median initial conditions in our
sample and holding investments fixed at their median value in each period. In each
graph we plot both the estimates from the baseline model and the estimates from the
model with self-productivity lags.
      The figures show that, perhaps not suprisingly, our model fits remarkably well. For
the cognitive factor, however, both the baseline model and the one with an additional
lag in cognition, underpredict child development at age 6 and, more severely, at age 7.
For the other two dimensions (socioemotional skills and health) the fit of both versions
of the model is remarkably good.




                                            41
               (a) Cognitive skills                            (b) Socio-emotional skills




                                             (c) Health

               Figure 3: Evolution of Skills Over Time (Model Estimates)

 Notes: The figure plots the evolution of cognitive skills (panel a), socio-emotional skills (panel b),
and health (panel c) over time as predicted by our model estimates reported in Tables 6, 8 and 9, as
well as the average factor corresponding to each dimension considered. The figures are constructed
assigning the median initial conditions in our sample and holding investments fixed at their median
value in each period. In each graph we plot both the estimates from the baseline model (solid blue
line) and the estimates from the model with self-productivity lags (dashed red line).


6.2    Marginal Product of Investment

In Figure 4, we plot the marginal product of investment (MPI) by baseline skills level,
computed using the estimates from the production functions for cognitive skills, socio-
emotional skills and health, as implied by our model estimates. As before, the estimates
used here are those reported in Tables 6, 8 and 9. The first three graphs plot the MPI
for cognitive skills, the following three for socio-emotional skills and the last three
for health. Within each row, each column shows how the marginal product varies
by baseline level of cognitive skills (column 1), socio-emotional skills (column 2) and
health (column 3). In each graph, we plot the MPI at different ages. The figures are
constructed evaluating the marginal product at different levels of baseline skills, while
holding all other inputs at their median value in the sample. We note that the scale is

                                                  42
different in each graph.
    First,we note the complementarity of investment in each of the three dimensions
with the relevant level of development (the graphs on the diagonal). These are evident
in particular for cognition and socio-emotional skills, while for health it is only relevant
for the production function at age 2. For cognition the complementarity (the slope of
the marginal productivity lines) becomes more evidence at age 3. Moreover, investment
seems to be complementary also with health and, to an extent, with socio-emotional
skills. These results point to the fact that investments in children with higher baseline
skill levels are more productive.
    In the case of socio-emotional skills, there are no strong complementaries of in-
vestment with cognitive development, while we do find evidence of complementarity
between health and investments in the production for socio-emotional skills at age
2. Finally, in the case of the health production function we find no complementaries
between cognition or socioemotional skills and investments.

6.3     Impulse Response Functions

In Figure 5, we plot the impulse response functions (IRFs) for cognitive skills following
an investment innovation, as implied by the estimated production functions. The
IRFs are dynamic and take into account the effects that, over time, a given change
in investment has on all dimensions of child development we consider. In each plot,
we increase investments by one standard deviation at a particular age (panels a, b, c
and d). In panel e, investment is increased at ages 2, 3 and 4, while in panel f , it is
increased at ages 3 and 4. We compare the evolution of cognitive skills to what would
have occurred if investments were fixed at their median level observed in the data. We
assume that at baseline all other inputs are fixed at their median level. Each graph
reports both the evolution of skills predicted by the production function that allows
for only one lag of the various dimensions of child development and that predicted by
the model with an additional self-productivity lag.
      A striking difference is that observed between panels a and b. In the former, when
investment increases at age 2 only, it gives an impact of about 0.12 when it occurs.
Such effect is sustained through age 7, although the model with a richer dynamics
implies a slight decline in particular at ages 6 and 7. The picture is very different in
the increase happens at age 3: while on impact the effect of the increased investment
is very similar, this effect vanishes completely from age 4 onwards. The main reason
behind this differences is the different dynamics of the process at different ages. We


                                            43
                                                                                                     44




                                             (a) Cognitive skills




                                          (b) Socio-emotional skills




                                                  (c) Health

                          Figure 4: Marginal Product of Investment

 Notes: This figure plots marginal product of investment (MPI) by baseline skills level, computed using
the estimates from the production functions for cognitive skills, socio-emotional skills and health, as
implied by our model estimates. The top three panels plot the MPI for cognitive skills, the middle
three for socio-emotional skills and the bottom three for health. Within each row, each column shows
how the marginal product varies by baseline level of cognitive skills (column 1), socio-emotional skills
(column 2) and health (column 3). In each graph, we plot the MPI at age 2 (solid blue), age 3 (dashed
red) and age 4 (dashed blue). The figures are constructed evaluating the marginal product at different
levels of baseline skills, while holding all other inputs at their median value in the sample. We note
that the scale is different in each graph.
notice that investment at age 2 has a considerable effect on the health dimension at
age 2. This effect is then reflected on cognition at age 3 and subsequent ages.
   We also notice that investment at age 4 has a persistent effect, while the effect of
parental investment at age 5 is absent. Finally, the comparison between panel e and
f and the previous four panel makes clear not only the importance of starting the
investing early, but the importance of sustaning investments for several periods. The
cumulate effect in panel e is much larger than that in panel f and that of short lived
increases in investment considered in previous panels.
   While we do not report confidence interval for these exercises, they show the im-
portance of considering the process of child development as a whole in its various
dimensions. The dynamic of this process can be complex and has important impli-
cations for the identification of windows of opportunities to target interventions and
policies to improve the chances of disadvantaged children.
    In Figure 6, we repeat the exercise we perfomed for cognitive skills for socioempo-
tional skills. Again, we increase investment exogenously by one standard deviation at
different ages, following the same scheme we used for cognitive skills. We then compare
the evolution of socio-emotional skills to what would have occurred if investments were
fixed at their median level. Again, we assume that at baseline all other inputs are fixed
at their median level. Each graph reports both the evolution of skills predicted by our
baseline model and that predicted by the model with an additional self-productivity
lag.
    While we do not find the dramatic difference in dynamics we observe for cognitive
skills, again the impact of investment is much more pronounced at age 2 than at
subsequent ages. The effects of the two models (with or without additional lags) are
very simliar. When looking at the effects of changing the investment at ages 2, 3 and
4, rather than only at ages 3 and 4, it is clear that the cumulate impact of the former
is much higher than that of the former.
   An impressive feature of the impacts on the accumulation of scoio-emotial skills is
the effect of investment at age 5, which is quite high and compares with a zero impact
on cognitive skills at the same age. While we do not report the IRF for an increase at
ages 2 to 5, it is clear from this picture and the coefficients in the production function,
that the effect of such an intervention would be vey high.
   Finally, in Figure 7, we plot the impulse response functions (IRFs) for health fol-
lowing the same investment innovations considered for cognition and socioemotional
skills. As before, we assume that at baseline all other inputs are fixed at their median


                                            45
                                                                                                     46




      (a) Increase in investment at age 2                 (b) Increase in investment at age 3




      (c) Increase in investment at age 4                 (d) Increase in investment at age 5




 (e) Increase in investment at age 2, 3 and 4         (f) Increase in investment at age 3 and 4

                               Figure 5: IRFs for cognitive skills

 Notes: This figure plots the impulse response functions (IRFs) for cognitive skills following an
investment innovation, as implied by the estimated production functions. In each plot, we increase
investments by one standard deviation at age 2 (panels a), age 3 (panel b), age 4 (panel c) and age 4
(panel d). In panel e, investment is increased at ages 2, 3 and 4, while in panel f , it is increased at
ages 3 and 4. In the plot, we assume that at baseline all other inputs are fixed at their median level.
Each graph reports both the evolution of skills predicted by the production function that allows for
only one lag of the various dimensions of child development (in blue) and that predicted by the model
with an additional self-productivity lag (in red).
                                                                                                     47




      (a) Increase in investment at age 2                 (b) Increase in investment at age 3




      (c) Increase in investment at age 4                 (d) Increase in investment at age 5




 (e) Increase in investment at age 2, 3 and 4         (f) Increase in investment at age 3 and 4

                           Figure 6: IRFs for socio-emotional skills

 Notes: This figure plots the impulse response functions (IRFs) for socio-emotional skills following an
investment innovation, as implied by the estimated production functions. In each plot, we increase
investments by one standard deviation at age 2 (panels a), age 3 (panel b), age 4 (panel c) and age 4
(panel d). In panel e, investment is increased at ages 2, 3 and 4, while in panel f , it is increased at
ages 3 and 4. In the plot, we assume that at baseline all other inputs are fixed at their median level.
Each graph reports both the evolution of skills predicted by the production function that allows for
only one lag of the various dimensions of child development (in blue) and that predicted by the model
with an additional self-productivity lag (in red).
                                                                                                     48




      (a) Increase in investment at age 2                 (b) Increase in investment at age 3




      (c) Increase in investment at age 4                 (d) Increase in investment at age 5




 (e) Increase in investment at age 2, 3 and 4         (f) Increase in investment at age 3 and 4

                                    Figure 7: IRFs for health

 Notes: This figure plots the impulse response functions (IRFs) for health following an investment
innovation, as implied by the estimated production functions. In each plot, we increase investments
by one standard deviation at age 2 (panels a), age 3 (panel b), age 4 (panel c) and age 4 (panel d). In
panel e, investment is increased at ages 2, 3 and 4, while in panel f , it is increased at ages 3 and 4.
In the plot, we assume that at baseline all other inputs are fixed at their median level. Each graph
reports both the evolution of skills predicted by the production function that allows for only one lag
of the various dimensions of child development (in blue) and that predicted by the model with an
additional self-productivity lag (in red).
level and we report the effects implied by the two versions of the model we consider.
    We notice that out estimates imply a persistent effet of investment on the health
dimension of child development if done at age 2 but not for subsequent ages. Once
again, we observe some differences in the long run effect of the two models in panel a
but not in the other panels. As we discussed above, while not particularly surprising,
given the coefficients of the health production function, these results, and in particular
the effect of investment on health age age 2, are important to better understand the
effect of investment on other dimensions of child development.


7    Conclusions

In this paper, we study the process of human development from age 1 to 7, in three
important dimensions: cognition, socio-emotional skills and health. We use a rich
and unique data set from Colombia, which contains high frequency information fo a
large sample of children from vulnerable families . We show that there are important
interactions among the different dimensions, and that these change with age. We also
study the dynamics of the process and show that, especially for the case of cognition, a
simple Markov structure, with an individual lag of the dimension being studied, might
not be enough to capture what is observed in reality.
    Consistently with other studies we have show that to get consistent estimates of the
effect of parental investment on child development, it is important to take into account
the endogeneity of such a variable. The impact that parental investments have on
child development vary with age and dimension considered. In the case of health,
parental investment seems to be important only early on (at age 2). For cognition,
instead, parental investment is effective at ages 2,3 and 4. After that, it becomes
not particularly important. For socio-emotional skills, instead, parental investment is
important for a longer interval of ages and it seems particularly effective at age 5.
    We have used the model, which include the interactions among various components,
to study how the productivity of investment changes with age, once we take into
account these interactions. We also study the sustainability and persistence of certain
interventions in the various dimensions.
    Our contribution is important because it represents a rich analysis of the process
of child development which has important implications for policy design. We are not
aware of studies that have characterised the process with such high frequency of data
over the first period of life. We also introduce some innovations in the way available
measures are summarized and how they are compared over different ages.

                                           49
References
Agostinelli, F. and Wiswall, M. (2016a). Estimating the technology of childrens skill
  formation. NBER Working Paper No. 22442.
Agostinelli, F. and Wiswall, M. (2016b). Identification of dynamic latent factor mod-
  els: The implications of re-normalization in a model of child development. NBER
  Working Paper No. 22441.
Almond, D. and Currie, J. (2011). Chapter 15 - human capital development before age
  five. volume 4 of Handbook of Labor Economics, 1315 ­ 1486. Elsevier.
Anderson, T. and Rubin, H. (1956). Statistical inference in factor analysis. In Proceed-
 ings of the Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability,
 volume 5, 111­150. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Attanasio, O., Blundell, R., Conti, G., and Mason, G. (2018). Inequality in non-
  cognitive skills: a cross-cohort comparison. Unpublished.
Attanasio, O., Cattan, S., Fitzsimons, E., Meghir, C., and Rubio-Codina, M. (2020).
  Estimating the production function for human capital: results from a randomized
  controlled trial in colombia. American Economic Review 110(1):48­85.
Attanasio, O., Meghir, C., and Nix, E. (2020). Human capital development and
  parental investment in india. .
Attanasio, O., Meghir, C., Nix, E., and Salvati, F. (2017). Human capital growth and
  poverty: Evidence from ethiopia and peru. Review of Economic Dynamics 11(8).
Bayley, N. (2005). Bayley scales of infant development .
Bernal, R., Giannola, M., and Nores, M. (2020). The effects of a project and play-
  based early education program on medium term developmental trajectories of young
  children in a low-income setting. Unpublished manuscript Universidad de los Andes
  and National Institute for Early Education Research.
Bernal, R., Mart´
                inez, M. A., and Quintero, C. (2015). Situaci´
                                                             on de ni~
                                                                     nas y ni~
                                                                             nos
  colombianos menores de cinco a~
                                nos, entre 2010 y 2013. Technical report, Bogota,
  Colombia: Editorial Kimpress.
Bracken, B. A., Keith, L. K., and Walker, K. C. (1998). Assessment of preschool behav-
  ior and social-emotional functioning: A review of thirteen third-party instruments.
  Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment 16(2):153­169.
Christensen, L. R., Jorgenson, D. W., and Lau, L. J. (1973). Transcendental logarith-
 mic production frontiers. The review of economics and statistics 28­45.
Cunha, F., Heckman, J., and Schennach, S. (2010). Estimating the technology of
 cognitive and non-cognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78(3):883­931.

                                          50
DeBruin-Parecki, A. (2005). Early Literacy Skills Assessment User Guide. Ypsilanti,
  MI: High/Scope Press.

Doyle, A., Ostrander, R., Skare, S., Crosby, R. D., and August, G. J. (1997). Conver-
  gent and criterion-related validity of the behavior assessment system for children-
  parent rating scale. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology 26(3):276­284.

Fernald, L. C., Prado, E., Kariger, P., and Raikes, A. (2017). A toolkit for measuring
  early childhood development in low and middle-income countries .

Gertler, P., Heckman, J., Pinto, R., Zanolini, A., Vermeerch, C., Walker, S., Chang,
 S., and Grantham-McGregor, S. (2014). Labor market returns to an early childhood
 stimulation intervention in Jamaica. Science 344:998­1001.

Heckman, J., Pinto, R., and Savelyev, P. (2013). Understanding the mechanisms
  through which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 103:2052­2086.

Heckman, J. J., HyeokMoon, S., RodrigoPinto, A.Savelyev, P., and AdamYavitz
  (2010). The rate of return to the highscope perry preschool program. Journal
  of Public Economics 94:114­128.

Mu~
  noz-Sandoval, A., Woodcock, R., McGrew, K., and Mather, N. (2005). Bater´
                                                                          ia iii
 pruebas de aprovechamiento. Itasca, IL: Riverside Publishing .

Nores, M., Bernal, R., and Barnett, S. (2019). Center-based care for infants and
  toddlers: the aeiotu randomized trial. Economics of Education Review 72:30 ­ 43.

Padilla, E., Lugo, D., and Dunn, L. (1986). Test de vocabulario en im´
                                                                     agenes peabody
  (tvip). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service (AGS), Inc. .

Ponitz, C. C., McClelland, M. M., Matthews, J. S., and Morrison, F. J. (2009). A struc-
  tured observation of behavioral self-regulation and its contribution to kindergarten
  outcomes. Developmental psychology 45(3):605.

Ponitz, C. E. C., McClelland, M. M., Jewkes, A. M., Connor, C. M., Farris, C. L., and
  Morrison, F. J. (2008). Touch your toes! developing a direct measure of behavioral
  regulation in early childhood. Early Childhood Research Quarterly 23(2):141­158.

Rubio-Codina, M., Araujo, C., Attanasio, O., Munoz, P., and McGregor, S. G. (2017).
 Concurrent validity and feasibility of short tests currently used to measure early
 childhood development in large scale studies. PLOS-ONE 25:234­259.

Sparrow, S. S., Cicchetti, D., and Balla, D. A. (1984). Vineland adaptive behavior
  scales .

Squires, J., Bricker, D., and Twombly, E. (2002). The ASQ: SE user's guide: For the
  Ages & Stages Questionnaires: Social-emotional. Paul H Brookes Publishing.

                                          51
WHO (2007). WHO child growth standards: head circumference-for-age, arm
 circumference-for-age, triceps skinfold-for-age and subscapular skinfold-for-age:
 methods and development. World Health Organization.




                                       52
Appendix Tables




                  53
                                               Table 11: Production functions for cognitive skills (full results)
                                                                                                                    Cognitive t+1
                                                             Exogenous investments                                                                                   Endogenous   investments
                          Age 2            Age 3             Age 4           Age 5             Age 6            Age 7              Age 2            Age 3              Age 4            Age 5            Age 6             Age 7
 TFP                       -0.19           0.155             -0.135          0.44              0.552            0.74               -0.29             0.027            -0.176             0.481            0.548             0.739
                            0.16            0.11              0.03           0.054             0.043            0.05               0.154             0.114             0.044              0.07             0.05              0.05
                      [-0.443,0.079]   [0.048,0.402]    [-0.191,-0.098]  [0.341,0.517]     [0.486,0.624]    [0.651,0.811]     [-0.52,-0.037]   [-0.097,0.299]   [-0.278,-0.145]      [0.37,0.588]    [0.456,0.626]     [0.649,0.813]
 Control function             -               -                 -              -                 -                -                -0.22            -0.268            -0.132            0.133            -0.028            -0.061
                                                                                                                                   0.145             0.102             0.098             0.113            0.161              0.12
                                                                                                                              [-0.423,0.036]   [-0.43,-0.127]   [-0.366,-0.053]    [-0.017,0.333]   [-0.272,0.193]    [-0.223,0.158]
 AeioTu                     -0.13           0.034             0.03              0.068           0.025               0.05           -0.11             0.046              0.03             0.068            0.026             0.056
                           0.081            0.056            0.013              0.018           0.045              0.042           0.078             0.051             0.013             0.018            0.046             0.045
                      [-0.217,0.038]   [-0.048,0.125]    [0.007,0.047]      [0.026,0.09]   [-0.048,0.099]    [-0.004,0.122]   [-0.208,0.046]   [-0.036,0.129]     [0.007,0.046]     [0.026,0.088]   [-0.051,0.093]    [-0.005,0.134]
 Cognitive t                 0.3            0.501            0.436              1.021           1.138             0.908             0.3             0.494              0.423            1.051             1.133            0.898
                           0.067            0.081            0.039              0.085           0.059              0.048           0.067             0.082             0.042              0.1            0.072              0.054
                       [0.229,0.442]    [0.449,0.692]    [0.372,0.498]     [0.879,1.141]    [1.01,1.205]      [0.805,0.954]    [0.221,0.442]    [0.421,0.678]     [0.349,0.487]     [0.901,1.207]     [0.982,1.22]      [0.79,0.969]
 Socio-emotional t           0.08           0.158            0.058              -0.06           0.007              0.058            0.08             0.121             0.046            -0.043            0.002             0.053
                           0.103            0.075            0.023              0.031           0.036              0.043           0.101             0.074             0.028             0.035            0.049             0.044
                      [-0.007,0.335]    [0.018,0.263]    [0.008,0.085]    [-0.089,0.014]   [-0.074,0.044]    [-0.001,0.133]   [-0.014,0.326]   [-0.022,0.215]    [-0.017,0.071]    [-0.071,0.038]     [-0.1,0.063]    [-0.012,0.139]
 Health t                    0.39           0.238             0.293             0.006          -0.065             -0.062            0.35             0.161             0.267             0.024           -0.066            -0.066
                             0.12           0.103            0.048              0.063           0.044             0.034            0.116             0.097             0.055             0.063            0.045             0.035
                       [0.134,0.512]    [0.051,0.366]    [0.193,0.362]    [-0.087,0.108]   [-0.119,0.021]    [-0.095,0.011]    [0.108,0.478]   [-0.003,0.319]     [0.156,0.327]    [-0.067,0.137]    [-0.123,0.02]    [-0.103,0.009]
 Parental cognition         0.02            0.013            0.102             -0.011          -0.031              0.101              0             -0.008             0.061             0.025            -0.04             0.079
                           0.089            0.054            0.031              0.036           0.045              0.045           0.089             0.061             0.044             0.046            0.068             0.064
                      [-0.017,0.233]   [-0.011,0.142]    [0.058,0.159]    [-0.051,0.065]   [-0.085,0.064]    [-0.008,0.142]   [-0.047,0.223]   [-0.103,0.063]    [-0.027,0.118]    [-0.023,0.121]   [-0.138,0.086]     [-0.045,0.16]
 Investments                 0.2            0.091            0.111              0.043           -0.05             -0.005            0.27             0.231             0.203            -0.057            -0.03             0.036
                           0.085            0.068            0.041              0.042           0.053              0.045            0.12             0.103             0.092             0.103            0.145             0.097
                       [-0.017,0.28]   [-0.035,0.184]    [0.061,0.191]     [-0.06,0.081]   [-0.129,0.045]    [-0.032,0.106]   [-0.032,0.376]    [0.082,0.387]     [0.134,0.418]     [-0.273,0.04]   [-0.234,0.232]     [-0.113,0.19]
 Number of children         0.01            0.001            0.005             -0.018          -0.006             -0.001            0.01             0.006             0.008            -0.023           -0.004             0.002
                           0.016            0.009            0.006              0.009           0.013              0.011           0.016             0.009             0.007             0.009            0.013             0.011
                        [-0.03,0.02]   [-0.014,0.013]   [-0.006,0.012]       [-0.029,0]    [-0.027,0.014]     [-0.017,0.02]    [-0.028,0.02]    [-0.008,0.02]    [-0.003,0.017]   [-0.032,-0.004]   [-0.027,0.015]    [-0.016,0.019]
 Gender                      0.08           -0.037           -0.037            -0.107          -0.019              0.011            0.07            -0.042            -0.037            -0.108            -0.02             0.006
                           0.066            0.046            0.019              0.029           0.032              0.029           0.065             0.042             0.019             0.029            0.034             0.031
                       [-0.07,0.146]   [-0.118,0.025]   [-0.06,-0.002]   [-0.137,-0.038]   [-0.071,0.035]    [-0.044,0.052]   [-0.071,0.149]   [-0.114,0.021]        [-0.06,0]    [-0.138,-0.039]   [-0.075,0.034]    [-0.047,0.053]
 Age                           0            -0.011            0.03              0.059           0.011             -0.037              0             -0.006              0.03             0.059            0.011            -0.035
                           0.012            0.011             0.01              0.014           0.015              0.015           0.012             0.011             0.009             0.014            0.015             0.014
                      [-0.016,0.023]   [-0.033,0.002]    [0.014,0.045]     [0.033,0.078]   [-0.014,0.034]   [-0.053,-0.009]    [-0.009,0.03]   [-0.025,0.008]     [0.015,0.045]     [0.031,0.076]   [-0.015,0.034]   [-0.052,-0.009]



 Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the production function for cognitive skills. The left panel considers investments as exogenous, while
the right panel allows investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square brackets.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     54
                      Table 12: Production functions for cognitive skills with two self-productivity lags (full results)
                                                                                                                      Cognitive t+1
                                                            Exogenous investments                                                                                      Endogenous   investments
                          Age 2            Age 3            Age 4           Age 5               Age 6            Age 7              Age 2             Age 3             Age 4             Age 5             Age 6             Age 7
 TFP                       -0.19           0.202            -0.056          0.44                0.422            0.483              -0.29              0.097            -0.098            0.484              0.389             0.478
                            0.16           0.102             0.043          0.047               0.073            0.109              0.154              0.101             0.047            0.062              0.083              0.11
                      [-0.443,0.079]    [0.1,0.426]     [-0.121,0.012]  [0.353,0.505]       [0.342,0.575]    [0.527,0.876]     [-0.52,-0.037]    [-0.016,0.326]   [-0.199,-0.044]     [0.386,0.574]     [0.298,0.565]     [0.516,0.871]
 Control function             -              -                 -              -                   -                -                -0.22             -0.303            -0.147            0.136             -0.135            -0.077
                                                                                                                                    0.145              0.107             0.093             0.112             0.157             0.122
                                                                                                                               [-0.423,0.036]   [-0.459,-0.124]   [-0.361,-0.066]    [-0.011,0.327]     [-0.395,0.12]    [-0.235,0.145]
 AeioTu                    -0.13            0.034             0.056              0.068            0.006             0.046           -0.11              0.048             0.057            0.068               0.01             0.054
                           0.081             0.057            0.016              0.018            0.046             0.043           0.078              0.051             0.016            0.018              0.047             0.045
                      [-0.217,0.038]   [-0.049,0.127]      [0.028,0.08]     [0.025,0.089]   [-0.061,0.085]    [-0.009,0.125]   [-0.208,0.046]    [-0.044,0.127]     [0.028,0.081]     [0.026,0.087]    [-0.055,0.087]    [-0.013,0.132]
 Cognitive t                0.3             0.469             0.319              1.022            1.281             1.321            0.3              0.435               0.3             1.044             1.271             1.315
                           0.067             0.124            0.069              0.124            0.092             0.178           0.067              0.125             0.071            0.133              0.098             0.181
                       [0.229,0.442]    [0.379,0.741]     [0.204,0.427]     [0.808,1.215]    [1.072,1.365]      [0.69,1.211]    [0.221,0.442]     [0.348,0.707]     [0.161,0.403]      [0.834,1.27]     [1.046,1.362]     [0.683,1.213]
 Cognitive t-1               -              0.046             0.155                0             -0.248            -0.507             -                0.084             0.162             0.011            -0.275            -0.514
                                            0.076              0.066             0.073            0.115             0.199                              0.075            0.065             0.073              0.117             0.202
                                       [-0.094,0.134]     [0.067,0.276]     [-0.12,0.101]   [-0.365,0.019]    [-0.377,0.205]                     [-0.077,0.147]     [0.071,0.279]    [-0.111,0.121]   [-0.402,-0.014]     [-0.39,0.202]
 Socio-emotional t          0.08            0.161             0.049              -0.06            0.053             0.082            0.08              0.123             0.035            -0.043             0.034             0.076
                           0.103             0.077            0.023              0.031            0.044             0.042           0.101              0.075             0.027            0.035              0.052             0.043
                      [-0.007,0.335]     [0.02,0.264]    [-0.002,0.074]    [-0.088,0.014]   [-0.061,0.085]     [0.006,0.143]   [-0.014,0.326]    [-0.017,0.216]     [-0.027,0.06]    [-0.072,0.039]    [-0.096,0.067]     [-0.012,0.14]
 Health t                   0.39            0.213              0.269             0.006            -0.03            -0.037            0.35              0.107             0.238              0.02            -0.032            -0.041
                            0.12              0.1             0.047              0.051            0.045             0.035           0.116              0.095             0.054            0.053              0.046             0.036
                       [0.134,0.512]    [0.034,0.355]     [0.178,0.339]    [-0.066,0.111]   [-0.099,0.044]    [-0.095,0.015]    [0.108,0.478]    [-0.017,0.271]     [0.132,0.309]    [-0.055,0.124]    [-0.105,0.044]      [-0.1,0.018]
 Parental cognition         0.02            0.016             0.092             -0.011            0.006              0.12              0              -0.006             0.045             0.026            -0.035             0.092
                           0.089             0.059            0.029              0.036            0.048             0.048           0.089              0.062             0.041            0.046              0.067             0.067
                      [-0.017,0.233]    [-0.01,0.161]     [0.046,0.144]    [-0.054,0.064]   [-0.065,0.096]    [-0.009,0.149]   [-0.047,0.223]    [-0.092,0.087]    [-0.038,0.094]    [-0.023,0.117]     [-0.14,0.085]    [-0.048,0.171]
 Investments                 0.2            0.095             0.117              0.043            -0.06              0.02            0.27              0.258             0.221            -0.058             0.036             0.072
                           0.085             0.068            0.038              0.044            0.053             0.046            0.12              0.106             0.086             0.103             0.143             0.099
                       [-0.017,0.28]   [-0.038,0.176]     [0.066,0.194]    [-0.068,0.083]   [-0.131,0.049]    [-0.036,0.118]   [-0.032,0.376]     [0.088,0.401]     [0.147,0.416]    [-0.275,0.042]    [-0.165,0.297]    [-0.096,0.221]
 Number of children         0.01               0                  0             -0.018           -0.005             0.001            0.01              0.005             0.004            -0.023             0.003             0.005
                           0.016             0.009            0.006              0.009            0.013             0.012           0.016              0.009             0.006            0.009              0.013             0.011
                        [-0.03,0.02]   [-0.016,0.013]    [-0.011,0.007]       [-0.029,0]    [-0.027,0.016]    [-0.016,0.023]    [-0.028,0.02]     [-0.008,0.02]    [-0.007,0.012]   [-0.032,-0.004]    [-0.021,0.021]     [-0.014,0.02]
 Gender                     0.08            -0.039            -0.066            -0.107            0.007             0.016            0.07             -0.045            -0.068            -0.107             0.002             0.009
                           0.066             0.046            0.022              0.029            0.032             0.029           0.065              0.042             0.022            0.029              0.034              0.03
                       [-0.07,0.146]    [-0.12,0.035]   [-0.093,-0.024]   [-0.141,-0.041]    [-0.059,0.05]    [-0.044,0.051]   [-0.071,0.149]    [-0.112,0.026]   [-0.096,-0.026]    [-0.138,-0.04]     [-0.066,0.05]    [-0.046,0.051]
 Age                          0             -0.013              0.03             0.059           -0.004            -0.039              0              -0.007             0.029             0.059            -0.004            -0.037
                           0.012             0.011             0.01              0.014            0.015             0.015           0.012              0.011              0.01            0.014              0.016             0.014
                      [-0.016,0.023]   [-0.033,0.001]     [0.013,0.044]     [0.033,0.077]   [-0.023,0.025]   [-0.053,-0.008]    [-0.009,0.03]    [-0.028,0.005]     [0.014,0.044]     [0.031,0.076]    [-0.023,0.028]   [-0.052,-0.008]



 Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the production function for cognitive skills. The left panel considers investments as exogenous, while
the right panel allows investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square brackets.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        55
                                  Table 13: Production functions for socio-emotional skills (full results)
                                                                                                 Socio-emotional t+1
                                                   Exogenous investments                                                                   Endogenous investments
                          Age 2            Age 3           Age 4          Age 5                Age 6              Age 2             Age 3             Age 4          Age 5             Age 6
 TFP                        0.4             0.104          0.217          0.312                0.286               0.11              -0.12            0.054           0.09             0.236
                           0.303            0.408           0.07          0.064                0.079              0.326              0.409            0.104           0.108             0.089
                      [-0.143,0.812]   [-0.596,0.706]   [0.1,0.327]   [0.222,0.451]        [0.158,0.407]     [-0.483,0.597]    [-0.893,0.355]   [-0.141,0.175]  [-0.102,0.251]     [0.102,0.377]
 Control function            -                -               -             -                    -                -0.62             -0.471           -0.529          -0.728            -0.356
                                                                                                                  0.279              0.263            0.237           0.273             0.348
                                                                                                            [-0.979,-0.097]   [-1.045,-0.244]  [-0.955,-0.241] [-1.288,-0.368]    [-0.947,0.169]
 AeioTu                    -0.12             0.13            -0.007            -0.115           -0.001            -0.08              0.151           -0.006          -0.117             0.017
                           0.181             0.162            0.038             0.031             0.1             0.173              0.156            0.037           0.031             0.106
                      [-0.375,0.234]   [-0.305,0.219]    [-0.072,0.05]   [-0.175,-0.072]   [-0.195,0.116]    [-0.343,0.244]     [-0.25,0.218]    [-0.07,0.046] [-0.172,-0.071]    [-0.201,0.154]
 Cognitive t               -0.15            -0.007           0.216              0.099            0.217            -0.16             -0.019            0.167          -0.064             0.151
                           0.131             0.206            0.076             0.078            0.088            0.133              0.206            0.088           0.129             0.118
                       [-0.369,0.05]   [-0.552,0.138]    [0.062,0.319]    [-0.019,0.224]    [0.072,0.359]    [-0.391,0.035]    [-0.577,0.121]   [-0.019,0.282]  [-0.321,0.083]     [-0.044,0.33]
 Socio-emotional t          0.28             0.77             0.41              0.436           0.378              0.26              0.707            0.361           0.345             0.316
                           0.159             0.216            0.077             0.067            0.092            0.148              0.229            0.089           0.075             0.109
                       [0.118,0.609]    [0.304,0.983]    [0.332,0.568]     [0.332,0.543]    [0.242,0.548]     [0.106,0.538]     [0.208,0.912]    [0.258,0.538]   [0.211,0.454]     [0.148,0.495]
 Health t                   0.42              0.09            0.156             0.242            0.103             0.31             -0.044             0.05           0.144              0.09
                           0.176             0.198            0.082             0.068            0.073            0.184               0.21            0.087           0.086             0.077
                       [0.122,0.685]   [-0.106,0.556]    [0.051,0.315]       [0.16,0.38]   [-0.017,0.219]     [0.012,0.605]    [-0.287,0.425]   [-0.077,0.208]   [0.022,0.296]    [-0.069,0.201]
 Parental cognition         0.04            -0.021            0.083             0.115           0.206             -0.01             -0.058           -0.084          -0.079             0.088
                           0.111             0.129            0.068             0.056            0.089            0.152              0.146            0.095           0.094             0.149
                      [-0.071,0.291]    [-0.054,0.37]    [-0.068,0.15]      [0.03,0.217]    [0.054,0.336]    [-0.323,0.145]    [-0.309,0.103]  [-0.309,-0.007]   [-0.231,0.06]    [-0.172,0.287]
 Investments                0.41            0.167            0.135              0.108           0.095               0.6              0.415            0.506           0.654             0.354
                           0.163             0.137            0.068             0.083            0.099            0.232              0.246            0.203           0.243             0.286
                       [0.104,0.593]   [-0.052,0.386]    [0.043,0.264]    [-0.054,0.202]   [-0.049,0.257]     [0.259,0.944]     [0.223,0.989]     [0.256,0.92]   [0.368,1.136]    [-0.049,0.869]
 Number of children         0.02             0.003           -0.025             0.026              0               0.02              0.011            -0.01           0.049              0.02
                           0.029             0.025            0.018             0.018            0.025            0.027              0.025            0.019           0.019             0.025
                      [-0.035,0.057]   [-0.029,0.049]   [-0.053,0.005]    [-0.005,0.051]    [-0.03,0.053]    [-0.021,0.064]    [-0.015,0.066]   [-0.043,0.022]   [0.015,0.075]    [-0.006,0.073]
 Gender                     0.05            -0.107           -0.072             0.144            -0.15             0.03             -0.114           -0.072           0.146            -0.168
                           0.154             0.136             0.06             0.053           0.081             0.147              0.131             0.06           0.054             0.085
                      [-0.246,0.254]   [-0.189,0.254]    [-0.17,0.024]      [0.067,0.23]   [-0.257,0.016]    [-0.235,0.254]     [-0.18,0.246]   [-0.173,0.025]   [0.063,0.234]   [-0.278,-0.007]
 Age                       -0.02            -0.021            0.063            -0.051            0.076            -0.01             -0.011             0.06          -0.049              0.08
                           0.029             0.029            0.026             0.027            0.035            0.029              0.029            0.027           0.028             0.035
                      [-0.065,0.037]      [-0.093,0]     [0.016,0.098]   [-0.102,-0.014]     [0.01,0.129]    [-0.047,0.045]    [-0.073,0.018]      [0.013,0.1]  [-0.098,-0.01]      [0.011,0.13]



 Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the production function for socio-emotional skills. The left panel considers investments as exogenous,
while the right panel allows investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square
brackets.




                                                                                                                                                                                   56
               Table 14: Production functions for socio-emotional skills with two self-productivity lags (full results)
                                                                                                     Socio-emotional t+1
                                                    Exogenous investments                                      Endogenous investments
                           Age 2            Age 3           Age 4          Age 5                Age 6                Age 2          Age 3             Age 4             Age 5             Age 6
 TFP                         0.4             0.03           0.175          0.316                 0.31                 0.11          -0.079              0.06             0.107             0.272
                            0.303            0.535          0.076          0.065                0.078                0.326           0.508             0.102             0.106             0.088
                       [-0.143,0.812]   [-0.997,0.783]  [0.034,0.271]  [0.226,0.438]        [0.195,0.452]       [-0.483,0.597] [-1.126,0.534]    [-0.133,0.177]    [-0.053,0.268]     [0.159,0.424]
 Control function             -                -              -              -                     -                 -0.62          -0.258            -0.447            -0.683            -0.242
                                                                                                                     0.279           0.243              0.25             0.268             0.347
                                                                                                               [-0.979,-0.097] [-0.747,0.012]   [-0.935,-0.127]   [-1.228,-0.303]    [-0.749,0.369]
 AeioTu                     -0.12             0.147             0.035             -0.1             0.01              -0.08           0.158             0.012            -0.105             0.021
                            0.181             0.15              0.038            0.033             0.097             0.173           0.148             0.039             0.034             0.102
                       [-0.375,0.234]    [-0.222,0.24]    [-0.034,0.093]   [-0.158,-0.05]     [-0.18,0.125]     [-0.343,0.244] [-0.217,0.271]    [-0.058,0.062]    [-0.16,-0.059]    [-0.191,0.142]
 Cognitive t                -0.15            -0.041             0.212            0.093              0.17             -0.16           -0.04             0.173            -0.059             0.133
                            0.131             0.272             0.077            0.081             0.094             0.133           0.266             0.088             0.124             0.116
                        [-0.369,0.05]   [-0.721,0.182]      [0.051,0.31]    [-0.032,0.23]    [-0.003,0.312]     [-0.391,0.035] [-0.716,0.138]    [-0.018,0.282]      [-0.286,0.1]    [-0.064,0.313]
 Socio-emotional t           0.28             0.728              0.39            0.338            0.314               0.26           0.702              0.36             0.275             0.282
                            0.159             0.211             0.085            0.076             0.103             0.148           0.224              0.09             0.078             0.111
                        [0.118,0.609]    [0.245,0.918]     [0.293,0.557]    [0.193,0.448]     [0.149,0.484]      [0.106,0.538]  [0.173,0.887]     [0.248,0.534]     [0.116,0.369]      [0.099,0.46]
 Socio-emotional t-1           -              0.087             0.171            0.114             0.164                -            0.066             0.075             0.088             0.139
                                              0.246             0.093           0.079              0.119                             0.246             0.096            0.078              0.125
                                         [-0.265,0.61]       [0.034,0.3]    [0.054,0.283]     [0.013,0.393]                    [-0.243,0.588]    [-0.081,0.215]     [0.015,0.242]    [-0.024,0.383]
 Health t                    0.42             0.078             0.118            0.263             0.093              0.31           0.005              0.05             0.166             0.086
                            0.176             0.203             0.083            0.071             0.072             0.184           0.21              0.085             0.087             0.074
                        [0.122,0.685]   [-0.121,0.555]     [0.003,0.268]    [0.162,0.397]    [-0.025,0.205]      [0.012,0.605] [-0.246,0.468]    [-0.073,0.203]     [0.031,0.318]    [-0.043,0.196]
 Parental cognition          0.04            -0.024             0.065           0.111              0.178             -0.01          -0.044            -0.066             -0.07             0.102
                            0.111             0.112             0.066            0.055             0.088             0.152           0.122             0.097              0.09             0.144
                       [-0.071,0.291]   [-0.097,0.249]     [-0.084,0.13]    [0.016,0.203]     [0.007,0.302]     [-0.323,0.145] [-0.256,0.101]     [-0.28,0.018]    [-0.227,0.062]    [-0.148,0.312]
 Investments                0.41              0.173             0.044           0.082              0.081              0.6           0.311              0.409              0.6             0.259
                            0.163             0.15              0.071            0.089             0.095             0.232            0.22              0.22             0.247              0.28
                        [0.104,0.593]    [-0.029,0.45]    [-0.042,0.199]   [-0.101,0.171]    [-0.067,0.245]      [0.259,0.944]  [0.087,0.843]     [0.204,0.895]     [0.222,1.072]    [-0.189,0.697]
 Number of children          0.02            -0.004            -0.032            0.02              0.007              0.02           0.002            -0.016             0.042              0.02
                            0.029             0.031             0.018            0.018             0.026             0.027           0.031             0.018             0.018             0.023
                       [-0.035,0.057]   [-0.061,0.039]    [-0.059,0.001]   [-0.011,0.045]    [-0.021,0.064]     [-0.021,0.064] [-0.045,0.049]    [-0.043,0.015]     [0.005,0.069]    [-0.004,0.064]
 Gender                      0.05            -0.122            -0.105            0.117            -0.143              0.03          -0.125            -0.087             0.125            -0.157
                            0.154             0.123             0.059            0.055             0.077             0.147           0.122             0.058             0.056              0.08
                       [-0.246,0.254]   [-0.203,0.177]   [-0.201,-0.009]     [0.037,0.21]   [-0.243,-0.003]     [-0.235,0.254] [-0.189,0.178]    [-0.182,0.015]     [0.042,0.215]   [-0.253,-0.007]
 Age                        -0.02             -0.02             0.075            -0.03             0.075             -0.01          -0.014             0.066            -0.033             0.077
                            0.029             0.031             0.024            0.029             0.034             0.029           0.03              0.026              0.03             0.033
                       [-0.065,0.037]   [-0.092,0.013]     [0.027,0.107]    [-0.08,0.013]      [0.01,0.124]     [-0.047,0.045] [-0.079,0.017]     [0.023,0.102]     [-0.08,0.015]     [0.015,0.124]



 Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the production function for socio-emotional skills. The left panel considers investments as exogenous,
while the right panel allows investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square
brackets.




                                                                                                                                                                                      57
                                                        Table 15: Production functions for health (full results)
                                                                                                                       Health t+1
                                                             Exogenous investments                                                                                    Endogenous   investments
                          Age 2            Age 3             Age 4          Age 5              Age 6             Age 7               Age 2            Age 3            Age 4             Age 5             Age 6              Age 7
 TFP                       0.1             0.382             0.347          0.38               0.331             0.496                -0.06            0.402           0.368              0.353              0.35             0.497
                          0.145            0.062             0.017          0.021              0.026             0.026                0.135            0.071            0.021             0.025             0.033             0.027
                      [-0.14,0.319]    [0.252,0.449]     [0.323,0.379]  [0.338,0.407]      [0.305,0.391]     [0.455,0.538]      [-0.288,0.166]     [0.235,0.47]    [0.341,0.409]     [0.307,0.391]     [0.323,0.425]     [0.455,0.539]
 Control function           -                -                 -              -                  -                 -                  -0.33           0.042            0.067              -0.09            0.132              0.033
                                                                                                                                      0.116            0.061            0.037             0.046             0.137             0.098
                                                                                                                               [-0.473,-0.119]   [-0.102,0.106]    [0.015,0.128]     [-0.13,0.011]    [-0.012,0.433]    [-0.061,0.236]
 AeioTu                     -0.03            0.004           0.005              0.005            0.069              0.105               0              0.002            0.005             0.005             0.062             0.102
                           0.061             0.042           0.005              0.007             0.032             0.028              0.05            0.041            0.005             0.007             0.032              0.03
                      [-0.104,0.086]   [-0.069,0.059]   [-0.002,0.016]    [-0.009,0.014]     [0.004,0.105]      [0.05,0.137]    [-0.076,0.076]    [-0.068,0.06]   [-0.002,0.016]     [-0.01,0.014]    [-0.005,0.097]      [0.04,0.133]
 Cognitive t                -0.02            0.061           0.002              -0.13              -0.1            -0.122             -0.03           0.062             0.008            -0.151            -0.075            -0.117
                           0.063              0.1            0.022              0.033             0.038             0.033             0.062            0.098            0.022             0.036             0.049             0.036
                      [-0.108,0.096]   [-0.043,0.268]   [-0.037,0.037]   [-0.191,-0.086]   [-0.152,-0.031]   [-0.177,-0.072]    [-0.108,0.093]    [-0.043,0.26]    [-0.03,0.044]   [-0.214,-0.093]    [-0.126,0.026]    [-0.171,-0.05]
 Socio-emotional t          -0.01            0.069           0.026              0.042            -0.037            -0.035             -0.02            0.075            0.032             0.031            -0.014            -0.032
                           0.098             0.052           0.011              0.014             0.036             0.027             0.087             0.05            0.014             0.016             0.049             0.028
                        [-0.1,0.225]     [0.003,0.18]    [0.006,0.041]     [0.009,0.055]    [-0.088,0.028]    [-0.085,0.005]      [-0.1,0.187]    [0.006,0.169]    [0.012,0.057]    [-0.005,0.052]     [-0.07,0.079]    [-0.078,0.021]
 Health t                    0.77            0.892             0.95             1.107             1.196             1.237              0.71            0.904            0.963             1.095             1.202             1.239
                           0.107             0.155           0.028              0.034             0.043             0.034             0.097            0.162             0.03             0.034             0.045             0.036
                       [0.533,0.872]    [0.543,1.036]    [0.914,1.009]     [1.051,1.164]     [1.103,1.249]     [1.173,1.291]     [0.495,0.822]    [0.522,1.056]    [0.925,1.022]     [1.047,1.159]      [1.11,1.263]     [1.181,1.301]
 Parental cognition           0             -0.006           -0.023             0.029            -0.017            -0.071             -0.03           -0.002           -0.002             0.005             0.027             -0.06
                           0.071             0.029           0.015               0.02             0.035             0.032            0.058             0.031            0.018             0.023             0.063             0.049
                      [-0.017,0.189]   [-0.026,0.062]   [-0.047,0.003]    [-0.013,0.052]    [-0.075,0.031]   [-0.123,-0.017]    [-0.062,0.095]   [-0.028,0.062]     [-0.03,0.03]     [-0.04,0.036]     [-0.049,0.16]    [-0.118,0.034]
 Investments                0.27            -0.017           0.045             -0.048            -0.043            -0.009              0.37           -0.039           -0.002              0.02            -0.139            -0.031
                           0.073             0.045           0.019              0.022              0.04             0.035            0.083             0.064            0.034             0.041              0.13             0.082
                       [0.061,0.301]   [-0.061,0.082]     [0.01,0.069]    [-0.059,0.014]    [-0.102,0.023]    [-0.053,0.061]      [0.18,0.443]   [-0.117,0.099]   [-0.063,0.046]    [-0.038,0.101]    [-0.401,0.006]    [-0.196,0.061]
 Number of children           0              0.001           0.002             -0.011             -0.01            -0.013              0.01               0                0             -0.008            -0.018            -0.014
                           0.013             0.005           0.003              0.004             0.007             0.008             0.013            0.006            0.003             0.003             0.009             0.007
                      [-0.022,0.019]   [-0.007,0.011]   [-0.002,0.007]   [-0.013,-0.001]       [-0.021,0]     [-0.024,0.001]    [-0.017,0.023]   [-0.008,0.012]   [-0.004,0.006]       [-0.011,0]    [-0.034,-0.006]   [-0.027,-0.004]
 Gender                      0.01            0.012            0.011            -0.011            -0.058            -0.085                0             0.013            0.011            -0.011            -0.051            -0.082
                           0.049             0.037           0.009              0.011             0.026             0.019             0.042            0.037            0.009             0.011             0.028              0.02
                      [-0.081,0.073]   [-0.039,0.076]   [-0.008,0.023]    [-0.023,0.013]    [-0.086,0.001]   [-0.105,-0.043]     [-0.07,0.061]    [-0.04,0.076]   [-0.009,0.024]    [-0.023,0.013]     [-0.076,0.01]      [-0.1,-0.034]
 Age                         0.01              0             -0.004             0.007             0.028            -0.016              0.01           -0.001           -0.003             0.007             0.026            -0.017
                           0.009             0.006           0.005              0.006             0.011             0.009              0.01            0.006            0.005             0.006             0.012             0.009
                       [-0.009,0.02]   [-0.006,0.016]   [-0.012,0.004]    [-0.005,0.012]     [0.002,0.042]   [-0.032,-0.004]    [-0.001,0.029]   [-0.006,0.015]   [-0.011,0.004]    [-0.005,0.012]    [-0.002,0.039]   [-0.035,-0.006]



 Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the production function for health. The left panel considers investments as exogenous, while the right
panel allows investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square brackets.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       58
                           Table 16: Production functions for health with two self-productivity lags (full results)
                                                                                                                       Health t+1
                                                            Exogenous investments                                                                                     Endogenous   investments
                          Age 2            Age 3            Age 4          Age 5                Age 6            Age 7               Age 2            Age 3            Age 4             Age 5             Age 6             Age 7
 TFP                       0.1             0.394            0.298          0.256                0.076            0.376                -0.06           0.407            0.318             0.222              0.08              0.371
                          0.145            0.065            0.026           0.072               0.095            0.059               0.135             0.068           0.028              0.079            0.097              0.062
                      [-0.14,0.319]    [0.252,0.472]    [0.261,0.347]   [0.298,0.53]        [-0.022,0.28]    [0.306,0.486]      [-0.288,0.166]    [0.249,0.479]    [0.282,0.369]    [0.266,0.517]       [-0.003,0.3]     [0.301,0.498]
 Control function           -                -                -               -                   -                -                  -0.33           0.034             0.06               -0.1            0.204             -0.032
                                                                                                                                     0.116             0.07             0.038             0.048              0.12             0.099
                                                                                                                               [-0.473,-0.119]   [-0.112,0.101]     [0.002,0.12]     [-0.13,0.018]     [0.027,0.411]    [-0.125,0.184]
 AeioTu                     -0.03            0.004            0.009             0.001             0.028            0.074                0             0.003            0.009             0.001             0.014              0.076
                           0.061             0.042            0.006             0.007              0.03            0.029               0.05            0.042           0.006              0.007             0.03               0.03
                      [-0.104,0.086]   [-0.068,0.058]      [0.002,0.02]   [-0.008,0.014]    [-0.026,0.068]     [0.029,0.121]    [-0.076,0.076]   [-0.069,0.059]    [0.002,0.021]   [-0.008,0.014]     [-0.034,0.061]     [0.027,0.119]
 Cognitive t                -0.02             0.05             0.012           -0.092            -0.032            -0.092             -0.03           0.054             0.017            -0.113            0.012             -0.096
                           0.063             0.084            0.023             0.042             0.041             0.033            0.062             0.082           0.023              0.043            0.048              0.036
                      [-0.108,0.096]   [-0.069,0.212]    [-0.031,0.047]   [-0.22,-0.077]    [-0.091,0.042]   [-0.157,-0.045]    [-0.108,0.093]   [-0.062,0.203]   [-0.025,0.054]    [-0.24,-0.094]    [-0.054,0.095]   [-0.158,-0.044]
 Socio-emotional t          -0.01            0.067             0.025            0.038            -0.007             -0.01             -0.02           0.072             0.031            0.025              0.031            -0.012
                           0.098             0.051            0.012             0.014             0.039             0.029            0.087             0.049           0.014              0.017            0.045              0.028
                        [-0.1,0.225]    [0.002,0.168]     [0.005,0.041]    [0.008,0.056]    [-0.058,0.063]    [-0.068,0.032]      [-0.1,0.187]    [0.005,0.153]    [0.008,0.053]   [-0.004,0.054]      [-0.03,0.113]    [-0.063,0.028]
 Health t                    0.77            0.857             1.051            1.472             1.752             1.546              0.71            0.876             1.06              1.47             1.815             1.554
                           0.107             0.233            0.066             0.215             0.208             0.152            0.097             0.248           0.067              0.217            0.206               0.16
                       [0.533,0.872]    [0.381,1.119]     [0.955,1.175]    [0.639,1.327]      [1.278,1.97]      [1.26,1.744]     [0.495,0.822]    [0.334,1.132]    [0.965,1.186]    [0.654,1.335]      [1.323,2.006]     [1.226,1.743]
 Health t-1                    -             0.041            -0.117           -0.385            -0.698            -0.396                -              0.03           -0.113            -0.397            -0.766            -0.409
                                             0.144              0.06            0.223             0.252             0.176                             0.149            0.061             0.228             0.249              0.191
                                       [-0.178,0.272]   [-0.214,-0.021]   [-0.219,0.491]   [-0.976,-0.155]   [-0.626,-0.066]                     [-0.192,0.286]   [-0.208,-0.02]   [-0.229,0.488]    [-1.005,-0.193]   [-0.635,-0.018]
 Parental cognition           0             -0.006            -0.019            0.034             0.012            -0.063            -0.03            -0.003               0              0.007             0.082            -0.074
                           0.071             0.033            0.016              0.02             0.036            0.033            0.058             0.032             0.019            0.023              0.056             0.045
                      [-0.017,0.189]   [-0.026,0.079]    [-0.041,0.011]    [-0.015,0.05]    [-0.053,0.056]   [-0.116,-0.008]   [-0.062,0.095]    [-0.028,0.063]   [-0.027,0.034]   [-0.038,0.036]     [-0.015,0.172]    [-0.119,0.014]
 Investments                0.27            -0.009            0.047            -0.068            -0.027            0.015             0.37             -0.029           0.005             0.007             -0.174             0.036
                           0.073             0.053            0.019             0.028             0.037             0.038            0.083             0.081           0.034              0.042            0.109              0.081
                       [0.061,0.301]   [-0.069,0.095]      [0.01,0.073]   [-0.065,0.025]    [-0.089,0.028]    [-0.039,0.076]     [0.18,0.443]    [-0.119,0.141]   [-0.059,0.053]   [-0.035,0.107]    [-0.382,-0.037]    [-0.122,0.122]
 Number of children           0              0.001             0.002           -0.012                0             -0.009             0.01                0             0.001            -0.009            -0.011            -0.007
                           0.013             0.005            0.003             0.004             0.007             0.008            0.013             0.006           0.003              0.004            0.008              0.007
                      [-0.022,0.019]   [-0.008,0.011]    [-0.002,0.007]      [-0.013,0]     [-0.012,0.009]    [-0.019,0.005]   [-0.017,0.023]    [-0.007,0.012]   [-0.004,0.006]   [-0.011,0.001]        [-0.026,0]     [-0.021,0.002]
 Gender                     0.01             0.011             0.005           -0.012            -0.028            -0.055               0              0.012            0.005            -0.012            -0.015            -0.057
                           0.049             0.036            0.009             0.011             0.024             0.02            0.042             0.036             0.009            0.011              0.025              0.02
                      [-0.081,0.073]   [-0.042,0.075]    [-0.013,0.019]   [-0.024,0.013]    [-0.059,0.015]    [-0.084,-0.02]    [-0.07,0.061]    [-0.041,0.075]   [-0.014,0.019]   [-0.024,0.012]     [-0.051,0.031]    [-0.084,-0.02]
 Age                        0.01                0                 0             0.009             0.025            -0.028             0.01            -0.001               0               0.01             0.023            -0.028
                           0.009             0.006            0.005             0.006             0.011             0.009             0.01            0.006             0.005            0.006              0.012             0.009
                       [-0.009,0.02]   [-0.006,0.016]    [-0.008,0.009]   [-0.006,0.012]     [0.003,0.039]   [-0.039,-0.011]   [-0.001,0.029]    [-0.006,0.015]   [-0.008,0.009]   [-0.006,0.012]     [-0.003,0.038]    [-0.041,-0.01]



 Notes: This Table shows the estimates of the production function for health. The left panel considers investments as exogenous, while the right
panel allows investments to be endogenous. 90% confidence intervals based on 200 bootstrap replications are reported in square brackets.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       59
