                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      FENCING OFF SILICON VALLEY:
        CROSS-BORDER VENTURE CAPITAL AND TECHNOLOGY SPILLOVERS

                                          Ufuk Akcigit
                                          Sina T. Ates
                                          Josh Lerner
                                      Richard R. Townsend
                                        Yulia Zhestkova

                                       Working Paper 27828
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27828


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




^The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted
 as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of any other
 person associated with the Federal Reserve System. Harvard Business School's Division of
 Research provided financial support for this project. We thank Luting Chen, Patrick Clapp,
 Kathleen Ryan, James Zeitler, and Chris Zhao for excellent research assistance. We also thank
 James Mawson for corporate venture capital data. Akcigit gratefully acknowledges an NSF
Career Award #1654719. Lerner has received compensation from advising institutional investors
 in venture capital funds, venture capital groups, and governments designing policies relevant to
 venture capital. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
 authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ufuk Akcigit, Sina T. Ates, Josh Lerner, Richard R. Townsend, and Yulia Zhestkova.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fencing Off Silicon Valley: Cross-Border Venture Capital and Technology Spillovers
Ufuk Akcigit, Sina T. Ates, Josh Lerner, Richard R. Townsend, and Yulia Zhestkova
NBER Working Paper No. 27828
September 2020
JEL No. G24,O33,O34

                                          ABSTRACT

The treatment of foreign investors has been a contentious topic in U.S. entrepreneurship policy in
recent years. This paper examines foreign corporate investments in Silicon Valley from a
theoretical and empirical perspective. We model a setting where such funding may allow U.S.
entrepreneurs to pursue technologies that they could not otherwise, but may also lead to spillovers
to the overseas firm providing the financing and the nation where it is based. We show that
despite the benefits from such inbound investments for U.S. firms, it may be optimal for the U.S.
government to raise their costs to deter investments. Using as comprehensive as possible a sample
of investments by non-U.S. corporate investors in U.S. start-ups between 1976 and 2015, we find
evidence consistent with the presence of knowledge spill-overs to foreign investors.


Ufuk Akcigit                                     Richard R. Townsend
Department of Economics                          Rady School of Management
University of Chicago                            University of California at San Diego
1126 East 59th Street                            9500 Gilman Drive
Saieh Hall, Office 403                           La Jolla, CA 92093
Chicago, IL 60637                                and NBER
and NBER                                         rrtownsend@ucsd.edu
uakcigit@uchicago.edu
                                                 Yulia Zhestkova
Sina T. Ates                                     University of Chicago
Federal Reserve Board of Governors               1126 E 59th Street
20th & C St.                                     Chicago, IL 60637
Washington, DC 20551                             yzhestkova@uchicago.edu
sina.t.ates@frb.gov

Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu
1        Introduction

One of the most contentious issues in public policy regarding U.S. entrepreneurship over the past
four years has been the treatment of foreign investors. The military community (see, for instance,
Brown and Singh, 2018; U.S. House, Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, 2018; and U.S.
Senate, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, 2018) has highlighted the extent of
foreign venture investments in Silicon Valley, particularly from Chinese corporations, individuals,
and financial institutions. These analysts have also emphasized that these investments are often
in critical areas, such as artificial intelligence, fintech, robotics, and virtual reality, and expressed
the fear that these activities may be leading to technology flows that, while legal, are nonetheless
detrimental to U.S. economic and military interests. A particular concern is corporate venture
investments, since these investors well-suited to gain insights from their interactions with the com-
panies in their portfolios and to exploit these discoveries: Brown and Singh (2018) highlight, for
instance, Alibaba's and Enjoyor's investment in Magic Leap, Baidu's purchase of shares in Velo-
dyne, and Lenovo and Tencent's investments in Meta, companies that specialized in areas such as
augmented reality, active remote sensing, and artificial intelligence.

The primary policy response to these concerns has been to strengthen the mandate of the Committee
on Foreign Investment in the U.S. (CFIUS).1 President Gerald Ford established CFIUS by executive
order in 1975, an era of concern about Japanese purchases of American technology firms. The
mandate of the inter-agency working group was to review national security implications of foreign
investments in U.S. companies or operations. Its powers have been strengthened by a series of
laws, especially as the Exon-Florio Amendment in 1988, the Foreign Investment and National
Security Act of 2007, and the Foreign Investment Risk Modernization Act of 2018. The latter act
expanded the scope of CFIUS to include reviews of "non-controlling 'other investments' that afford
a foreign person an equity invest in and specified access to information. . . [about] certain critical
technologies." This legislation, and in particular the enabling regulations promulgated by the U.S.
Department of Treasury (2019), raised substantial concerns about their consequences among the
U.S. venture capital community (National Venture Capital Association, 2019). In response to this
debate and the new rules, anecdotal accounts suggest that investments in new ventures by Chinese-
based entities dropped sharply in recent years (Somerville, 2019). Similar controversies have played
out contemporaneously in, among other nations, Australia, Canada, Germany, and especially Israel
(Klein, 2018).

Despite the intense controversy and substantial stakes, the attention of economists to these issues
has been very modest. While academics have scrutinized numerous aspects of entrepreneurial
finance, such as the mixture of securities employed and the consequences of intensive monitoring
by investors, the impact of cross-border capital flows on technology transfer have received almost
no attention.2 Nor has this been a major focus of works on trade and innovation. In Shu and
    1
        This brief history is based primarily on Masters and McBride (2019).
    2
        Perhaps the most related (though still quite distant) papers in this literature are studies of the rationales of


                                                             2
Steinwender's (2019) review of the theoretical and empirical economics literature studying the link
between trade liberalization and firms' innovation-related outcomes, the authors examine four types
of trade shocks: import competition, export opportunities, access to foreign inputs (intermediate
goods or foreign labor), and foreign input competition. The authors highlight that there has been
virtually no literature looking the consequences of foreign competition for inputs such as R&D and
early-stage innovation.

This paper seeks to address this gap, examining foreign corporate investment in Silicon Valley from
a theoretical and empirical perspective. We begin with a stylized model of two countries. In each
there are a variety of industries, with one incumbent in each nation. These firms differ in their labor
productivity, and engage in Bertrand competition. In each nation, start-ups may appear that are
potentially more productive, in which case, they will replace the incumbent firm. To be successful,
however, these new firms must raise financing. In some cases, this financing may not be available
domestically.

One option that entrants face is to seek money from foreign corporate investors. Such financing
is "good news" for the entrant firm, as without financing it may not be able to put its superior
technology into practice. But it may also lead to spillovers to the overseas firm providing the
financing and the nation where it is based.

We posit that policymakers can raise the cost of foreign financing, whether through regulatory
barriers or taxes. If these costs are high enough, these costs will choke off venture investments
by foreign corporations. But start-ups with the potential to enhance domestic productivity may
consequentially languish unfunded.

We explore the dynamics of the equilibrium in this model to differences in the relative technological
positioning of the leader and follower incumbent firms. When the following incumbent is lagging
far behind, it is more likely to engage in cross-border investments. As the two firms become more
similar in their productivity, the probability of cross-border investment activity approaches zero.
The probability of investment is also a probability of the baseline level of spillovers that would have
occurred without any foreign venture investment. In particular, higher levels of baseline spillovers
reduce the gains from the investment and dampen the incentive of foreign incumbents to invest
abroad.

In a numerical example, we seek to explore the optimal response by policymakers. We depict
the government in the country with technological leadership as being able to raise the cost of
foreign corporate investments. We posit that in its deliberations, policymakers consider not only
the impact of these investments on the prospects for domestic firms, but also the potential for
an "arms race" if a foreign nation has the potential to acquire leadership in a critical technology.
The numerical examples suggest that the optimal cost will have an inverted U shape. As the
threat of military competition grows, the exercises suggests that the optimal cost imposed on
corporations to initiate venturing programs (Ma, 2020) and the propensity of venture-backed firms to enter into
strategic alliances with other portfolio firms (Gonz´
                                                    alez-Uribe, 2020; Lindsey, 2008).


                                                      3
foreign corporate venture investors should increase. At the same time, it should be noted that the
hypothesized cost of technological competition is very substantial, suggesting that such cost-raising
interventions should not be undertaken casually.
We then seek to explore these ideas empirically, to see whether we find evidence supportive of
the model. We begin acknowledging that this analysis by necessity presents correlations rather
than casual relationships. In particular, a number of papers have seeking to explore the impact of
venture investments on innovation have sought to exploit exogenous shifts, such as pension fund
reforms and changes in commercial flight schedules (Kortum and Lerner, 2000; Bernstein et al.,
2016). Identifying similar shifts in foreign corporate investments that are uncorrelated with key
dependent variables is exceedingly difficult. Thus, the results must be interpreted as more as
suggestive that the trade-offs illustrated in the model seem reasonable.
We build a data-set of venture investments that includes as comprehensive a sample of investments
by non-U.S. corporate investors in U.S. start-ups as possible. We identify transactions involving
344 companies from 32 distinct countries between 1976 and 2015. We identify the patents of the
start-up firms, as well as patenting by the corporate investors specifically and by residents of the
countries in which they are based.
In our initial analysis, we examine patenting activity before and after the corporate investment. We
show that around the time of investment, patent applications by entities in the country in which
the investor is based increase in the patent classes that the start-up focuses on. In a follow-on
analysis, we examine citations by organizations in that nation to the patents of U.S. start-ups.
These also increase in the relevant patent classes after a foreign corporate investment. The results
suggest that there are benefits from these investments in the form of knowledge spillovers.
The results are also heterogeneous in a way consistent with the theoretical framework. In par-
ticular, these effects are stronger in patent classes that are more basic, where catching up to the
technological frontier without the benefit of the insights gained through a corporate venture invest-
ment is likely to be harder. Similarly, knowledge flows appear to be greater in classes that contain
patents subject to a secrecy order from the Federal government. These patterns of patenting and
citations suggest the real knowledge transfer is taking place.
We then look at where these investments are more frequent. We show these investments are more
common when the nation in which the corporation is based is further behind the United States in
the given technology, measured in various ways. The investments appear to be responses to address
this technology gap, at least partially.
We finally turn to examine the consequences of these investments. While we cannot demonstrate
causality, more foreign investments in firms specializing in a technology class are associated with
more subsequent patenting by U.S. start-ups. These results are at least consistent with the hy-
pothesized benefits of such investments in easing capital constraints.
Taken together, these empirical results seem to suggest the reasonableness of many of the assump-
tions behind the model. Corporate venture investments may allow companies and nations to catch

                                                   4
up, at least when they are not too far behind the technological leaders.

There has been a long literature on endogenous growth and innovation, dating back to Romer (1990)
and Aghion and Howitt (1992). This framework we use in our analysis is most closely related to
Aghion et al. (2001, 2005), in that it builds on the step-by-step innovation framework pioneered by
these studies. An important feature of this framework is that it captures the relationship between
competition among firms and their productive investments--firms' innovation incentives depend on
how close they are to their rivals in the technological race. The novel feature of our framework is that
it focuses on the foreign VC investment and explicitly models the interplay between technological
differences across competing firms and their incentives to invest abroad.

The plan of this paper is as follows. Part 2 lays out the theory, and the third part the numerical
example. Part 4 describes the construction of the data set. The fifth part presents the results. The
final section concludes the paper.



2     Model with Endogenous Markups and Innovation

Our model economy consists of two countries and a unit measure of industries, with the final product
of each industry being consumed by representative households. Each industry is characterized by
a duopoly, with one firm from each country. The industry output is a CES combination of the two
varieties they produce, which can be traded freely across borders. The firms produce essentially the
same variety but with different labor productivities and compete `
                                                                 a la Bertrand. As a result, both
producers are actively producing imperfectly substitutable goods, and their profits, markups, and
market shares are a function of their productivities relative to the one of their competitors. These
relative productivity levels also evolve endogenously, as new start-ups from each country replace
domestic incumbent firms with new, more efficient production techniques--reflecting the essence of
"step-by-step innovations" framework.

In each country, new start-ups are born from business ideas that arrive at an exogenous rate. Each
idea needs financing for it to be implemented and give rise to a new firm. To capture the essence
of cross-border corporate venture capital financing, we allow incumbent firms to invest in the ideas
generated in the other country by paying a one-time investment cost. Upon a successful investment,
the investor obtains a claim on a portion of the profits that is generated by the new foreign startup,
which enters the same industry replacing the foreign incumbent. Moreover, the domestic incumbent
derives knowledge spillovers from the new idea implemented by the emerging start-up. This new
channel of foreign investment will be the focus of our analysis.


2.1   Fundamentals

Final-Good Production.         We consider an open economy model with two countries c  {A, B }
in continuous time. In each country, there is a representative final-good producer that combines

                                                   5
the industrial goods into a final output, which is used for consumption and to pay thecross-border
investment cost, whose price is the numeraire. The final-good production technology is the following
CES composite of industrial goods:
                                                                1
                                              ln Yc (t) =           ln Qcj (t) dj,                                    (1)
                                                            0

where Qcj (t) is the output of industry j  [0, 1] used in country c.


Industry Production. In each industry, two firms--one from each country--produce imper-
fectly substitutable varieties to meet the demand from both countries. Let Qcj (t) denote the output
                                                          (t)} denote the amounts produced by the
of industry j consumed in country c, and let {qcj (t) , qcj
firm in country c operating in industry j to meet domestic and foreign demand, respectively--i.e.,
  (t) is exported. Without loss of generality, the industry output Q
qcj                                                                  Aj (t) supplied to country A is
then determined by the following CES technology:

                                                                                     1/
                                        QAj (t) = qAj (t) + qBj
                                                             
                                                                (t)                       .                           (2)

QBj (t) is defined reciprocally. In this expression,   (0, 1] denotes the degree of substitution
between the two varieties. As we shall see later, this parameter determines the distribution of
production shares and thereby profits across firms in a given industry.

Each firm produces its variety with a linear technology using labor:

                                                qcj (t) = zcj (t) lcj (t) ,                                           (3)

where lcj denotes the amount of labor used in production by firm (c, j ), and zcj denotes the firm's
productivity level.3 Accordingly, the marginal cost of production of firm (c, j ) is given by wt /zcj .
The firm with a higher productivity than its competitor has an edge over its rival in terms of
marginal cost, which in equilibrium will allow this firm to capture a larger share of the industry
revenue. Therefore, we will call the firm (c, j ) the leader if zcj > z-cj and the follower if zcj < z-cj .
We say that firms in industry j are in neck-and-neck position if they produce with the same
productivity.

The productivity with which the country c produces increases, proportionally with step size  > 1,
when there is a new business idea introduced by a domestic entrant (a new "start-up"). When
there is entry during the time interval t, the new start-up replaces existing domestic incumbent,
and the productivity level with which the new incumbent (c, j ) operates becomes

                                                zcj (t + t) = zcj (t) .
  3
      To save on wording, we use the pair (c, j ) to define that a firm is from country c operating in industry j .




                                                             6
Let us denote the number of technology rungs, i.e., productivity improvements, that took place in
country c in industry j up to time t by ncj (t)  N, and assume that the initial value of zcj (0)
is normalized to 1. Then, the productivity level of firm (c, j ) operating at time t is given by
zcj (t) = ncj (t) . Moreover, the relative productivity of (c, j ) compared with its rival (-c, j ) is given
by
                                 zcj (t)   ncj (t)
                                         = n (t) = ncj (t)-n-cj (t)  mcj (t) ,
                                z-cj (t)   -cj
where we denote the productivity difference or the technology gap between firm (c, j ) and its rival
(-c, j ) by mcj .4 We say that firm (c, j ) is an m-step ahead leader (m-step behind follower) if
mcj > 0 (mcj < 0). The technology gap is a sufficient statistic to describe firm-specific payoffs;
therefore, we will drop the industry subscript j and use mc (t). We assume that in our economy
                            ¯ on the number of technology gaps, such that |m|  m
there is a high upper bound m                                                  ¯ . This
assumption ensures the finiteness of the state space. Finally, we denote the productivity gap at the
industry level by mj (t)  {0, ..., m
                                   ¯ }, for which mj (t) = |mc (t)| holds true.


Start-ups and Foreign Investment. Incumbent firms remain in the business until a domestic
entrant (a new "start-up") replaces them. In both countries, business ideas arrive to outside
entrepreneurs at an exogenous Poisson arrival rate c . An entrepreneur can immediately implement
his or her idea to replace the domestic incumbent if that incumbent produces with an inferior
technology in its industry. But if an entrepreneur creates an idea that can potentially replace a
domestic incumbent that is a leader in its industry, we assume that the entrepreneur needs outside
financing to turn thes business idea to a viable business venture.5 In this case, there are three
                ¯, the entrepreneur finds financing domestically,6 (ii) if not, there may be foreign
cases: (i) with p
investment in the idea from the foreign (laggard) incumbent in that industry, (iii) if none of the
first two options happens, there is no financing and the idea gets lost unimplemented.7

Foreign investment into an idea happens as follows. When there is a business idea born in the
country whose firm is leading in the particular industry, the laggard incumbent receives the chance
                                                                                                           iid
to invest to that idea with 1 - p
                                ¯. The option arrives with an associated investment cost   [0, u ].
If the cost is low enough and the firm chooses to invest in the foreign startup, the productivity gap
between the new leader and the laggard incumbent opens up, as the foreign start-up improves on the
productivity of the leader that it replaces. However, although the laggard incumbent falls further
behind, it starts benefiting from knowledge spillovers generated by the foreign incumbent, in which
it has invested. These spillovers arrive at an exogenous Poisson arrival rate  . With probability ,
they improve the productivity of the laggard firm to the level at which the leader produces (quick
     4
      Notice that mcj = -m-cj .
     5
      Conversely, we assume that business ideas that are to replace the laggard firm, which has inferior technology in
the industry, can be funded by the entrepreneur's own means.
    6
      For now, we take this parameter to be common across countries. We consider relaxing this assumption in later
iterations.
    7
      Probability p
                  ¯ is exogenously determined and is assumed to be common across countries and industries.



                                                          7
catch-up), and with probability 1 - , the improvement is only one step (slow catch-up).8 As such,
the two firms become neck-and-neck with probability , and the follower closes the gap by only
one step with probability 1 - . The laggard firm retains this position until it catches up with
the leader or until a new foreign start-up enters the business without receiving foreign investment.
Finally, the investing firm earns a  share of the profits the new investee start-up generates.

Figure 1 summarizes the possibilities associated with entry in a given industry in the leader country
(US in this case). With p
                        ¯, the idea is financed domestically. With the complementary probability,
two cases may arise: (i) if the foreign investment cost is low enough (following cutoff rule in
equilibrium), the idea is funded by the rival incumbent from the foreign country, (ii) otherwise,
the business idea is not implemented. In this setting, we will interpret u --the upper bound of
the domain of the random investment cost--as a policy parameter of the country that is leading
in the industry. By increasing the upper bound u , the government can decrease the possibility
of the rival paying a relatively low investment cost to avoid potential spillovers to the rival in the
future. However, this would come at the expense of reducing the probability of foreign investment
and thus domestic entry, limiting potential productivity improvements.


Preferences.       Finally, we describe the household side. Each country admits a representative
household with the following log-utility:
                                                  
                                   Uc (t) =                ~- t
                                                     exp - t                    ~ dt
                                                                          ln Cc t  ~                             (4)
                                              t

where Cc (t) is consumption in country c, and  > 0 is the subjective rate of time preference. The
budget constraint of the representative household is given as

                               rAc (t) + Lw(t) = Pc (t)Cc (t) + A c (t) + Gc (t),                                (5)

where r is the fixed worldwide return to asset holdings, L is the labor supplied inelastically by the
household (normalized to unity in each country) and is mobile across countries, w(t) is the common
international wage rate, Pc (t) is the aggregate price of consumption (equal to the numeraire), and
Gc (t) is the lump sum transfers distributed or taxes levied by the government. Finally, households
own all firms in their country, and, under the assumption of full home bias, the asset-market clearing
condition implies
                                                            1
                                               Act =            Vcj (t) dj,
                                                        0

with Vcj (t) denoting the value of the domestic incumbent firm industry j at time t.
   8
    In the economy, there will be a basic level of knowledge spillover, which occurs at the Poisson arrival rate 0 ,
generating the same probability of quick catch-up. However, we will assume that foreign investment unlocks spillovers
at rate  > 0 .




                                                            8
2.2      Equilibrium

Production and Profits. As a result of the final-good technology, each representative final-good
producer spends the same amount on each product j in their consumption basket. Therefore, the
total expenditure from country c on the varieties from any industry j satisfies the budget constraint

                       pcj (t)qcj (t) + p        
                                         -cj (t)q-cj (t) = Pc (t)Yc (t) = Yc (t)      j  [0, 1] ,

where the second equality holds because of the numeraire assumption. Here, {pcj , qcj } denote the
price and the quantity demanded of the domestic good, and {p       
                                                            -cj , q-cj } denote the same values
for the good imported from the other country (denoted by -c).9
                                                      } subject to the budget constraint, and the
The household chooses optimal variety bundle {qcj , q- cj
resulting demand functions the two firms face are

                                          1                                              1
                                         -1
                                        pcj                                    p-cj
                                                                                         -1
                                                                
                      qcj =                           Yc   and q- cj =                             Yc .   (6)
                                                 -1                                           -1
                              pcj-1
                                       + p-cj
                                                                          -1
                                                                         pcj + p-cj


In our analysis, we abstract from trade frictions; therefore, in equilibrium, pcj = pcj holds for any
industry--i.e., a firm charges the same price on goods it sells domestically or abroad (as shown
                       = q (Y /Y ) holds in equilibrium.
below). As a result, qcj  cj -c c

The total industry revenue from selling to market (country) c is by definition Yc . We denote the
share of this revenue accruing to the domestic firm by scj  pcj qcj /Yc and to the exporting foreign
firm by s                            
         -cj  p-cj q-cj /Yc . scj + s-cj = 1 holds true. The resulting expressions for the shares are

                                                                                         
                                          -1
                                         pcj                                   p-cj
                                                                                         -1

                         scj =                             and s-cj =                              .      (7)
                                                     -1                                       -1
                                 pcj-1
                                         +    p-cj
                                                                          -1
                                                                         pcj   +    p-cj


The optimal prices follow as

                                    1 - scj w(t)                        1 - s -cj w (t)
                           pcj =                           and p-cj =                   .                 (8)
                                     (1 - scj ) zcj                      1 - s    z-cj
                                                                                   -cj


Notice that the optimal pricing rule is an endogenous markup over the marginal cost of production.
Finally, firms' profits follow as

                            scj (1 - )                                   s-cj (1 - )
                    cj =               Yc  cj Yc           and   -cj =
                                                                                         
                                                                                     Yc  cj Yc .          (9)
                             1 - scj                                      1 - s  -cj


As a consequence of unit-elastic demand at the industry level, equations (7)-(9) define firms' revenue
  9
      We drop the time notation unless it creates confusion.


                                                             9
shares and thus profits from market c as an implicit function of their relative marginal costs and thus
their relative productivities--i.e., scj = g (mcj ) and s-cj = g (-mcj ). Therefore, cj = f (g (mcj ))
and -cj = f (g (-mcj )). Moreover, notice that the revenue share of firm (c, j ) when serving the
domestic or foreign market is the same, thus scj = scj , as both markets differ only in terms of total
household expenditure. The payoff-relevant state--the relative productivity levels of firms in the
specific industry--is the same when producing for any market. Consequently, the total profits firm
(c, j ) generates from serving both markets is

                            cj = cj +              
                                      cj = cj Yc + cj Y-c = cj (Yc + Y-c ) .


Notice that in equilibrium, given that there are no trade frictions, both countries produce the
same amount of final good, i.e., Y (t)  Yc (t) = Y-c (t) (however, consumption levels could differ
depending on the total income the country generates). Therefore, we have cj = 2cj Y .


Dynamic Decisions and Firm Values. Let dj denote the state of an industry with regards to
flow of knowledge spillovers. The value dj = 1 implies that the latest entrant in the country of the
leading firm has received foreign financing, and there is intra-industry spillovers flowing at rate  .
This is the high-spillover state. dj = 0 denotes the other case, in which spillovers occur only at the
basic rate 0 <  . This defines a low-spillover state. Then, we denote the stock market value of a
firm whose productivity is mc  {-m,                                             d .10 Without
                                        ¯ } steps away from its competitor by Vcm
                                 ¯ ..., m
loss of generality, we first define the value for a firm from A that is an m-step leader (mA > 0) in
a low-spillover industry (d = 0):

             0         0 (t) = Am (t) -  0 (t)V 0 (t) + B V 0
                (t) - V                                                0
           rVAm         Am              Am     Am          Am-1 (t) - VAm (t)

                                           0          0                  0           0
                                    +  0  VA 0 (t) - VAm (t) + 0 (1 - ) VAm-1 (t) - VAm (t) .                      (10)


                                                                    (·) denoting the change in
Let us dissect equation (10). The left-hand side is the flow value V
value because of changes in aggregate variables (recall the definition of profits). The first item on
the right-hand side is the total profits this firm earns from serving domestic and export markets.
The second item is the result of domestic entry; when there is a domestic start-up with necessary
financing, the incumbent exits the business, destroying the value of the incumbent firm. The
probability of a successful firm depends on foreign investment decision of foreign firms and is an
endogenous object defined by the function m (t). The third term defines the change in value as a
result of foreign entry, which happens at rate B . The foreign entrant, which lags in productivity
(mB < 0), closes the productivity gap by one step, causing the leading firm lose its advantage by
  10
     Notice that we drop the subscript j as the identity of the industry does not matter once the pay-off relevant state
variable, the productivity gap between the firms in that industry, and the rate of spillovers are known. Moreover,
in a symmetric setting, we could also drop the country subscript c. However, we keep it as differential government
policies between two countries can render different values for two firms facing the same productivity gap with the
rival.


                                                          10
one step. Finally, knowledge spillovers occur with Poisson arrival rate 0 , which helps the follower
close the productivity gap fully with probability --bringing the leader down to the neck-and-neck
stage--or incrementally with probability 1 - .

Next, we define the value for firm (A, m), an m-step follower (mA < 0) in a low-spillover industry:

            0
          rVAm        Am
               (t) - V 0                   0
                         (t) = Am (t) - A VAm           0
                                              (t) + 0  VA          0
                                                          0 (t) - VAm (t)

                                           0            0
                                +  (1 - ) VAm -1 (t) - VAm (t)

                                       0            0
                                + B p
                                    ¯ VAm -1 (t) - VAm (t)
                                                      u
                                                                1            0
                                + B (1 - p
                                         ¯)               max  VAm -1 (t) - VAm (t) - Y (t) d,      (11)
                                                  0       {0,1}


where Y (t) denotes final output. Again, the first two components on the right-hand side are profits
and the effect and domestic entry. The third and fourth ones are the gain from spillovers, helping
the follower reduce or fully close the productivity gap with the leader. The expression on the third
line denotes the effect of foreign entry funded by domestic firms, which happens with probability
p
¯. In that case, the productivity gap opens up one more step, and the follower firm's position
deteriorates to m - 1.

The last line in equation (11) describes what happens when the firm gets the chance to invest in
the foreign start-up, which happens with the complementary probability 1 - p
                                                                           ¯. An opportunity
                                                                                     iid
to undertake a foreign investment comes with a random investment cost   [0, u ] (the total
investment cost is assumed to scale with aggregate output since firm values grow over time). The
firm decides to pay this cost ( = 1) only if it is less than the incremental gain in firm value from this
investment. This gain reflects the benefit of transitioning to a high-spillover state--with spillovers
from the funded foreign start-up occurring at rate  > 0 and additional profits received--although
successful foreign entry due to cross-border investment still causes the productivity gap to increase
one more step. If the firm forgoes the chance to invest, its state remain the same, as the foreign
business idea is not implemented due to lack of funding.

With a constant gain from cross-border investment and a linear cost of so doing, the optimal
decision follows a cutoff rule. The firm optimally invests in the foreign start-up when the random
cost  is less than the cutoff value
                                                   1            0
                                                  VAm -1 (t) - VAm (t)
                                    ¯0 (m, t) =
                                                                       .
                                                          Y (t)

The cutoff depends on the productivity (dis)advantage, which determines the magnitude of the
value increase from the investment. Consequently, the optimal decision rule is

                                                      1 if     <¯0 (m)
                                   0 (m) =                               .                          (12)
                                                      0 if     >¯0 (m)


                                                          11
We now turn to the value functions of firms in high-spillover state. Starting with an m-step ahead
leader, we have

            1
          rVAm        Am
               (t) - V 1                      1
                         (t) = (1 - )Am (t) - Am     1
                                                 (t)VAm          1
                                                        (t) + B VAm           1
                                                                    -1 (t) - VAm (t)

                                     0          1                 1           1
                                 +  VA 0 (t) - VAm (t) +  (1 - ) VAm-1 (t) - VAm (t) .            (13)

This value function is similar to the value of a leader in state dj = 0, except that the firm sends a
 fraction of its profits. The value of an m-step behind follower is again similarly defined as in the
low-spillover state:

            1
          rVAm        1 (t) = Am (t) + Bm (t) - A V 1 (t)
               (t) - V Am                          Am

                                            0          1          1           1
                                 +  (1 - ) VA 0 (t) - VAm (t) +  VAm-1 (t) - VAm (t)

                                        0            1
                                 + B p
                                     ¯ VAm -1 (t) - VAm (t)
                                                      u
                                                                1            1
                                 + B (1 - p
                                          ¯)              max  VAm -1 (t) - VAm (t) - Y (t) d,    (14)
                                                  0       {0,1}


Notice that this laggard receives the  fraction of the profits the industry leader generates, as
that leader firm had emerged upon investment from the follower. Moreover, the follower in this
high-spillover state could still optimally decide to re-invest into a new potential idea to get a claim
on the larger profits the emerging startup would generate. The cutoff rule is defined reciprocally
as in equation 12:
                                                      1 if     <¯1 (m)
                                    0 (m) =                              ,                        (15)
                                                      0 if     >¯1 (m)
with the cutoff value given as
                                                   1            1
                                                  VAm -1 (t) - VAm (t)
                                    ¯1 (m, t) =
                                                                       .
                                                          Y (t)

Finally, the value of a firm in neck-and-neck stage is given by

                    0
                  rVA         0                     0           0          0
                      0 (t) - VA0 (t) = A0 (t) - A VA0 (t) + B VA-1 (t) - VA0 (t) .               (16)

Notice that spillovers are not relevant for a firm that is in neck-and-neck stage. As a result, it
follows that Vc1     0
               0 = Vc0 .

To render the dynamic problem stationary, we will use normalized value functions. We define
v (t) = V (t)/CW (t). Then, the normalized flow value of a generic firm is defined as

                  rV (t) - V (t)
                                 = rv (t) - (v
                                              (t) + g (t)v (t)) = (r - g (t)) v (t) - v
                                                                                       (t),       (17)
                      Y (t)


                                                          12
               (t)/Y (t) denotes the growth rate of global consumption. Then, the normalized
where g (t) = Y
value function of a leader firm in a low-spillover state becomes, for example:

                 0          0                 0      0           0            0
    (r - g (t)) vAm (t) - v
                           Am (t) = 2Am (t) - Am (t)vAm (t) + B vAm -1 (t) - vAm (t)

                                         0          0                  0           0
                                  + 0  v A 0 (t) - vAm (t) + 0 (1 - ) vAm-1 (t) - vAm (t) .     (18)

Other normalized value functions are defined accordingly.


Balanced Growth Path. A balanced growth path (BGP) equilibrium is defined as an equilib-
rium where all aggregate variables and value functions grow at the same rate g in both counties.
Looking first at the value of a leader firm in a low-spillover state, we obtain

                             0          0   0       0        0
                   (r - g ) vAm = 2Am - Am vAm + B vAm -1 - vAm

                                         0      0              0       0
                                  + 0  v A 0 - vAm + 0 (1 - ) vAm-1 - vAm .                     (19)

Notice that v
             (t) = 0, as the normalized functions become stationary in BGP. Again, the other value
functions are defined accordingly.

The cost cutoffs for investment decisions remain constant over time in BGP. In particular, the
cutoff for an m-step follower in low-spillover state becomes

                                          ¯0 (m) = vAm
                                                    1        0
                                                       -1 - vAm ,


and the value of the firm simplifies to

                   0             0         0      0             0       0
         (r - g ) vAm = 2Am - A vAm +  0  vA 0 - vAm +  (1 - ) vAm-1 - vAm

                              0        0
                       + B p
                           ¯ vAm -1 - vAm


                       + B (1 - p
                                ¯) Pr  < ¯0 (m) ×           1
                                                           vAm       0
                                                               -1 - vAm - E | < ¯0 (m)

                                0         0      0             0       0
                     = 2Am - A vAm + 0  v A 0 - vAm +  (1 - ) vAm-1 - vAm

                                                                              2
                                                                1        0
                              0        0
                                                               vAm -1 - vAm
                       + B p
                           ¯ vAm -1 - vAm + B (1 - p
                                                   ¯)                             .             (20)
                                                                    u

Notice that a higher maximum value for the investment cost (u ) decreases the probability that
the firm receives a low enough cost, thereby depressing the last component and thus the value of
the firm. The expression for the m-step follower in high-spillover state is defined correspondingly.




                                                    13
2.3   Model Discussion

The model presents a rich setting that captures the essence of foreign VC investment highlighted in
the empirical section. A foreign VC investment in the model benefits the investor in both pecuniary
(additional profits) and non-pecuniary (spillovers) ways. Reflecting on the findings presented in
Section 5.1, investing firms increase their patenting (measured by higher  ) after an investment.

The model also provides a useful framework to investigate the determinants of the foreign VC
investment, discussed in Section 5.2. A key pillar of the model is the technology gaps between
firms, which evolve endogenously. We can analyze how investment decisions of foreign entities
change depending on where they stand in the technological race relative to their competitors. The
exact nature of this relationship is a quantitative question that we illustrate numerically below.

Finally, the model allows us to reflect on the relationship between the basicness of a patent class
and the presence of foreign VC investment. In the numerical examples below, we will define more
basic classes as those with a lower baseline level of spillovers, building on the idea that it is harder
to learn from the advanced basic research done by the frontier firms.

In addition to the positive analysis, we use this framework for policy analysis. In particular, we will
analyze whether the United States would benefit from allowing a higher or lower level of foreign VC
investment. The policy parameter that is determined by the domestic policymakers is the range of
the investment cost that the foreign entities face. We will discuss the effect of the changes in this
parameter at the end of the numerical analysis below.


3     Numerical Example

To illustrate the key implications of our framework, we now present a what we term a numerical
example. Our goal is not to provide a detailed calibration of the model economy, but to highlight
its qualitative implications for cross-border financing and optimal policy under plausible parameter
values.


3.1   Parameters

In the numerical exercise, we assume symmetric countries except for their entry rates. As such,
we have a set of ten parameters to be determined, out of which four (, , p
                                                                         ¯, u ) are determined
internally. Given our focus on foreign VC investment and subsequent innovative activity of firms,
we discipline most parameters using statistics from our sample used in the empirical section and
the USPTO patent database. The parameter values are summarized in Table 1.

External Parameters. We set the subjective rate of time preference of the household (rho) in a way
that the real rate of return on risk-free assets r mimics the average long-run U.S. interest rate of
around 6 percent (Cooley and Prescott, 1995; Akcigit et al., 2016). The household has a logarithmic

                                                  14
utility function, and, under the assumption that assets are owned domestically, the Euler equation
resulting from her optimization problem implies  = r - g . With the calibrated growth rate g (see
Table 2),  = 0.03 implies an interest rate consistent with the data.

We pick the idea generation intensities (c ) in a proportion that reflects the ratio of the total number
of (citation-weighted) patents registered by foreign and U.S. entities in the USPTO database over
the period 1976­2015. Over this period, 63 percent of the weighted patents are registered by U.S.
entities.11

Next, we need to determine the spillover rates before and after the investment event in the model
(0 ,  ). To accomplish that, we rely on information that we obtain from our empirical exercises
regarding the increase in the patenting activity of investing firms (the treated group in our exercises)
upon investment. Specifically, the average number of annual patent applications submitted by a
foreign country in a given patent class in which it invests in the five years before the investment
event is 50.6 for the treated group.12 The increase in the five years after the investment (relative
to the increase in the control group) is 4.7. We thus use 50 and 55 as the reference values and,
accordingly, assume a 10 percent increase in the spillover rate after the investment ( ) relative to the
baseline spillover rate (0 ). Pinning down the level of the baseline spillover rate--equivalently, the
scale of these parameters--is harder as measuring international spillovers empirically is notoriously
difficult. We set 0 = 0.5 (thus  = 0.55) in line with the range of estimates found in prominent
work on international R&D and knowledge spillovers.13 This value for the baseline spillover rate
                                                      -1
implies that new technologies arrive every two years (0  ). We will present a sensitivity analysis
of our results to faster or lower arrival of new technologies.

The share of drastic innovations in spillovers (), which determines the rate of quick catch-up, is set
to reflect the share of foreign patents whose citation count is in the top five percent of the citation
distribution among all foreign patents. This ratio gives the rate with which foreign firms produce
their most influential patents, and we assume that, in our model, the share of drastic improvements
in spillovers that foreign firms receive captures the share of top five percent of mostly cited foreign
patents. We assume that a VC-backed start-up and the investor share the profits generated by
the start-up equally. Unfortunately, we do not have a convincing empirical measure of the profit
  11
     We normalize the total number of ideas generated in a unit time interval to 1.
  12
     In Table 3, we report "annual patent applications in class by foreign country" as 13.04. The reason why the
numbers quoted here are much larger than the averages in Table 3 is because the places where foreign CVCs invest
are non-random. That is, they tend to invest in places where they are already patenting more than average.
  13
     Most relevant for our purposes, Peri (2005) estimates that the elasticity of patenting in a region to foreign R&D
varies between 50-80 percent of its elasticity to domestic patenting. In addition, he estimates that about 50 percent
of knowledge originating from most innovative regions (the technology frontier) reach beyond domestic borders, with
close to 40 percent reaching farthest destinations (beyond 10,000 km). Our choice for 0 is in line with these findings.
Another branch in this literature measures R&D spillovers estimating the elasticity of TFP growth to foreign R&D.
In a seminal paper analyzing a set of 22 industrialized economies, Coe and Helpman (1995) find that the elasticity
of TFP to foreign R&D is between 0.25 and 1.5 times its elasticity to domestic R&D. Using a different estimation
method, Keller (2002) argues for a much stronger contribution of foreign R&D to domestic TFP. Finally, using a
cost function estimation approach for OECD countries, Nadiri and Kim (1996) estimate that the gain from R&D in
terms of cost reduction abroad is between 40 to 65 percent of the domestic gain. Again, our choice of 0 , which can
also be translated into the gain from foreign innovation relative to the source, falls to the middle of this range.


                                                          15
share held by the investor. Therefore, we assume an equal split in the baseline numerical example
and provide a sensitivity analysis around this value. Finally, we allow for a maximum gap of 30
such that m
          ¯ = 30. This is a conveniently high limit, allowing leader firms maintain a non-trivial
technological gap with the followers. This property ensures a smooth distribution of firms across
technology gaps.14

Internal Parameters. We determine the rest of the parameters using a simulated method of moments
(SMM) approach. These parameters do not correspond to a directly observable counterpart in
the data. However, these parameters determine certain moments in the model, whose empirical
counterparts we can back up from the data. As such, the calibration based on SMM pins down
these parameters by minimizing the difference between a set of model­based moments--which are
informative about the parameters to be calibrated--and their empirical counterparts (we detail
the set of calibrated moments below). The procedure minimizes the following objective function,
which maps the set of four parameters to the distance between the model­based moments and the
empirical targets (see Acemoglu et al., 2018):

                                        N
                                              |model(k ) - data(k )|
                                           1                            ,
                                       k=1 2
                                             |model(k )| +12 |data(k )|

where k denotes each moments and N = 4 is the number of targets. The bottom panel of Table 1
presents the parameters that jointly minimize this objective function.

The four targets we include in the internal calibration are (i) the average growth rate of the U.S.
real GDP (in 2012 dollars), (ii) the average ratio of non-financial corporate profits to U.S. GDP,
(iii) the share of VC-backed firms among U.S. firms that have registered a patent, and (iv) the
fraction of foreign VC investment in total VC investment received by patenting firms observed in
our sample.15 To be precise, the denominator in the last ratio reflects the investment in domestic
startups by both foreign and domestic investors, which happens at rate p
                                                                       ¯. These targets inform the
calibration as follows. In this model, as is the case in standard quality ladder models of endogenous
growth, the growth rate is determined by the arrival rate of innovations and the step size. Given
other parameters, the first target helps determine the step size, and the calibrated value 1.058
is in the ballpark of estimates found in the literature (Acemoglu and Akcigit, 2012). The profit
share of GDP disciplines the CES parameter, which determines the substitutability between two
varieties in an industry and, thus, the profits firms can charge given their technological advancement
relative to their rival. The final two parameters determine VC investment by domestic and foreign
investors. The investment cost upper bound (u ), which is symmetric for both countries in the
calibrated model, affects the average cost a firm faces when investing in foreign firms and, hence,
the prevalence of foreign VC investment in the host country.16 To discipline this parameter, we
  14
     For comparison, Akcigit et al. (2018) takes m
                                                 ¯ = 16 in their baseline quantitative exercises.
  15
     The first two targets are computed from the BEA database, and the other two are computed from the micro-level
data described in the next section. All targets are averages between 1976 and 2015.
  16
     See Section 3.3 for how we model the change in this cost parameter as a result of country-specific policy.



                                                       16
include in the set of targets the fraction of foreign VC investment in total VC investment received
by patenting firms in the United States observed in our sample, which is about 63 percent. Finally,
given u --the parameter that shapes foreign VC investment in the model--the share of patenting
U.S. firms that receive any VC investment (domestic or foreign) informs the calibration about the
                                             p). The value of this moment in our data sample is
probability of receiving domestic financing (¯
about 25 percent. The calibrated model hits these moments exactly, as summarized in Table 2.


3.2    Taking Stock

Now we turn to the illustration of the key implications of the model. First, the model captures
the insight from Section 5.1--the patenting intensity of foreign firms rises after VC investment--
because the rate of spillover arrival increases with investment ( > 0 ). Next, Figure 2a shows the
investment decisions of firms from country B --which denotes the foreign countries--in the balanced
growth path. The red line represents the probability for laggards in low-spillover state and the blue
dashed line pertains to the laggards in high-spillover state. For the sake of clarity, we present the
figure for laggards up to 15 steps (leaders do not engage in VC activity). The figure reveals that for
a laggard firm, the cross-border investment probability increases with the technological distance to
the frontier. This result conforms with the empirical findings discussed in Section 5.2--countries
make VC investments more in sectors where they have less knowledge relative to the United States.
That lower relative knowledge is captured by wider technology gaps in our model. As foreign firms
fall too far behind, their willingness to invest in the domestic startups reaches the maximum. The
investment probability quickly declines as the gap between foreign and domestic firms diminishes
and reaches zero when they are close to neck-and-neck.

Next we illustrate the relationship between basicness of a sector and the foreign VC investment
probability. To that end, we consider an economy that is different from the calibrated one only in
a lower baseline spillover rate (0 < 0 ). The lower intensity of the baseline spillover reflects the
idea that it is more difficult to learn from the advanced basic research conducted at the frontier.
Figure 2b exhibits the excess investment probability in that hypothetical economy relative to the
baseline. The model implies that the probability of investment is higher in the economy with more
basic sectors, especially for laggards that are relatively closer to the frontier, in accordance with
the empirical findings. For other laggards that are farther away, the investment intensity is slightly
lower, although those firms invest almost at the maximum rate as in the calibrated version.

In sum, the numerical analysis based on a calibrated version of the model highlights the ability
of the model to replicate key empirical relationships. Now, we turn to the welfare implications of
policies.




                                                 17
3.3    The Social Planner's Problem, Policy Analysis, and Welfare

In this section, we discuss how the welfare of the representative U.S. consumer responds to changes
in the rate of foreign VC penetration. In the numerical example above, we assumed a symmetric
structure in the cost of VC investment abroad for both countries. Now, we assume that the United
States has a policy tool to affect the upper bound of the cost distribution, from which the foreign
investors draw their cost. Precisely,
                                                uB
                                                  = (1 +  )u ,

where the  denotes the policy parameter, with which the United States can affect the foreign
investors' cost parameter proportionally. In the calibrated economy,  is equal to zero.

In addition, we assume that foreign CVC investment poses an economic security threat to the
recipient country that is increasing in the number of foreign investors.17 We model this security
cost in terms of domestic output using the following functional form:

                                            sec
                                           Cc   (-c1 ) = 0 2
                                                           -c1 Yc ,


where -c1 denotes the measure of foreign firms that have investment in domestic firms. Notice
that this aggregate cost is an externality of firm decisions, which firms do not take into account in
the decentralized equilibrium.

In the following numerical exercise, we set the scale parameter 0 = 2.80. It is not straightforward
to discipline the cost of the security threat posed by foreign firms that learn about the technology of
the U.S. firms. However, historical records provide some idea about how much of national income
policy makers would be willing to forgo to protect against a large threat from an adversary. In
particular, we set 0 as to match the post-war spending of the U.S. military on the research and
development of nuclear bombs to deter the use of such arms by other countries. Detailed estimates
from Schwartz (1998) suggest that the United States spent about 1.6 percent of its GDP in the five
decades after the WWII on the development and deployment of nuclear armaments. We present
additional results based on a broader cost measure including other costs such as maintenance, which
take the cost to about 2.3 percent of GDP.18

Figure 3a shows the change in consumption-equivalent welfare as  moves from -0.70 to 0.70. As the
figure shows, the U.S. consumers benefit from a lower  --i.e., from higher penetration by foreign
investors (Figure 3b). The optimal   suggests a 52 percent reduction in the barriers to foreign
investment. This implication stems mainly from the higher growth rate achieved in the economy
(Figure 3c) as a result of a higher rate of idea implementation supported by foreign investment.
However, decreasing  further to encourage more CVC investments is suboptimal, because the
security cost rises steeply, as shown in Figure 3d.
  17
    These threats are acknowledged even by those outside the defense community: see, for instance, National Venture
Capital Association (NVCA) Comments on Proposed Rule RIN 1505-AC64.
 18
    See Table 1 in Schwartz (1998).


                                                        18
Alternatively, when the security is assumed to be higher--2.3 percent of GDP, implying 0 = 3.85--
the optimal policy is to impose higher barriers to foreign CVC investment (Figure 4a). We contend
that this fraction of GDP serves as a quite high bar for the security threat that may be posed
by foreign firms learning about the U.S. technology and using it to develop potentially harmful
technologies. Therefore, the results suggest that, for most estimates, the policy prescription appears
to be to attract more foreign investment into U.S. firms.

Sensitivity. Finally, we discuss briefly the sensitivity of our main policy results to some of the
externally calibrated parameters. As mentioned in Section 3.1, our data do not allow us to directly
pin down the baseline spillover rate (0 ) and the share of profits a VC investor retains from the
startup in which it invests (). To assess the sensitivity of our results to these parameters, we
consider a higher and lower value for each of these parameters and rerun the internal calibration
exercise keeping other externally calibrated parameters fixed.19 In each exercise, we also reset 0 to
a value that keeps the security-cost-to-GDP ratio in the model at the benchmark empirical value,
so that we can compare the results in these alternative economies to our benchmark findings shown
in Figure 3. Finally, we calculate the optimal policy (  ) in each alternative economy.

Table 3 shows the optimal government policy (  ) in each of the four alternative economies. For
both 0 and , we experiment with values {0.30, 0.70} (recall that the calibrated value for both
parameters is 0.50). The results suggest that the optimal level of  varies in a wide range in the
alternative economies and declines notably (relative to the benchmark economy) especially when
the spillovers are happening at a high rate. However, our main finding that the optimal policy
reduces the barriers to foreign investment remains intact in all alternative economies we consider.
Therefore, we conclude that our benchmark finding is robust to a wide range of values for the
specific parameters and the alternative calibrations considered here.



4        Data

In this section we describe the data that we use for our empirical analysis.


4.1      Sources

We obtain data on VC investments from the Refinitiv VentureXpert database (formerly called
Thomson Reuters VentureXpert and Venture Economics). VentureXpert, along with Dow Jones'
VentureSource (formerly VentureOne), are the venture capital databases with the most extensive
historical data. We use VentureXpert because it starts earlier (1962 vs. 1994) and has been found
    19
     In the exercises where we change 0 , we keep the proportional increase in the spillover rate after investment
from 0 to  unchanged at the benchmark level dictated by our empirical findings. In all exercises, the alternative
calibration hits the targets listed in Table 2 almost exactly, if not perfectly.




                                                       19
to be more comprehensive in terms of investment coverage, which is important for our purposes.20
VentureXpert records detailed information about the dates of venture financing rounds, the VC
firms and companies involved, the amounts invested by each party, and the ultimate company
outcome.

To examine whether there is evidence of international technology spillovers stemming from cross-
border investments, we need to identify investments in U.S. startups by foreign entities, particularly
corporations. While VentureXpert does provide information on both headquarters location and
corporate affiliation status of each venture group, this information is somewhat unreliable. At
times, a VC firm that appears to be independent is really an investment arm of a corporation,
which may be based in a different country. Therefore, using a number of sources, we compiled a list
of all known corporate VC (CVC) firms, along with the countries that their ultimate parents are
located in.21 Using this list, we correct the corporate affiliation status and headquarters location of
mis-categorized VC firms in the VentureXpert data. Our results remain broadly similar, however,
using the raw data.

We measure knowledge flows across countries using patent data from the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office (USPTO). While we only observe patents granted in the U.S., foreign innovators typically
apply for patents in the U.S. on important inventions because it is a large market. The USPTO
data cover all utility patents granted from 1976 to 2017.22 Among other things, the data provide
information on the date a patent was applied for and ultimately granted, as well as its detailed
technology class. If a patent was assigned to one or more companies ("assignees"), the data also
provide information on assignee name(s)/location(s). We match the patent data with VentureXpert
using standardized company and location names along with the company's founding date and the
date of the assignee's first patent application. The details of the matching procedure are provided
in the Appendix. Using this matching procedure, we find that approximately 30% of VC-backed
companies in VentureXpert are also patent assignees in the USPTO data. Approximately 50% of
VC financing rounds in VentureXpert are associated with companies that are also patent assignees
in the USPTO data.
   20
      Maats et al. (2011) and Kaplan et al. (2002) compare VentureXpert against samples of financing rounds obtained
from original sources and find reasonably good coverage, albeit with concerns about valuation and outcome data
(neither of which will be used here).
   21
      Sources used include lists of CVCs compiled by Global Corporate Venturing, CB Insights, and Crunchbase. We
also manually check (using media reports and filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission) for any
corporate affiliations among seemingly independent foreign investors in U.S. startups. For example, we identify "Blue
Pool Capital" as being affiliated with Alibaba due to the fact that it invests the personal wealth of multiple Alibaba
founders (e.g., Jack Ma and Joe Tsai).
   22
      In addition to utility patents, there are three other minor patent categories: design, reissue, and plant patents.
Following the literature, we focus only on utility patents, which represent approximately 99% of all awards (Jaffe and
Trajtenberg (2002)).




                                                          20
4.2     Key Variables and Summary Statistics

Here we describe a few key variables used in our analysis. Table 4 provides summary statistics for
these variables.


4.2.1    Patents

Most of our analysis is at the country×technology-class×year level. We define a patent's country
based on the country of its assignee. Patents with assignees from multiple countries are attributed
equally to all of the countries of the assignees. We define a patent's class based on its primary
(three-digit) USPC classification.23 Finally, we follow the economics of innovation literature and
define a patent's year based on the year it was applied for. (A patent's application date is closer to
the date the underlying innovation was actually discovered: there can be a significant gap between
the two dates.) It should be noted that, while we focus on patent application dates, all of our patent-
based measures are based only on eventually-granted patents, as application data for non-granted
patents are only available starting in 2001.


4.2.2    Patent citations to U.S. startups

Patent citations are important in patent filings since they serve as "property markers" delineating
the scope of the granted claims. Hall et al. (2005) illustrate that citations are a good measure
of innovation quality and economic importance. Specifically, they find that an extra citation per
patent boosts a firm's market value by 3%. Moreover, Kogan et al. (2017) show that the stock
market reaction to a patent approval is a strong predictor of the number of future citations a patent
receives. We use patent citations to U.S. startups as a way of measuring knowledge flows from U.S.
startups to foreign entities. Citations are measured through the end of 2017.


4.2.3    Investment in U.S. startups

One of the key variables in our analysis is CVC investments from a foreign country, f , into U.S.
startups innovating in a technology class, c, in a given year, t. We construct several measures to
capture this. First, we construct binary investment variables. In this case, we define a country f
to have invested in a technology class c in a given year t if a corporation based in f invested in
a U.S. startup that had a majority or mode of its patent applications in class c as of the time of
investment in year t. For some analyses we also use a different version of this variable based on
whether the startup had any patent applications in class c, rather than requiring a majority.
  23
    The U.S. switched to classifying patents using the Combined Patent Classification (CPC) scheme at the start
of 2015. After that point, we impute USPC classes based on the modal USPC class associated with a CPC class
historically. The historical data linking USPC classes to CPC classes come from the CPC Master Classification File
for U.S. Patent Grants, maintained by the USPTO.



                                                       21
We also construct continuous investment variables as well, which represent the amount that cor-
porations based in country f invested in a technology class c in a given year t. However, for this
measure, in cases where a startup patents across different classes, we need to allocate different por-
tions of an investment to different technology classes. In such cases, we allocate a given investment
to different classes based on how frequently the startup applied for patents in each class prior to
year t. For example, suppose that 20% of the patents a startup applied for prior to year t were in
class A, 30% were in class B, and 50% were in class C. If a CVC invested $100M in that startup in
year t, we would define it as having invested $20M in class A, 30M in class B, and 50M in class C.
We then sum up all such investments by corporations in the same country and year to construct
our continuous measure of investment.


4.2.4   Basicness of a technology class

In order to distinguish basic innovation fields from applied innovation fields, we construct a measure
of how fundamental each technology class is. We assume that patents that cite academic publi-
cations rely on scientific discoveries inside academia and thus are more likely to contain complex
and fundamental innovations than patents that do not cite academic articles. The data on the
citations to academic publications come from Marx (2019) and include patents submitted between
1926-2018.

For each technology class and year, we define a measure of the class's "basicness" as the number
of backward citations to academic publications in the annual patent applications belonging to the
class. For each year, we then divide the primary USPC classes into two groups: patent classes with
number of backward academic citations above the year-specific median and the other not. We call
the former "High Basicness" patent classes and the lower "Low Basicness" patent classes.


4.2.5   Secrecy of a technology class

To determine whether patents were subject to secrecy orders, we follow the methodology suggested
by de Rassenfosse et al. (2020). From the USPTO's PAIR database (https://www.uspto.gov/learning-
and-resources/electronic-data-products/patent-examination-research-dataset-public-pair), we focus
on patent applications where secrecy orders were imposed (code L132) between 1951 and 2016. We
match the applications to the resulting patents through the ApplicationID-PublicationID bridge
file in PatentsView.

We then divide the primary USPC classes into two year-specific groups: one with any patents
subject to secrecy orders with a primary assignment to that class in a given year and the other not.
On average, there are 26 patent classes in the secrecy category and 403 in the non-secrecy one.




                                                 22
4.2.6      Knowledge of a foreign country relative to the U.S.

Another variable we are interested in the knowledge of foreign country f relative to the U.S. in a
given technology class c and year t. We define this variable as:

                                                      CummulativeP atentsf,c,t
          RelativeKnowledgef,c,t =                                                              ,
                                           CummulativeP atentsf,c,t + CummulativeP atentsus,c,t

where CummulativeP atentsf,c,t represents the total number of (eventually-granted) patent appli-
cations in class c that entities in country f applied for prior to year t; and CummulativeP atentsus,c,t
represents the same but for the U.S.


4.3      Trends in foreign investment in U.S. startups

Our merged sample includes 524 corporations with affiliated VC units. Of these, 344 (66%) are
non-U.S. based and are domiciled in 32 distinct foreign countries. Most of our analysis focuses
on these 344 foreign corporate VC investors. These firms invested in 3,560 different U.S. startups
during our sample period, among which 1,842 startups were granted at least one patent. The top
six home countries of the foreign corporations that invested in U.S. startups from 1976 to 2015
by capital invested are Japan (24.0%), Germany (11.5%), Switzerland (9.4%), United Kingdom
(6.9%), France (6.9%), and Singapore (6.7%).24

To put our analysis in a context, we start by documenting time trends in cross-border CVC invest-
ment in the U.S. Figure 5, Panel A, shows the share of aggregate VC investment in the U.S. made
by foreign CVCs over time. Over the past several decades, foreign corporations have substantially
increased their presence in venture capital markets. The share of VC investments in the U.S. made
by foreign corporations increased from approximately 0.18% in 1979 to 3.78% by 2015. The last
two panels show that this increase was both due to an increase in CVC investment more generally
during that time period (Panel B) and also an increase in the share of CVC investment made by
foreign corporations (Panel C).

Next, we examine the association between foreign CVC investment and startup activity in the
U.S. Since young, innovative firms are often financially constrained, we might expect that foreign
CVC investment would help stimulate startup activity. Figure 6 shows the evolution of foreign
CVC investment together with the number of U.S. startups raising a round of VC funding. Panel
A shows the number of startups raising their first round of VC funding, while Panel B shows
the number of startups raising any round. As can be seen, these two variables are significantly
positively correlated (Panel A:  =.76; Panel B:  =.89). While we are cautious not to impose a
causal interpretation on Figure 6, the positive correlation between foreign CVC investment and U.S.
startup activity suggests that foreign CVCs do not merely crowd out other VC investors without
 24
      If we compiles a similar list of the top foreign countries from 1976 to 2017, China is in second place with 10.7%.




                                                           23
increasing startup activity; rather, foreign CVCs appear to facilitate the funding of startups that
would not have otherwise been funded.


5     Empirical Analysis

5.1     Do foreign entities learn from investments in U.S. startups?

If foreign entities learn from investing in U.S. startups, we might expect to see such learning reflected
in the nature of their own innovative activities subsequent to investing. Therefore, we begin our
empirical analyses by looking at how a foreign country's innovation in a technology class evolves
after entities there invest in a U.S. startup specializing in that technology. Of course, it is difficult
to estimate the effect of a country's cross-border startup investments on its own innovation, as
cross-border startup investments are endogenous. Technology classes may experience shocks that
lead foreign entities to try to innovate in those classes and also to invest in U.S. startups innovating
in those classes. Thus, even absent any learning, there may be a positive correlation between a
country's cross-border investments in a technology class and its own innovations in that class.
To address such endogeneity concerns as well as possible, we use a difference-in-difference approach.
Specifically, we focus on the period surrounding a country's first investment in a U.S. startup
specializing in a particular technology class. We then compare changes in the country's innovative
activity in that "treated" technology class to changes in the same country's innovative activity
in a similar "control" technology class, in which it never invested. We match treated classes to
control classes based on two measures of innovative activity in a class during the five years prior
to investment: (1) the country's annual number of (eventually-granted) patent applications in the
class, and (2) the country's annual number of citations to U.S. startup patents in the class.
More precisely, for each treated class and potential control class, we compute the squared percentage
difference in the number of patents the country produced in the two classes during the five years
prior to investment. We also do the same with the number of citation the country made to U.S.
startup patents in the two classes. Finally, we take the square-root of each of these and average
them. Our matched control class is the one that minimizes this measure of distance between the
two classes.


5.1.1    Changes in patenting activity around U.S. startup investments

Having defined treatment and control classes for a country, we begin by estimating difference-in-
difference specifications of the form:

                   P atentsf ct = 1 P ostf ct + 2 P ostf ct × T reatedf c + f c + t + f cd ,         (21)

where observations are a the country×patent-class×year level, with f indexing countries, c indexing
technology classes, and t indexing years. We limit the sample to treated classes in the five years

                                                      24
before and after the country's first investment in a U.S. startup specializing in the class, and
matched control classes for the same country and time period. In columns 1 and 2, we classify a
country as having invested in a U.S. startup specializing in a technology class if a corporation based
in that country invested in a U.S. startup that had a majority of its (eventually granted) patent
applications in that class at the time of investment. The variable P ostf ct is an indicator equal
to one in the year of investment and the five subsequent years; T reatedf c is an indicator variable
equal to one if the technology class c was one that the country f made a U.S. startup investment
in; f c is a country-class pair fixed effect; and t is a year fixed effect. Standard errors are clustered
at the treatment-control pair level.

The results are reported in Table 5. In column 1, we find that after investing in a U.S. startup
specializing in particular technology class, countries increase their patenting in that class by 5.6
patents per year, with the estimated effect significant at the 5% level. This represents a 43.1%
increase in patenting relative to the 13 patents per year that the average foreign country produces
in a technology class prior to investing in it through a startup.25 Thus, the magnitudes are econom-
ically significant as well. In column 2, we control for year fixed effects to address the possibility that
patenting in treatment classes increases relative to control classes in certain years. Our estimates
remain similar with these controls. Finally, in columns 3­4, we repeat the analysis of columns 1­2,
but now classify a country as having invested in a U.S. startup specializing in a technology class if
a corporation based in that country invested in a U.S. startup that had the mode of its (eventually
granted) patent applications in that class at the time of investment. As can be seen, the results
remain similar. Overall, the results in Table 5 suggest that other countries do learn from U.S.
startup investments, and that their own patenting begins to resemble that of the startups they
invest in.

It is also interesting to examine the dynamics of a country's patenting in more detail over the years
surrounding a U.S. startup investment. Therefore, rather than pooling together the years before
investment and the years after investment, we examine each of these years separately. Specifically,
we estimate event-study specifications of the form:


                                  5
                P atentsf ct =          1{EventY earf ct =  }+
                                 =-5
                               5
                                                                                                              (22)
                                     1{EventY earf ct =  } × T reatedf c + f c + t + f ct
                              =-5

Equation 22 is the same as equation 21, but with the variable P ostf ct replaced by a series of
EventY earf ct indicator variables. We define event years based on the year of investment (i.e.,
EventY earf ct = 0 corresponds to the year of investment) and the omitted year is the year prior
  25
     The average number of annual patent applications submitted by a foreign country in a given patent class before
the investment event is 50.63 if we focus on the treated group only.


                                                        25
to investment (EventY earf ct = -1). Table 6 and Figure 7 show the results, with Figure 7 corre-
sponding to column (1) of Table 6. The coefficients on the interaction terms represent the difference
between the treatment and control classes in each year. From these coefficients, we see that in the
five years leading up to a U.S. startup investment, there is no significant difference between a
country's patenting in the treatment and control classes. In each of the five years following the
investment, however, patenting in the treatment class is significantly higher than patenting in the
control class. Again, these patterns are consistent with the idea that countries learn from U.S.
startup investments.


5.1.2    Changes in citation patterns around U.S. startup investments

If a country learns about a technology class from investing in a U.S. startup specializing in that
class, we might not only expect the country to patent in that class more, but also to cite the patents
of U.S. startups in that class more. To investigate this, we repeat the analysis of Section 5.1.1, but
with the the outcome being citations to U.S. startup patents in a technology class.

Table 7, which is modeled on Table 5, shows our difference-in-difference analysis with this outcome
variable. We find that countries increase their citations to U.S. startup patents in a technology
class after investing in a U.S. startup that innovates in that class. In terms of magnitudes, Table 7
(column 1) implies that after investing, countries increase their relevant citations by 0.35 citation
per year. This represents a 14.7% increase in citations relative to the 2.38 citations per year that
the average foreign country makes to U.S. startup patents in a class prior to investing. Table 8 and
Figure 8 show the full dynamics.


5.2     Heterogeneity in learning from investments in U.S. startups

As posited in the theoretical analysis, the basicness of a sector may also affect the extent of learning
from a foreign VC investment. In particular, fields that are closer to the academic frontier may
have a lower level of baseline spillovers: it is harder to learn from the advanced basic research
conducted at the frontier. In these settings, corporate venture investments may be more critical to
learning.

To test this idea, we divide the patent classes into those where the classes are above and below
the median when it comes to basicness, defined (as explained in Section 4.2.4) by the backward
academic citations from the patents in the class. In Table 9, we repeat several key regressions in
Tables 5 and 7, now dividing observations by whether they are of patents with a primary assignment
to a patent class above or below the median on the basicness measure.

As Panel A reports, the interactions between the post and treated dummies are significantly positive
for patent classes with high basicness. For classes with low basicness, however, the coefficients
on the interaction term are insignificant and even negative. Note that the difference in these


                                                  26
coefficients between high- and low-basic groups is statistically significant. When we look at citations
in Panel B, we also find larger effects in patent classes with high basicness. While the differences
in theses coefficients are not quite statistically significant, the point estimates go in the direction
we would expect.26 Overall, these results are consistent with the idea that there is greater cross-
border learning in more basic technologies. We repeat this analysis dividing patent classes into two
groups by patent originality score as defined in Hall et al. (2001). The findings also suggest that
foreign investments in patent classes with high originality generate more learning spillovers than
investments in those with low patent originality.27

Similar to how we might expect greater learning in more basic patent classes, we might also expect
greater learning in more secretive classes. As described in Section 4.2.5, we define a patent class to
be secretive if it contains any patents subject to secrecy orders by the U.S. government. We then
repeat the analysis of Table 9, splitting our sample by patent class secrecy rather than basicness.
The results are shown in Table 10. Consistent with what we would expect, we estimate stronger
effects in secretive patent classes. As in the case of basicness, the difference in the estimated
effects across the two types of patent classes is statistically significant for patent applications, but
not quite statistically significant for citations. Overall, however, our findings suggest that foreign
countries learn more from investments in U.S. startups when those startups specialize in more
secretive technologies.


5.3    Determinants of cross-border startup investments

Thus far, we have shown evidence that foreign entities learn from investments in U.S. startups.
Next, we explore the determinants of such cross-border startup investments. In particular, we
investigate whether foreign entities tend to make these investments in technological areas where
their country is behind relative to the U.S., or in areas where their country already has expertise
relative to the U.S. To answer this question, we estimate equations of the form:

                    Investmentf ct = 0 + RelativeKnowledgef ct + f + t + f ct ,                                  (23)

where Investmentf ct is a measure of country f 's investments in U.S. startups specializing in class
c during year t; RelativeKnowlegef ct is defined in Section 4.2.6 and represents the knowledge of
country f relative to the U.S. in class c as of year t; f represents country fixed effects; and t
represents year fixed effects.

The results are shown in Table 11. In columns 1­2, we measure investment simply as an indicator
variable equal to one if, during year t, corporations in country f made any investments in U.S.
startups that had patent applications in class c. We find that as a country increases its knowledge
  26
     Another proxy of class basicness that we looked into is presence of top-100 universities among the assignees of
patents in the class. The results are qualitatively similar if we focus on observations before 1995, but are ambiguous
for more recent observations.
  27
     Results are available upon request.


                                                         27
of a technology class relative to the U.S., it also becomes less likely to invest in a U.S. startups
innovating in that technology class.

In columns 3­4, we measure investment continuously, as the share of country f 's investments in
U.S. startups during year t that was allocated to class c. We find qualitatively similar results using
this continuous measure as well. Overall, these results suggest that foreign countries tend to invest
in U.S. startups that specialize in technological areas where they are behind the U.S.


5.4   Do U.S. startups benefit from foreign investments?

Most of our analysis thus far has focused on whether foreign corporations benefit from U.S. startup
investments. We conclude by investigating whether there is any evidence that U.S. startups benefit
from these investments as well. In particular, foreign investments may give financially constrained
startups access to funding that they would not have been able to obtain otherwise. This funding
may, in turn, allow them to innovate. We therefore examine whether there is a positive correlation
between foreign investments in a technology class through U.S. startups and patenting in that
technology class by U.S. startups.

Specifically, we estimate equations of the form:


                 StartupActivityc,t =  + F oreignInvestmentc,t + c + t + ct ,                    (24)

where StartupActivityc,t is one of four proxies for startup activity delineated below; ForeignInvest-
ment c,t represents the log of total foreign CVC investments in U.S. startups in class c in year t ; c
represents class fixed effects; and t represents year fixed effects.

The results are shown in Table 12. We look at four metrics for U.S. startup activity. In columns
1­2, we look at the logarithm of the number of U.S. startups patenting in class c in year t, looking
first at new patenting entities only and then all startups. In columns 3­4, we look at the logarithm
of the count of U.S. startup patents in class c in year t. We again examine first patents by new
patenting entities only and then those by all startups. As can be seen, we do find a positive
correlation between foreign investments in a technology class through U.S. startups and patenting
in that technology class by U.S. startups. While this evidence is open to alternative interpretations,
it is at least suggestive of benefits to U.S. startups from foreign CVC investments.



6     Conclusion

This paper is motivated by the intense policy interest in foreign investments in startup firms,
especially in Silicon Valley. Despite the intense real world interest, the topic has attracted very
little attention in the economics literature.



                                                   28
This paper examines foreign corporate investments in Silicon Valley from a theoretical and empir-
ical perspective. We model a stylized setting where startups can attract investment from foreign
corporations, which may allow young firms to pursue innovations for which would not otherwise
be able to raise financing. But these investments may lead to knowledge spillovers to the foreign
corporation and its nation. We present empirical results consistent with the presence of knowledge
spillovers to foreign investors.

The analysis raises a number of avenues for future research. One possibility would be to enrich the
depiction of the relationship between the foreign corporation and the startup. For instance, the
involvement of the corporation with the startup might bring additional benefits, such as enhanced
market access to the foreign nation for the startup and deeper ties to the startup's venture backers
for the corporation. The easing of the startups' financial constraints through foreign corporate
investments might be more or less consequential, depending on the boom/bust cycle of venture
financing. More generally, policies to modulate foreign corporate investments must be seen in the
context of a broader array of policies affecting the competitive positioning of startups. Examples
include limits on the ability of domestic firms to readily hire foreign engineers to provisions in
patent policy that favor or harm young firms.




                                                29
References
Acemoglu, D. and Akcigit, U. (2012). Intellectual property rights policy, competition and innova-
  tion. Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(1):1­42.

Acemoglu, D., Akcigit, U., Alp, H., Bloom, N., and Kerr, W. (2018). Innovation, reallocation, and
  growth. American Economic Review, 108(11):3450­3491.

Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., and Howitt, P. (2005). Competition and innova-
  tion: An inverted-U relationship. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2):701­728.

Aghion, P., Harris, C., Howitt, P., and Vickers, J. (2001). Competition, imitation and growth with
  step-by-step innovation. Review of Economic Studies, 68(3):467­492.

Aghion, P. and Howitt, P. (1992). A model of growth through creative destruction. Econometrica,
  60(2):323­352.

Akcigit, U., Ates, S. T., and Impullitti, G. (2018). Innovation and trade policy in a globalized
  world. Unpublished working paper.

Akcigit, U., Celik, M. A., and Greenwood, J. (2016). Buy, keep or sell: Economic growth and the
  market for ideas. Econometrica, 84(3):943­984.

Bernstein, S., Giroud, X., and Townsend, R. R. (2016). The impact of venture capital monitoring.
  Journal of Finance, 71(4):1591­1622.

Brown, M. and Singh, P. (2018). China's technology transfer strategy: How Chinese investments in
  emerging technology enable a strategic competitor to access the crown jewels of U.S. innovation.
  Defense Innovation Unit Experimental.

Coe, D. T. and Helpman, E. (1995). International R&D spillovers. European Economic Review,
  39(5):859­887.

Cooley, T. F. and Prescott, E. C. (1995). Economic growth and business cycles. In Cooley, T. F.,
  editor, Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, pages 1­38. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
  NJ.

de Rassenfosse, G., Pellegrino, G., and Raiteri, E. (2020). Do patents enable disclosure? Evidence
  from the Invention Secrecy Act. Unpublished working paper.

Gonz´
    alez-Uribe, J. (2020). Exchanges of innovation resources inside venture capital portfolios.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 135(1):144­168.

Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A., and Trajtenberg, M. (2005). Market value and patent citations. RAND
  Journal of Economics, 36(1):16­38.



                                               30
Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. B., and Trajtenberg, M. (2001). The NBER patent citation data file: Lessons,
  insights and methodological tools. Unpublished working paper.

Jaffe, A. B. and Trajtenberg, M. (2002). Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A Window on the
  Knowledge Economy. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Kaplan, S. N., Str¨
                  omberg, P., and Sensoy, B. A. (2002). How well do venture capital databases
  reflect actual investments? Unpublished working paper.

Keller, W. (2002). Geographic localization of international technology diffusion. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 92(1):120­142.

Klein, J. X. (2018). It's not just the US: Around the world, doors are shutting on Chinese invest-
  ment. Southern China Morning Post, September 13.

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Seru, A., and Stoffman, N. (2017). Technological innovation, resource
  allocation, and growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2):665­712.

Kortum, S. and Lerner, J. (2000). Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation.
  RAND Journal of Economics, 31(4):674­692.

Lindsey, L. (2008). Blurring firm boundaries: The role of venture capital in strategic alliances.
  Journal of Finance, 63(3):1137­1168.

Ma, S. (2020). The life cycle of corporate venture capital. Review of Financial Studies, 33(1):358­
  394.

Maats, F., Metrick, A., Yasuda, A., Hinkes, B., and Vershovski, S. (2011). On the consistency and
  reliability of venture capital databases. Unpublished working paper.

Marx, M. (2019). Patent citations to science. Unpublished working paper.

Masters, J. and McBride, J. (2019). Foreign Investment and U.S. National Security. Council on
  Foreign Relations, New York, NY.

Nadiri, M. I. and Kim, S. (1996). International R&D spillovers, trade and productivity in major
  OECD countries. Unpublished working paper.

National Venture Capital Association (2019). National Venture Capital Association comments on
  proposed rule RIN 1505-AC64, provisions pertaining to certain investments in the United States
  by foreign persons (84 FR 50174) (`part 800 rules') and proposed rule RIN 1505-AC63, provisions
  pertaining to certain transactions by foreign persons involving real estate in the United States
  (84 FR 50214) (`part 802 rules').

Peri, G. (2005). Determinants of knowledge flows and their effect on innovation. Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 87(2):308­322.

                                                31
Romer, P. M. (1990). Endogenous technological change. Journal of Political Economy, 98(5, Part
  2):S71­S102.

Schwartz, S. I. (1998). Atomic Audit: the Costs and Consequences of US Nuclear Weapons since
  1940. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC.

Shu, P. and Steinwender, C. (2019). The impact of trade liberalization on firm productivity and
  innovation. Innovation Policy and the Economy, 19(1):39­68.

Somerville, H. (2019). Chinese tech investors flee Silicon Valley as Trump tightens scrutiny. Reuters,
  January 7.

U.S. House, Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (2018). China's threat to American
  government and private sector research and innovation. 115th Congress.

U.S. Senate, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs (2018). CFIUS reform: Admin-
  istration perspectives on the essential elements. 115th Congress.

U.S. Treasury, Office of Investment Security (2019). Provisions pertaining to certain investments
  in the United States by foreign persons.




                                                 32
level at which the leader produces (quick catch-up), and with probability 1 - , the improvement
is only one step (slow catch-up).6 As such, the two firms become neck-and-neck with probability
, and the follower closes the gap by only one step with probability 1 - . The laggard firm
retains this position until it catches up with the leader or until a new foreign start-up enters the
business without receiving foreign investment. Finally, the investing firm earns a  share of the
                                             Figure 1
profits the new investee start-up generates.
                               Entry and Cross-border Investment


                                                       US
                                                   investment
                                        ¯
                                        p
             A : US idea
             generation                                                              Foreign
                                      1-                                           investment
                                            p
                                            ¯                              ¯
                                                                           
                                                                       
                                                      no US
                                                   investment
                                                                      >
                                                                          ¯
                                                                          
                                                                                   no entry /
                                                                                 implementation

                              Figure 1: Entry and Cross-border Investment

    Figure 1 summarizes the possibilities associated with entry in a given industry in the leader
                                    ¯ , the idea is financed domestically. With the complementary
country (US in this case). With 1 - p
probability, two cases may arise: (i) if the foreign investment cost is low enough (following cutoff
rule in equilibrium), the idea is funded by the rival incumbent from the foreign country, (ii)
otherwise, the business idea is not implemented. In this setting, we will interpret u --the upper
bound of the domain of the random investment cost--as the policy parameter of a country that
is leading in the industry. By increasing the upper bound u , the government can decrease the
possibility of the rival paying a relatively low investment cost to avoid potential spillovers to
the rival in the future. However, this would come at the expense of lower probability of foreign
investment and thus domestic entry, limiting potential productivity improvements.

    6 In the economy, there will be a basic level of knowledge spillover, which occurs at the Poisson arrival rate

0 , generating the same probability of quick catch-up. However, we will assume that foreign investment unlocks
spillovers at rate  > 0 .


                                                        4




                                                       33
                                                                                       Figure 2
                                                       Cross-border Investment Decisions and the Effect of Basicness
     Panel A shows the investment probabilities conditional on the chance to do so arises (the idea abroad is not domestically funded). Panel B compares two hypothetical economies:
     the calibrated one and another one, in which the baseline spillover rate is lower (operating in more basic sectors). The line shows the difference in the investment probabilities
     (conditional on idea arrival) of laggards that did not invest in VC yet in both economies. Positive values mean the probability is higher in the alternative economy.

               (a) Investment Probability (conditional on idea arrival)                       (b) Difference in Investment Probability (higher basicness)



                                           0.6
                                                              not invested firms
                                                              already invested firms                 0.25
                                           0.5
                  Investment Probability




                                                                                                       0.2
                                           0.4
                                                                                                     0.15
                                           0.3
                                                                                                       0.1
                                           0.2
                                                                                                     0.05
34




                                           0.1                                                           0

                                            0                                                       -0.05
                                            -10   -5             0                5                     -10                  -5                  0                  5
                                                       Gaps                                                                          Gaps
                                                                                       Figure 3
                                                                                     Policy Analysis

                                                        (a) CEQ welfare                                                                      (b) Foreign CVC share
Cons-eqv. welfare change, percent




                                                                                                Foreign CVC investment, percent
                                          1

                                         0.5                                                                                      80

                                          0

                                    -0.5                                                                                          70

                                          -1

                                    -1.5                                                                                          60

                                          -2
                                                                                                                                  50
                                               -60   -40    -20   0      20   40      60                                               -60   -40    -20   0     20    40     60
                                                     US policy, percent change ( )                                                           US policy, percent change ( )


                                                            (c) Growth                                                                          (d) Security cost



                                         3.2
                                                                                                Security cost, percent




                                                                                                                                  15
                  Growth rate, percent




                                         3.1

                                                                                                                                  10
                                           3


                                         2.9                                                                                       5



                                               -60    -40   -20    0     20   40      60                                               -60   -40    -20   0     20    40     60
                                                     US policy, percent change ( )                                                           US policy, percent change ( )




                                                                                           35
                                                                                 Figure 4
                                                             Policy Analysis with Higher Cost of Security

                                                   (a) CEQ welfare                                                                     (b) Foreign CVC share
Cons-eqv. welfare change, percent




                                     0




                                                                                          Foreign CVC investment, percent
                                     -2                                                                                     80


                                     -4
                                                                                                                            70

                                     -6
                                                                                                                            60
                                     -8


                                    -10                                                                                     50
                                          -60   -40    -20    0     20   40     60                                               -60   -40    -20   0     20    40     60
                                                US policy, percent change ( )                                                          US policy, percent change ( )


                                                       (c) Growth                                                                         (d) Security cost


                                                                                                                            25
                                    3.2
                                                                                          Security cost, percent
            Growth rate, percent




                                                                                                                            20
                                    3.1
                                                                                                                            15
                                      3
                                                                                                                            10

                                    2.9
                                                                                                                             5


                                          -60    -40   -20     0    20   40     60                                               -60   -40    -20   0     20    40     60
                                                US policy, percent change ( )                                                          US policy, percent change ( )




                                                                                     36
                                                  Figure 5
                                    Corporate VC Investment Share
Panel A of this figure depicts the share of all U.S. VC investment attributable to foreign CVCs over time. Panel
B depicts the share of all U.S. VC investment attributable to all CVCs. Panel C depicts the share of U.S. CVC
investment attributable to foreign CVCs.

                        Panel A: Foreign CVC Investment / VC Investment




                                                      37
                   Figure 5
                  (Continued}
    Panel B: CVC Investment / VC Investment




Panel C: Foreign CVC Investment / CVC Investment




                       38
                                  Figure 6
              Foreign CVC Investment and U.S. Startup Activity
Panel A: Foreign CVC Investment and Startups Raising First Round of Investment




Panel B: Foreign CVC Investment and Startups Raising Any Round of Investment




                                     39
                                                      Figure 7
                                               Dynamics: Patents
This figure shows the results of the event study according to specification (2) of Table 6. Omitted category is the
year before the investment event. The vertical axes plots the differential effect of investment event on treated classes
in comparison to control classes captured by coefficients gap 1{d = gap} × T reatedf c .




                                                          40
                                                    Figure 8
                                             Dynamics: Citations
The results of the event study according to specification (2) of Table 8. Vertical axes plots the differential effect
of investment event on treated classes in comparison to control classes captured by coefficients gap 1{d = gap} ×
T reatedf c . Omitted category is the year before the investment event.




                                                         41
                                                        Table 1
                                                  Parameter Values
        Parameter    Description                          Value Identification
                                             Externally calibrated
                     Subjective rate of time preference 0.03       U.S. long-run interest rate
           A         Entry in country A                   0.63     Share of patents by U.S. entities
           B         Entry in country B                   0.37     Share of patents by foreign entities
           0         Baseline spillover                   0.50     Literature on international spillovers
                     Investment spillover                 0.55     Patenting intensity of treated firms
                     Probability of quick catch-up        2.5% Top-cited share among patents firms
                     Profits retained by investor         50%      Set for illustrative purposes
           m
           ¯         Max. technology gap                  30       Set for illustrative purposes
                                             Internally calibrated
                     Step size                            1.056 Set to fit moments in Table 2
                     CES technology                       0.983 Set to fit moments in Table 2
           p¯        Probability of domestic financing 9.3% Set to fit moments in Table 2
           u         Investment cost (upper bound)        0.17     Set to fit moments in Table 2
42




     
      For the values of the empirical targets, see the discussion in the text and Table 2.
     
      Patent counts are obtained from the USPTO data and are weighted by the total number of citations each patent
     has received. Citations are computed relative to all other patents issued in the same quarter and assigned to the
     same four-digit CPC patent class and in patents issued through October 2019.
                                 Table 2
                                Model Fit
Moment                                                       Data    Model
U.S. growth rate                                             2.85%   2.85%
Non-business corporate profit share of GDP                    5.9%   5.9%
Share of patenting U.S. firms receiving VC                    25%     25%
Fraction of foreign VC in total VC inv. in patenting firms    63%     63%




                                    43
                               Table 3
             Sensitivity to Alternative Parameter Choices
                     Low         High       Low     High     Benchmark
                   Spillover   Spillover   Profit   Profit    Economy
Optimal Policy       -48%        -10%      -36%     -24%        -52%




                                  44
                                                     Table 4
                                              Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for our key variables as defined in Section 4.2. Observations are at the
country×patent-class×year level. Summary statistics for investment measures is computed using observations with
positive investments in a technology class from a country in a given year. Summary statistics for patent measures
are computed using all possible country×technology class pairs for all the years with positive aggregate patenting by
the country.

                                                                                      Mean          Std       Median
 Annual CVC investments in class by foreign country (in $ thous)                      9650.3      26584.4     2545.5
 Aggregate annual CVC investments by foreign country (in $ thous)                    163790       255813      64924
 Annual patent applications in class by foreign country                               13.04        58.23         2
 Aggregate annual patent applications by foreign country                              4057.0      8198.3       1105
 Annual patent applications in class by all U.S. VC startups                          36.29       132.94         4
 Aggregate annual patents application by all U.S. VC startups                         7862.7      7321.3       5582
 Annual citations to U.S. startup patents in class by foreign country                  2.38        1.66          2
 Backwards academic citations in class                                               1302.83     11495.05       13
 Relative knowledge of foreign country with respect to U.S. in class                   .050        .094        .015




                                                         45
                                                      Table 5
                                      Difference-in-Difference: Patents
This table examines how a foreign country's patenting in a technology class evolves after a corporation based in
that nation invests in a U.S. startup specializing in that technology. Observations are at the patent class by country
by year level. The sample consists of the five years before and after a country's first investment in a U.S. startup
specializing in a particular technology class. Changes in the country's innovative activity in that "treated" technology
class are compared to to changes in the same country's innovative activity in a similar "control" technology class
that it never invested in. Treated classes are matched to control classes based on two measures of innovative activity
in a class during the five years prior to investment: (1) the country's annual number of (eventually-granted) patent
applications in the class, and (2) the country's annual number of citations to U.S. startup patents in the class. A
country is classified as having invested in a U.S. startup specializing in a technology class if a corporation based in
that country invested in a U.S. startup that had a majority (columns 1­2) or mode (columns 3­4) of its eventually-
granted patent applications in that class at the time of investment. The variable P atentsf ct represents the number
of patents country f applied for in class c in year t. P ostf ct is an indicator equal to one in the year of investment
and the five subsequent years; T reatedf c is an indicator variable equal to one if the technology class c was one that
the country f made a U.S. startup investment in; Country×Class FE represents country-by-class fixed effects; and
Year FE represents year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the treatment-control pair level. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                           Patent applications
                                                  (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
                      Post                     8.096*** 8.268*** 8.068*** 8.084***
                                                (1.653)     (1.669)   (1.558)     (1.569)
                      Post×Treated              5.631**     5.460**   4.859**     4.843**
                                                (2.349)     (2.358)   (1.888)     (1.895)
                      Country×Class FE            Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
                      Year FE                      No         Yes        No         Yes
                      Treatment                Majority of startup      Mode of startup
                      Definition                 patents in class c    patents in class c
                      R-squared                  0.857       0.884     0.821       0.855
                      Observations               14,310      14,310    15,764     15,764




                                                          46
                                                     Table 6
                                               Dynamics: Patents
This table repeats the analysis of Table 5, but rather than pooling together the years before investment and the years
after investment, it examines each of these years separately. We define event years based on the year of investment
(i.e., EventY earf ct = 0 corresponds to the year of investment) and the omitted year is the year prior to investment
(EventY earf ct = -1). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                 Patent Applications
                                                         (1)          (2)      (3)         (4)
             1{Event Year = -5}× Treated               -1.464      -1.464    -0.145      -0.145
                                                     ( 1.677)     (1.681)   (1.641)     (1.645)
             1{Event Year = -4}× Treated               -0.711      -0.711     0.298      0.298
                                                      (1.329)     (1.333)   (1.432)     (1.435)
             1{Event Year = -3}× Treated               0.840        0.840    0.773       0.773
                                                      (1.282)     (1.285)   (1.271)     (1.274)
             1{Event Year = -2}× Treated               0.949         .949    0.810       0.810
                                                      (0.861)     (0.932)   (0.959)     (0.961)
             1{Event Year = 0}× Treated                2.014        2.014     1.226      1.226
                                                      (1.317)     (1.320)   (1.068)     (1.070)
             1{Event Year = 1}× Treated              5.684*** 5.684*** 4.269*** 4.269***
                                                      (1.590)     (1.594)   (1.286)     (1.289)
             1{Event Year = 2}× Treated              4.818**      4.818** 4.976*** 4.976***
                                                      (2.272)     (2.277)   (1.798)     (1.803)
             1{Event Year = 3}× Treated              5.079**      5.079**  5.359**      5.359**
                                                      (2.547)    ( 2.554)   (2.140)     (2.145)
             1{Event Year = 4}× Treated              7.042**      7.042** 7.477*** 7.477***
                                                      (3.114)     (3.122)   (2.714)     (2.720)
             1{Event Year = 5}× Treated              8.945**      8.945** 9.366*** 9.366***
                                                      (3.660)     (3.669)   (3.154)     (3.162)
             Country×Class FE                           Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes
             Year FE                                     No          Yes       No          Yes
             Treatment                               Majority of startup      Mode of startup
             Definition                                patents in class c    patents in class c
             R-squared                                 0.688        0.688    0.622        0.622
             Observations                             14,310       14,310   15,764       15,764




                                                         47
                                                        Table 7
                                       Difference-in-Difference: Citations
This table examines how a foreign country's patent citations to a technology class evolves after a corporation based in
that nation invests in a U.S. startup specializing in that technology. Observations are at the patent class by country
by year level. The sample consists of the five years before and after a country's first investment in a U.S. startup
specializing in a particular technology class. The dependent variable is the number of citations to patents of U.S.
start-ups in the technology class made in patents filed in the year by entities in the foreign nation. Changes in the
country's innovative activity in that "treated" technology class are compared to to changes in the same country's
innovative activity in a similar "control" technology class, which it never invested in. Treated classes are matched to
control classes based on two measures of innovative activity in a class during the five years prior to investment: (1) the
country's annual number of (eventually-granted) patent applications in the class, and (2) the country's annual number
of citations to U.S. startup patents in the class. A country is classified as having invested in a U.S. startup specializing
in a technology class if a corporation based in that country invested in a U.S. startup that had a majority (columns
1­2) or mode (columns 3­4) of its eventually-granted patent applications in that class at the time of investment. The
variable Citationsf ct represents the number of citations by country f 's patents to U.S. startup patents in class c in
year t. P ostf ct is an indicator equal to one in the year of investment and the five subsequent years; T reatedf c is an
indicator variable equal to one if the technology class c was one that the country f made a U.S. startup investment
in; Country×Class FE represents country-by-class fixed effects; and Year FE represents year fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the treatment-control pair level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                      Citations to U.S. Startup Patents
                                                    (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)
                    Post                        -0.137*** -0.162*** -0.081*           -.113**
                                                  (0.046)     (0.046)     (0.043)     (0.044)
                    Post×Treated                 0.352*** 0.376*** 0.322*** 0.364***
                                                  (0.045)     (0.045)     (0.044)      (.043)
                    Country×Class FE                Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
                    Year FE                         No          Yes         No           Yes
                    Treatment                     Majority of startup      Mode of startup
                    Definition                     patents in class c      patents in class c
                    R-squared                      0.772       0.778       0.761        0.771
                    Observations                  14,310       14,310     15,764       15,764




                                                            48
                                                     Table 8
                                              Dynamics: Citations
This table repeats the analysis of Table 7, but rather than pooling together the years before investment and the years
after investment, it examines each of these years separately. We define event years based on the year of investment
(i.e., EventY earf ct = 0 corresponds to the year of investment) and the omitted year is the year prior to investment
(EventY earf ct = -1). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                          Citations to U.S.    Startup Patents
                                                       (1)          (2)             (3)           (4)
            1{Event Year = -5}× Treated            -0.164*** -0.164***         -0.164*** -0.164***
                                                    (0.055)      (0.055)         (0.054)       (0.054)
            1{Event Year = -4}× Treated            -0.143*** -0.143***         -0.163*** -0.163***
                                                    (0.053)      (0.053)          (.051)       (0.051)
            1{Event Year = -3}× Treated             -0.109*      -0.109*        -0.106**      -0.106**
                                                    (0.056)      (0.056)        (0.0595)       (0.054)
            1{Event Year = -2}× Treated              -0.078       -0.078         -0.104*       -0.104*
                                                    (0.054)      (0.054)         (0.053)       (0.053)
            1{Event Year = 0}× Treated               0.097*       0.097*          0.070         0.070
                                                    (0.052)      (0.052)         (0.050)       (0.050)
            1{Event Year = 1}× Treated             0.283*** 0.283***            0.257*** 0.257***
                                                    (0.067)      (0.064)         (0.064)       (0.064)
            1{Event Year = 2}× Treated             0.246*** 0.246***            0.220*** 0.220***
                                                    (0.067)      (0.067)         (0.064)       (0.064)
            1{Event Year = 3}× Treated             0.336*** 0.336***            0.283*** 0.283***
                                                    (0.074)      (0.074)         (0.070)       (0.070)
            1{Event Year = 4}× Treated             0.362*** 0.362***            0.343*** 0.343***
                                                    (0.074)      (0.074)         (0.071)       (0.071)
            1{Event Year = 5}× Treated             0.404*** 0.404***            0.364*** 0.364***
                                                    (0.080)      (0.080)         (0.076)       (0.076)
            Country×Class FE                           Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes
            Year FE                                    No           Yes             No            Yes
            Treatment                               Majority of startup            Mode of startup
            Definition                                patents in class c           patents in class c
            R-squared                                 0.339        0.339           0.326         0.326
            Observations                             14,310       13,752          15,764        15,764




                                                         49
                                                     Table 9
                             Heterogeneity by Basicness of Patent Classes
This table examines whether the baseline results of Table 5 vary across patent classes that differ in their basicness.
High Basicness is an indicator equal to one if class c is above the median in terms of the number of backward academic
citations in its patent applications submitted at time t. Low Basicness is defined similarly. The sample and all other
variables are as defined in Table 5. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                        Panel A: Patent Applications
                                                             Patent Applications
                                    High Basicness Low Basicness High Basicness Low Basicness
                                          (1)                (2)              (3)                 (4)
                                          (1)                (2)              (3)                 (4)
            Post                       7.2788*           9.6680***         9.4445**          9.3583***
                                       (4.1758)           (2.4002)         (3.6441)           (2.2368)
            Post×Treated             12.9449***           -4.7501*         8.6204**            -3.4738
                                       (4.6789)           (2.7811)         (3.6312)           (2.5769)
            Country×Class FE             Yes                 Yes              Yes                Yes
            Year FE                      Yes                 Yes              Yes                Yes
            Treatment                     Majority of startup                   Mode of startup
            Definition                      patents in class c                  patents in class c
            P-value of Difference                0.006                               0.014
            R-squared                   0.8703             0.9120           0.8369              0.8844
            Observations                7,041               7,032            7,788              7,798

                               Panel B: Citations to U.S. Startup Patents
                                                     Citations to U.S. Startup Patents
                                    High Basicness Low Basicness High Basicness Low Basicness
                                          (5)                (6)              (7)                (8)
            Post                        -0.0357          -0.1308**          0.0321           -0.1020**
                                       (0.0800)           (0.0528)         (0.0766)           (0.0495)
            Post×Treated              0.3309***          0.3185***        0.2757***          0.3003***
                                       (0.0898)           (0.0908)         (0.0852)           (0.0897)
            Country×Class FE              Yes                Yes             Yes                 Yes
            Year FE                       Yes                Yes             Yes                 Yes
            Treatment                      Majority of startup                  Mode of startup
            Definition                      patents in class c                  patents in class c
            P-value of Difference                0.877                               0.800
            R-squared                   0.7615             0.8275           0.7581             0.8181
            Observations                 7,008             7,060            7,788               7,798




                                                         50
                                                      Table 10
                                 Heterogeneity by Secrecy of Patent Class
This table examines whether the baseline results of Table 5 vary across patent classes that differ in their government
secrecy. High Secrecy is an indicator equal to one if class c has any patent applications with government secrecy orders
submitted in year t. Low Secrecy is an indicator equal to one if class c has no patent applications with government
secrecy orders submitted in year t. The sample and all other variables are as defined in Table 4. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                         Panel A: Patent Applications
                                                           Patent Applications
                                      High Secrecy Low Secrecy High Secrecy Low Secrecy
                                           (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)
         Post                          12.197***        7.959***       14.722***        8.677***
                                         (3.767)         (2.201)         (4.153)         (1.959)
         Post×Treated                   23.204**         5.176**       23.685**            3.369
                                         (9.773)         (2.492)        (11.636)         (2.060)
         Country×Class FE                  Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes
         Year FE                           Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes
         Treatment                        Majority of startup               Mode of startup
         Definition                         patents in class c              patents in class c
         P-value of Difference                   0.021                           0.106
         R-squared                        0.955            0.874          0.904            0.842
         Observations                      874            13,157          1,052           14,497

                                Panel B: Citations to U.S. Startup Patents
                                                   Citations to U.S. Startup Patents
                                      High Secrecy Low Secrecy High Secrecy Low Secrecy
                                           (5)              (6)           (7)              (8)
          Post                          0.590***        -0.149***      0.522***         -0.100**
                                         (0.180)         (0.046)        (0.152)          (0.044)
          Post×Treated                    0.388         0.342***        0.455*         0.314***
                                         (0.277)         (0.048)        (0.233)          (0.046)
          Country×Class FE                 Yes              Yes           Yes              Yes
          Year FE                          Yes              Yes           Yes              Yes
          Treatment                       Majority of startup              Mode of startup
          Definition                        patents in class c             patents in class c
          P-value of Difference                  0.789                          0.326
          R-squared                       0.852            0.793         0.854            0.785
          Observations                     874            13,157         1,052           14,497




                                                          51
                                                    Table 11
                                Determinants of Cross-Border Investment
In the first two columns, the dependent variable is an indicator of whether at least one corporate venture capital
program from country f invested in U.S. startups that innovate in a technology class c in year t. In the last two
columns, the dependent variable is the share of investments in U.S. startups that innovate in a technology class c
in year t by CVC firms from a country f relative to all investments in U.S. startups by CVCs from f in year t.
Relative knowledge is a ratio with a numerator equal to number of successful patent applications submitted by foreign
assignees from country f in technology class c before the investment event at t. The denominator is the sum of all
successful patent applications submitted by foreign assignees from f and from the U.S. in technology class c before
year t. 1st and 2nd lags look at this variable one year and two years after the investment event correspondingly.
All regressions include country and year FEs. Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered on year and country
levels. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                  1{Investmentt }               Investment Sharet
                                                  (1)             (2)             (3)         (4)
             Relative Knowledgef,c,t          -0.103***       -0.173***       -0.0043** -0.0051**
                                               (0.039)         (0.046)         (0.0017)   (0.0021)
             Relative Knowledgef,c,t-1                          -0.089                     -0.0007
                                                               (0.092)                    (0.0046)
             Relative Knowledgef,c,t-2                           0.137                      0.0002
                                                               (0.140)                    (0.0059)
             R-squared                          0.040           0.040            0.002       0.005
             Observations                       71,646          56,108          71,646     56,108




                                                         52
                                                       Table 12
                               Foreign Investment and U.S. Startup Activity
Observations are at the patent class by year level. New startups are U.S. startups with their first patent submitted
in year t in class c. All active are all active U.S. startups that have submitted at least one patent as of year t in class
c. For these firms, we compute the logarithm of the number of patenting U.S. startups and the number of patents
in class c filed by U.S. startups in year t. Investments are measured as log total foreign CVC investments in class c
in year t measured in thousands of U.S. $. Standard errors are clustered on a class level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1

                               Log Number of Patenting U.S. Startups               Log Number of U.S. Startup Patents
                               New startups         All active                     New startups        All active
                                    (1)                (2)                              (3)                (4)
 Log Foreign Investment         0.1170***          0.0167***                        0.1195***          0.0214***
                                 (0.0101)           (0.0030)                         (0.0102)           (0.0035)
 Class FE                           Yes                Yes                              Yes                Yes
 Year FE                            Yes                Yes                              Yes                Yes
 R-squared                         0.371              0.620                            0.372              0.670
 Observations                     13,915             13,915                           13,915             13,915




                                                            53
Appendix

Matching VentureXpert with USPTO Patent Data

Name Standardization

In order to match VentureXpert with data from the USPTO, we begin by standardizing the company
names in both, using the name standardization routines developed by the NBER Patent Data
Project to create a bridge file to COMPUSTAT.28 These routines standardize common company
prefixes and suffixes building on a list created by Derwent World Patent Index (Thomson-Reuters);
they also identify a company's stem name excluding these prefixes and suffixes. Similarly, we
standardize the location names from both datasets. This is done to correct spelling errors as well
as other types of errors that commonly occur, particularly in the patent data. For example, in
some cases, a neighborhood name is used rather than the name of a city. In other cases, country
codes are listed as state codes, e.g. a patent assignee from Germany (DE) may be coded as being
from Delaware (DE). The city name standardization is done by running all location names through
the Google Maps API, which automatically corrects close, but inaccurate text representations of
location names and returns a standardized name broken down into its component parts (city, state,
country), along with latitude and longitude information.


Creating Consistent Assignee Identifier

The USPTO data lack any kind of consistent assignee ID. Patent assignees often go by many
variations of the same name on different patents, and typos are also fairly common. The NBER
Patent Data Project created a consistent assignee ID, but the NBER data end in 2006. We extend
and improve upon the NBER assignee ID using the following procedure: we code two patents as
having the same assignee if (1) they share the same NBER assignee ID, or (2) they share the same
stem name, city, and state, or (3) they share the same first four letters, city, state, inventor first
name, and inventor last name, or (4) they share the same initials, city, state, inventor first name,
and inventor last name, or (5) they share the same standardized full name.


The Matching Procedure

With the standardized company and city names, along with the assignee ID, we then use the
following matching procedure:

   1. Each standardized name associated with a company in VentureXpert is matched with stan-
       dardized names from the USPTO data.29 If an exact match is found, this is taken to be the
  28
    https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/
  29
    Many companies have multiple names listed in VentureXpert, reflecting the fact that young companies often
change their name as they mature.


                                                     54
  same company and hence it is removed from the set of names that need to be matched.

2. For the remaining companies in VentureXpert, each stem name associated with a company
  is matched with stem names from the USPTO data. If an exact match is found and enough
  other identifying information matches as well, this is taken to be the same company and it
  is removed from the set of names that need to be matched. If an exact match is found, but
  not enough other identifying information matches as well, the match is added to a list of
  borderline matches to be checked manually.

   (a) For a stem match to be considered definite, the standardized city/state combination
       also has to match, or the state has to match along with the time period (first patent
       application was after the company founding year).

3. For the remaining companies in VentureXpert, each stem name associated with a company
  is matched with up to 10 close stem names from the USPTO data using a padded bi-gram
  comparator. Fuzzy matches with match quality between 1.5 and 2 that also had a city/state
  match were kept for review, as were fuzzy matches with quality above 2 with only a state
  match.

4. The borderline matches identified using the above procedure were reviewed by hand, now also
  using other qualitative information from both data sources, including full patent abstracts,
  and paragraph-long company descriptions.




                                            55
