                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  TRADE AND GEOGRAPHY

                                        Stephen J. Redding

                                       Working Paper 27821
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27821


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




This paper was commissioned for the Elsevier-North Holland Handbook in International
Economics, edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Ken Rogoff. I am very grateful to
the editors for their helpful comments and suggestions. Thanks also to a number of colleagues for
helpful comments and to Benny Kleinman for excellent research assistance. Responsibility for
results, opinions and errors lies with the author alone. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Stephen J. Redding. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Trade and Geography
Stephen J. Redding
NBER Working Paper No. 27821
September 2020
JEL No. F1,J4,R1,R4

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper reviews recent research on geography and trade. One of the key empirical findings
over the last decade has been the role of geography in shaping the distributional consequences of
trade. One of the major theoretical advances has been the development of quantitative spatial
models that incorporate both exogenous first-nature geography (natural endowments) and
endogenous second-nature geography (the location choices of economic agents relative to one
another) as determinants of the distribution of economic activity across space. These models are
sufficiently rich to capture first-order features of the data, such as gravity equations for flows of
goods and people. Yet they remain sufficiently tractable as to permit an analytical
characterization of the properties of the general equilibrium and facilitate counterfactuals for
realistic policy interventions. We distinguish between models of regions or systems of cities
(where goods trade and migration take center stage) and models of the internal structure of cities
(where commuting becomes relevant). We review some of key empirical predictions of both sets
of theories and show that they have been remarkably successful in rationalizing the empirical
findings from reduced-form research. Looking ahead, the combination of recent theoretical
advances and novel geo-coded data on economic interactions at a fine spatial scale promises
many interesting avenues for further research, including discriminating between alternative
mechanisms for agglomeration, understanding the implications of new technologies for the
organization of work, and assessing the causes, consequences and potential policy implications of
spatial sorting.


Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics &
School of Public and International Affairs
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and CEPR
and also NBER
reddings@princeton.edu
1     Introduction
One of the most striking features of the economy is the extremely uneven distribution of production, trade and income
across geographic space. This concentration of economic activity is most evident in the existence of cities. Roughly
two thirds of the world's population is projected to live in cities by the year 2050, with the urban population increasing
by around 2.5 billion people, and nearly 90 percent of this increase concentrated in Asia and Africa.1 But this con-
centration is also evident for individual economic activities within cities. In 1940, Motor Vehicles and Motor Vehicle
Equipment Industries made up 55 percent of the city of Detroit's manufacturing employment and 24 percent of its
total employment, and the city of Detroit was responsible for 30 percent of total employment in this industry in the
United States.2 A natural rst question is what explains these concentrations of economic activity: to what extent are
they explained by uneven di erences in exogenous fundamentals versus endogenous forces for the agglomeration of
economic activity? A natural second question is what are the implications of these concentrations of economic activ-
ity for the way in which economies respond to external shocks? As technology and trade shocks occur over time, and
some locations gain a comparative advantage in new sectors, while others lose that comparative advantage, how does
the spatial economy adjust? How do people and economic activities sort across geographic space in response? What
are the implications of new communication technologies, and shocks such as the COVID-19 pandemic, for the future
of work in densely versus sparsely-populated locations? If some locations are "left-behind" by increased economic
integration, to what extent and how should public policy respond?3
    This chapter reviews recent theoretical and empirical research on the causes and consequences of the uneven
distribution of economic activity across space. We begin by reviewing a largely reduced-form empirical literature
that has shown that geography is a key dimension along which the distributional consequences of international trade
occur. This idea that international trade creates winners and losers is not new and is rather central to neoclassical
economics. In the Heckscher-Ohlin model, trade a ects income inequality between di erent factors of production
that are mobile across industries. In the speci c-factors model, these e ects of trade on income inequality occur
because factors of production are immobile between industries, at least in the short-run. Nevertheless, in both of these
neoclassical theories, these distributional consequences of trade occur at the national level.4 The key contribution of
recent empirical research has been to highlight how di erences in industry composition across local labor markets
within countries induce di erences in their exposure to international trade shocks. In particular, Autor, Dorn, and
Hanson (2013a) show that local labor markets more exposed to Chinese import growth experience larger reductions
in manufacturing employment as a share of the working-age population, the employment to population ratio and
mean log weekly earnings, as well as larger increases in per capita unemployment, disability, and income assistance
transfer bene ts. These ndings have stimulated a useful dialogue between theory and empirics, as researchers have
developed quantitative spatial models to rationalize these empirical ndings.
    We next turn to the role of geography in explaining the observed uneven distribution of economic activity across
   1 These gures are taken from the World Urbanization Prospects, United Nations (2018). For further evidence on urbanization in a historical

context, see Michaels, Rauch, and Redding (2012) and Desmet and Henderson (2015).
   2 Figures based on the 1940 individual-level population census data (Ruggles, Flood, Goeken, Grover, Meyer, Pacas, and Sobek 2018).
   3 For further discussion of these "left-behind" places and the scope for place-based policies, see Kline and Moretti (2014b), Austin, Glaeser, and

Summers (2018), Wuthnow (2019) and Gaubert, Kline, and Yagan (2020).
   4 Another mechanism for trade to a ect wage inequality at a more disaggregate level is reallocations of resources across heterogeneous rm

that pay di erent wages, as for example in Helpman, Itskhoki, and Redding (2010) and Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler, and Redding (2017). For a
review of the broader literature on trade and income inequality, see Helpman (2018).




                                                                         2
space. We highlight a key distinction between what is termed " rst-nature" and "second-nature" geography. First-
nature geography is concerned with locational fundamentals, including the physical geography of coasts, mountains
and natural endowments. In contrast, second-nature geography is concerned with the location of agents relative to
one another in geographic space, and the role that this plays in understanding the agglomeration of economic activity.
While rst-nature geography is largely exogenous, second-nature geography is typically endogenous, and could be
in uenced, at least in principle, by public policy interventions.
    Separating rst and second-nature geography raises both theoretical and empirical challenges. From a theoretical
point of view, a key challenge has been to incorporate asymmetries across locations ( rst-nature geography) into
theoretical models of economic geography while preserving their analytical tractability. Traditionally, the theoretical
literature on economic geography has abstracted from rst-nature geography by considering stylized settings with a
small number of symmetric regions.5 However, a major theoretical advance in recent years has been the development
of quantitative spatial models that incorporate both rst and second-nature geography. These models are su ciently
rich to capture rst-order features of the data, such as large numbers of locations with heterogeneous productivity,
amenities, and land area, as well as trade and commuting costs. Yet these models remain su ciently tractable as to
permit an analytical characterization of the general equilibrium and to be used for realistic counterfactuals. They
thus provide a platform for evaluating the impact of a host of public policy interventions, including speci c transport
infrastructure improvements, such as the construction of a new link in the U.S. Interstate Highway System or a high-
speed railway between the North and South of California.6
    From an empirical point of view, a central challenge has been separately estimating the contributions of rst and
second-nature geography. Suppose that we observe a group of contiguous locations with high levels of economic ac-
tivity in the data. On the one hand, this concentration of economic activity could re ect good access to one another's
markets (second-nature geography). On the other hand, it could be explained by common locational fundamentals
such as access to nearby natural resources ( rst-nature geography). This challenge is an example of the broader
problem in the social sciences of separately identifying spillovers from correlated individual e ects.7 Empirical re-
search in recent years has seen more careful attention to the use of exogenous sources of variation, including natural
experiments from history, as part of a broader "credibility revolution" in applied econometrics. A growing body of em-
pirical research using such exogenous variation has provided evidence on the causal e ects of transport infrastructure
investments and changes in market access on the location of economic activity.
    We distinguish between models of regions or systems of cities (where goods trade and migration take center stage)
and models of the internal structure of cities (where commuting becomes relevant). We review the empirical evidence
on the predictions of both sets of models. Some of the key empirical ndings concern the importance of transport in-
frastructure for the spatial distribution of economic activity within countries; the role of market access (the proximity
of rms and consumers to one another) for location choices; the extent to which economic activity is path dependent
(such that temporary shocks can have permanent e ects); the degree of spatial sorting of high and low-skilled work-
ers across geographic space; and the role of agglomeration forces in understanding the concentration of economic
activities across geographic space. We show that the counterfactual predictions of both sets of models have proved
   5 For a synthesis of this theoretical literature, see Fujita, Krugman, and Venables (1999). For reviews of this earlier economic geography literature,

see Overman, Redding, and Venables (2003), Redding (2010) and Redding (2011).
   6 For a review of this recent literature on quantitative spatial models, see Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017).
   7 See, in particular, the discussion in Manski (1993).




                                                                           3
to be remarkably successful in explaining empirical ndings from reduced-form research, such as the impacts of the
division of Germany on city growth, the e ect of the division of Berlin on land prices, the distributional consequences
of Chinese import growth across local labor markets, and the impact of transport infrastructure investments on the
location of economic activity.
     The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews recent reduced-form evidence on the dis-
tributional consequences of international trade across local labor markets. Section 3 introduces a class of quantitative
spatial models for understanding the uneven distribution of economic activity across regions or cities within countries.
Section 4 presents empirical evidence on some of the key predictions of this class of models. Section 5 introduces a
class of quantitative urban models for understanding the internal structure of economic activity within cities. Section
6 o ers some concluding comments.


2      The Geographic Incidence of International Trade Shocks
A major contribution of recent reduced-form empirical research in international trade has been to quantify the im-
portance of geography as a dimension along which the distributional e ects of international trade occur. Following
the in uential work of Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a) for the United States, a substantial component of this re-
search has focused on the large-scale shock provided by China's emergence into the global economy. In Section 2.1,
we review the empirical ndings from this extensive body of research.8 In Section 2.2, we discuss the interpretation
of these reduced-form empirical ndings, before returning in a later section to examine the extent to which these
reduced-form empirical ndings are consistent with the predictions of quantitative spatial models.

2.1         The China Shock

With its rapid economic growth following its market-orientated reforms of 1978, China has emerged as a major source
of import competition for producers of manufactured goods in developed countries such as the United States. In 1991,
low-income countries accounted for just 9 percent of U.S. manufacturing imports. In contrast, by 2000, the low-
income-country share of U.S. imports reached 15 percent and climbed to 28 percent by 2007, with China accounting
for 89 percent of this growth. This rise in import penetration is particularly rapid following China's admission to
the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001 and coincides with a marked decline in U.S. manufacturing, as shown
in Figure 1.9 Between 1987 and 2007, the rise in China's share of U.S. imports from less than 1 percent to close to
5 percent is accompanied by a decline in the share of the U.S. working-age population employed in manufacturing
of around one third, from 12.6 percent to 8.4 percent.10 However, although this relationship is suggestive, it should
be interpreted with caution, because these trends in import penetration and manufacturing employment potentially
could be explained by omitted third variables, including in particular changes in technology.
     To provide further evidence on this relationship, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a) construct a measure of the
exposure of local labor markets in the United States to the China shock, which is based on changes in aggregate
industry imports and the concentration of these industries in each local labor market. This measure is derived as a
 rst-order approximation to a gravity model of international trade. In particular, the change in imports per worker
    8 For   a survey that focuses largely on these local labor market e ects of international trade, see Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2016).
    9 Admission to the WTO in 2001 removed the uncertainty associated with annual votes in the U.S. Congress over whether to maintain Permanent

Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) with China, as studied in Pierce and Schott (2016) and Handley and Limão (2017).
  10 For early evidence on the impact of the China shock at the plant-level, see Bernard, Jensen, and Schott (2006).




                                                                            4
Figure 1: Import
             VOL.Penetration
                 103 NO. 6   Ratio for U.S. Imports from China and Share of Working-Age Population
                                              autor et al.: the china syndrome                2122 Employed in
Manufacturing (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013a)

                                               0.05                                                                                    0.14
                                                                                     China import penetration ratio
                                                                                     Manufacturing employment/population
                                               0.04




                                                                                                                                             Manufacturing emp/pop
                          Import penetration
                                                                                                                                       0.12
                                               0.03


                                               0.02
                                                                                                                                       0.1

                                               0.01



                                                 0                                                                                     0.08
                                                      1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997   1999     2001     2003   2005   2007
                                                                                         Year

                                            Figure 1. Import Penetration Ratio for US Imports from China (left scale),
                                       and Share of US Working-Age Population Employed in Manufacturing (right scale)
(IP Wuit ) in each local labor market i at time t in the United States u is constructed as:
                                                                  2 Lijt Mucjt
               9  percent of US manufacturing    IP W   imports.
                                                          uit =
                                                                    However, owing        , largely to China's spec-                    (1)
               tacular economic growth, the situation j            has   changed
                                                                      Lujt         Lit markedly. In 2000, the low-
               income-country share of US imports reached 15 percent and climbed to 28 percent
where  in the  bydi 2007,  with
                      erence     ChinaL
                              operator;   accounting      for 89 percent
                                           it is total employment     in the of      this
                                                                                 local     growth.
                                                                                       labor   market  i atshare
                                                                                                     The            of of
                                                                                                                       total
                                                                                                            the start      the period (year
t); Mucjt isUSspending          on Chinese
                the change in U.S.   imports fromgoods
                                                     Chinarose
                                                             in from
                                                                industry0.6j percent
                                                                                between in  the1991   to 4.6
                                                                                                           end percent
                                                                                                start and                   in Lijt /Lujt
                                                                                                                 of the period;
               2007 (Figure 1), with an inflection point in 2001 when China joined the World
               Trade Organization (WTO).3 Over the same period, the fraction of US working-age
is the local labor market i's share of U.S. employment         in industry j at the start of the period (year t).
               population
     A key concern           employed
                     about this measurein      the China shockfell
                                           ofmanufacturing             by
                                                                  (1) is    a third,
                                                                          that          from 12.6
                                                                                 U.S. imports   from percent
                                                                                                      China are    8.4per- to shocks
                                                                                                                to endogenous
to U.S. import cent  (Figure
                 demand.       1). Amplifying
                                   4
                           To address   this concern China's    potential
                                                       and to capture      the impact    on the
                                                                                 supply-side      US from
                                                                                               shock   labor   market
                                                                                                             China's     areliberalization
                                                                                                                       own
               sizable current-account imbalances in the two countries. In the 2000s, China's
and economic   average
                 growth, current-account
                          Autor, Dorn, and Hanson        was 5 construct
                                               surplus(2013a)     percent of    an GDP,     a figure
                                                                                    instrument   usingequal    to the of
                                                                                                                       con-
                                                                                                        the growth        Chinese imports
to eight othertemporaneous       average
                developed countries.   11 US current-account deficit. US industries have thus faced a
                                          In particular, measured import exposure in equation (1) is instrumented using an
               major increase in import competition from China without an offsetting increase in
analogous exposure measure that is constructed using imports from China for these eight other developed countries
               demand for US exports.
and lags the US In    this paper,
                   employment        we ten
                                 levels  relate
                                             yearschanges    in labor-market
                                                    to address   the concern that     outcomes
                                                                                         employmentfrom at 1990    to of
                                                                                                                       2007
                                                                                                           the start      the period could
be endogenous     to theUS
               across       local labor
                         subsequent   China    shock. to changes in exposure to Chinese import compe-
                                            markets
               tition. We treat local labor markets as subeconomies subject to differential trade
     To explore the causal impact of the China shock across U.S. local labor markets, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a)
               shocks according to initial patterns of industry specialization. Commuting zones
               (CZs), which
consider the following          encompass
                          second-stage          all metropolitan
                                          regression,   in which the andmain nonmetropolitan        areas
                                                                                  outcome of interest       thethe
                                                                                                         is in       United
                                                                                                                 change    in the manufac-
               States,share
                        are logical    geographicpopulation
                                                       units for (defining
                                                                    Lm            local labor markets (Tolbert and
               Sizer 1996; Autor and Dorn 2013). They differ in their exposure to import competi-
turing employment            of the working-age                          it ):

               tion as a result of regional     m variation in the importance of different                manufacturing
                                                                Lit = t + 1 IP Wuit + Xit 2 + eit ,                                                                  (2)
                   2
                    See Table 1. We classify countries as low income using the World Bank definition in 1989, shown in the online
where t is a Data
             time   xed e ect; IP Wuit is the import exposure measure using U.S. imports from equation (1), which
                  Appendix.
                   3
                    In Figure 1, we define import penetration as US imports from China divided by total US expenditure on goods,
is instrumented
             measured rst-stage
                in a as          with plus
                        US gross output     import
                                        the US      exposure
                                                       minus US measure
                                               imports          exports. constructed using the imports of other developed
                   4
                    The data series for manufacturing/population in Figure 1 is based on the Current Population Survey for work-
countries; Xit is
             ers  a matrix
                 aged         of
                      16 to 64.  controls;
                                While        and ein
                                      the reduction    is the regression
                                                    it manufacturing       error.
                                                                     employment was rapid during the recessions in 1990­1991
                and 2001, there were also declines during the expansions 1992­2000 and particularly 2002­2007. In previous
    This regression (2)phases
             expansion  is a long-di    erences
                              of the 1970s       speci
                                           and 1980s,                   /population
                                                          cation in which
                                                      the manufacturing      a xed    e had
                                                                                          ect increased.
                                                                                    ratio      for time-invariant unobserved hetero-
geneity in the level of the manufacturing employment share has been di erenced out. The key coe cient of interest
  11 The eight other high-income countries are those that have comparable trade data covering the full sample period: Australia, Denmark, Finland,

Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Spain, and Switzerland.



                                                                                          5
on exposure to the China shock (1 ) has a "di erence-in-di erences" interpretation, in which the rst di erence is
over time, and the second di erence is across local labor markets with di erent levels of exposure to the China shock.
In their baseline analysis, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a) consider two long di erences from 1990-2000 and 2000-7,
and a speci cation pooling both of these long di erences from 1990-2007. In Placebo checks, they also consider two
long di erences pre-dating China's emergence as a major trading nation from 1970-80 and 1980-90, and a speci cation
pooling both of these Placebo long di erences from 1970-1990.
    The instrumental variables estimation of equation (2) requires that the instrument is relevant (a good predictor of
the endogenous variable) and valid (only a ects the outcome variable of interest through the endogenous variable).
Perhaps unsurprisingly, exposure measured using the imports of the eight other developed countries is a powerful
predictor of exposure measured using U.S. imports (1), with rst-stage F-statistics well above the conventional thresh-
old of ten. Therefore, the more demanding of the two identifying assumptions is that import exposure constructed
using the imports of the eight other developed countries (IP Woit ) is uncorrelated with shocks to the manufacturing
employment share of the working-age population (Lm
                                                 it ), as captured in the regression error (eit ).

    To address concerns about omitted variables that could be correlated with both import exposure and changes in the
manufacturing employment shares of the working-age population, thereby violating this exclusion restriction, Autor,
Dorn, and Hanson (2013a) include a wide range of controls (Xit ): (i) Percentage of employment in manufacturing at
the start of the period; (ii) Percentage of college educated in the population at the start of the period; (iii) Percentage
of foreign-born population at the start of the period; (iii) Percentage of employment among women at the start of
the period; (iv) Percentage of employment in routine occupations at the start of the period; (v) a measure of the
o shorability of occupational employment at the start of the period; and (v) Census-division-year xed e ects. The
 rst control for the size of the manufacturing sector addresses the concern that the exposure measure just could be
capturing the uneven distribution of manufacturing across local labor markets and its secular decline over time. The
fourth control for the percentage of employment in routine occupations alleviates the concern that shocks to industry
technology (such as computerization) could both directly a ect the economic outcome of interest and be correlated
with shocks to industry imports from China.12 The fth control for the census-division-year xed e ects mitigates the
concern that the results could just capture a broader shift in the distribution of economic activity from the North-East
and the Mid-West to the West and the South.
    Even after conditioning on these controls, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a) nd that local labor markets that
were more exposed to the China shock experienced a larger decline in the manufacturing employment share of the
working-age population. This relationship is both statistically signi cant and economically relevant. In the preferred
speci cation, each $1,000 increase in import exposure per worker is predicted to reduce manufacturing employment
as a share of the population by -0.596 percentage points. To put this into context, the observed di erence in the ten-
year equivalent growth in import exposure between the 75th and 25th percentiles from 2000-7 is 1.06. Therefore, these
estimates imply that the share of manufacturing employees in the working-age population of a local labor market at
the 75th percentile of import exposure declined by -0.6466 = 1.06 × -0.596 percentage points more than in a local
labor market at the 25th percentile over this period.
    In addition to the manufacturing employment shares of the working-age population, exposure to the China shock
  12 Autor,
          Dorn, and Hanson (2013b) show that there is relatively little correlation between the exposure of U.S. local labor markets to the trade
shock from China and the technology shock from the automation of routine tasks, thereby permitting separate identi cation of these two forces.



                                                                       6
is found to a ect a wide range of other economic outcomes of interest. Comparing two local labor markets at the
75th and 25th percentiles of exposure to Chinese import growth from 2000-7, the more exposed local labor market
experiences a 0.8 percentage point larger reduction in the employment to population rate, a 0.8 percent larger decline in
mean log weekly earnings, and larger increases in per capita unemployment, disability, and income assistance transfer
bene ts on the order of 2 to 3.5 percent. These ndings for transfers suggest that federally funded transfer programs,
such as Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI), play an important role in insuring U.S. workers against trade-
related employment shocks. Somewhat surprisingly, despite these negative e ects on local labor market outcomes,
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a) nd little evidence of population movements in response to the China shock.
    These ndings have had a major impact on both academic research and the policy debate, being presented in the
Oval O ce during the administration of President Obama, and being featured in the publicity material for the 2016
election campaign of President Trump.13 Subsequent research has explored the impact of the China shock in a number
of di erent countries. For Norway and Spain respectively, Balsvik, Jensen, and Salvanes 2015 and Donoso, Martín,
and Minondo 2014 con rm that local labor markets more exposed to Chinese imports experience larger declines in
manufacturing employment. For Germany, Dauth, Findeisen, and Suedekum 2014 nd that the labor market shock
from Eastern Europe following the Fall of the Iron Curtain was quantitatively more important that the China shock.
For Brazil, Costa, Garred, and Pessoa 2016 nd that local labor markets more exposed to Chinese import growth
experienced slower growth in manufacturing wages from 2000-10, whereas local labor markets more exposed to
Chinese commodity demand experienced faster wage growth. For Portugal, Branstetter, Kovak, Mauro, and Venâncio
2019 nd economically and statistically signi cant employment declines in rms with more exposure to Chinese
competition in European export markets, but minimal e ects of direct competition in Portugal. Although research on
the China shock initially concentrated on labor market outcomes, a proliferating literature has explored its broader
e ects on mortality (Pierce and Schott 2020), male marriage outcomes (Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2019), political
polarization (Autor, Dorn, Hanson, and Majlesi 2020 and Che, Lu, Pierce, Schott, and Tao 2020), and innovation (Autor,
Dorn, Hanson, Pisano, and Shu 2020 and Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen 2016), among others.
    In subsequent work, Autor, Dorn, Hanson, and Song (2014), use longitudinal linked employee-employer data
from social security records to provide evidence on the consequences for individual workers of di erential exposure
to Chinese imports across industries. Comparing workers at the 75th and 25th percentiles of exposure to Chinese
imports, the more exposed worker experiences a reduction of cumulative earnings by approximately one half of
the initial annual wage. Most of this net reduction in cumulative earnings operates through a reduction in within-
year earnings rather than from additional time with zero earnings. Cumulative earnings fall by around 50 percent
more than cumulative employment at both the initial employer and in the initial industry. Earnings gains in other
manufacturing industries are only half as large as the losses incurred with the original employer and industry. This
 nding of substantial income losses from job displacement is consistent with a broader literature in labor economics,
including Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993) and Neal (1995). Understanding the mechanisms underlying these
earnings losses from job displacement, and the extent to which they re ect the loss of rm and industry-speci c
human capital remains an area where more work is needed.
    Another group of studies has provided evidence of uneven geographical e ects of trade liberalization reforms.
In an early important contribution, Topalova (2010) nds that rural districts more exposed to trade liberalization
  13 See   https://assets.donaldjtrump.com/Trump_Economic_Plan.pdf.


                                                                      7
experienced slower declines in poverty and lower consumption growth. Consistent with labor mobility playing an
important role in shaping these distributional consequences of international trade, the impact of liberalization is most
pronounced among the least geographically mobile at the bottom of the income distribution and in Indian states where
in exible labor laws impeded factor reallocation across sectors.
    An in uential series of studies has investigated the local labor market e ects of Brazil's trade liberalization, includ-
ing Kovak (2013), Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2015) and Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017). Consistent with the predictions
of a multi-region speci c-factors model, Kovak (2013) nds that local labor markets more exposed to tari reductions
experienced larger wage declines. Also in line with the model's predictions, the treatment of the non-traded sector
is important for the magnitude of the estimated wage e ects, with substantially larger estimates from speci cations
that implicitly assume that non-traded prices are una ected by trade reform. A particularly striking nding in Dix-
Carneiro and Kovak (2017) is that Brazil's trade liberalization induced persistent dynamic di erences between regions,
with the impact of tari changes on regional earnings 20 years after liberalization equal to around three times the
e ect after 10 years. Two potential mechanisms for these persistent dynamic di erences between regions are slow
downward adjustment in complementary capital stocks and agglomeration economies, both of which receive some
support from the data. Further evidence is needed of the extent to which these persistent dynamic di erences are also
observed for other policy reforms and trade shocks.14
    A nal group of studies has examined the regional impact of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Using data on U.S. Consistent Public-Use Microdata Areas (conspumas), Hakobyan and McLaren (2016) nds that local
labor markets more exposed to Mexican imports experience lower wage growth for blue-collar workers. Using data
on U.S. counties, Choi, Kuziemko, Washington, and Wright (2020) nds that U.S. counties more exposed to Mexican
import competition experience slower total employment growth, an increase in disability implications, and a shift in
political support away from the Democratic party that was responsible for the enactment of NAFTA.

2.2     Interpretation

An enduring legacy of these reduced-form empirical ndings has been to focus trade economists on geography as a
neglected dimension along which the distributional e ects of international trade occur. In highlighting these uneven
geographical e ects, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a) has opened up a wide range of areas for further research in
interpreting and elaborating these empirical results. In the remainder of this section, we discuss some of the areas for
further debate and outstanding issues where further research is needed.


Relative Versus Aggregate E ects As discussed in Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a), equation (2) is a "di erence-
in-di erence" regression speci cation that identi es relative e ects between local labor markets with di erent levels
of import exposure, and does not identify aggregate level or general equilibrium e ects, which are captured along
with other aggregate shocks in the regression constant t . As part of the analysis in that paper, a quantitative ex-
ercise is reported in which rising exposure to Chinese import competition is found to explain 44 percent of the U.S.
manufacturing employment decline for the full sample period from 1990-2007. However, this quantitative exercise
uses an additional assumption that there is one local labor market in which the China shock has zero e ect on the
   14 Amior and Manning (2018) nds persistent di erences in the employment-population ratios across U.S. local labor markets, despite migration

responses. These results are rationalized by serially-correlated labor demand shocks, which generate a "race" between employment declines and
population responses. In this race, population lags behind employment, thereby generating persistent di erences in employment-population ratios.



                                                                       8
manufacturing employment shares of the working-age population, in which case the e ects relative to that one local
labor market can be used to compute an aggregate e ect.
    More generally, separating aggregate e ects from other contemporaneous economy-wide shocks is extremely
challenging from the point of view of empirical identi cation. In order to abstract from other economy-wide shocks,
as well as to compute unobserved model-based objects such as welfare, one typically requires a general equilibrium
model. One promising approach is to use the reduced-form "di erences-in-di erences" estimates from Autor, Dorn,
and Hanson (2013a) as a targeted moment for the model in either a calibration or a simulated method of moments
(SMM) / indirect inference estimation procedure, and then use the structure of the model to evaluate the implied
aggregate or general equilibrium e ects of the China shock, as discussed further in Section 4.8 below.15


Mechanisms and Measurement A second set of issues concerns the underlying economic mechanisms through
which trade shocks a ect the economy and the appropriate measurement of these trade shocks. Autor, Dorn, and
Hanson (2013a) provides compelling evidence of worse labor market outcomes in local labor markets more exposed
to the China shock. However, other research suggests that international trade also a ects welfare through the separate
mechanism of the price of tradeable consumption goods, including Amiti, Dai, Feenstra, and Romalis (2017), Borusyak
and Jaravel (2018) and Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016). Furthermore, some of the more negative e ects of the China
shock in more exposed local labor markets may be o set by adjustments in the prices of local goods and services,
including the price of local xed factors, such as durable building structures and land.16 From the perspective of
welfare, what matters is the e ect of international trade on real income, after taking all of these mechanisms into
account, including both e ects in the labor market through nominal income, and e ects in the product market through
the prices of tradeable consumption goods and local xed factors.
    The fact that there are multiple mechanisms through which trade a ects the economy also raises the question of
other possible measures of trade shocks. First, should one focus on imports from one country (e.g. China), from a group
of countries (e.g. low-wage countries), or from all countries (including both high and low-wage countries)? Second,
while imports of nal goods increase domestic market competition and reduce domestic labor market demand, those of
intermediate goods reduce domestic production costs and increase domestic labor market demand. Third, a key insight
from neoclassical theory is that trade involves both imports and exports, which raises the challenge of quantifying
the positive e ects of increased labor market demand for the export market in additional to any negative e ects of
reduced labor market demand in the domestic market. Fourth, in thinking about the impact of trade on domestic
welfare, further general equilibrium e ects occur through third markets, as when increased import competition from
China in European markets reduces the demand for American goods in those markets.17
    All of these mechanisms are considered in Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a). Additional empirical speci cations
are reported to incorporate e ects through U.S. exports to China, imports of intermediate inputs, and third-market
e ects. Nevertheless, simultaneously incorporating all of these mechanisms and quantifying their relative importance
is a challenging endeavor, and this remains an interesting area for further research. Subsequent research has provided
   15 In a broader discussion of the macroeconomics literature, Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) refers to these targeted moments used to a discipline

a model as "identi ed moments," in the sense that these moments permit credible empirical identi cation of model parameters, while the structure
of the model enables one to evaluate other objects of interest for which credible empirical identi cation is hard to achieve.
   16 For theory and evidence on the importance of durable housing for asymmetries in urban growth and decline, see Glaeser and Gyourko (2005).
   17 For a su cient statistics approach that highlights each of these mechanisms in the class of international trade models characterized by a

constant trade elasticity, see Kleinman, Liu, and Redding (2020).




                                                                        9
further evidence on the labor market e ects of U.S. exports (e.g. Feenstra, Ma, and Xu 2019) and input-output linkages
(e.g. Wang, Wei, Yu, and Zhu 2018). Another interesting area for further research is the extent to which there could
be heterogeneity in the local labor market e ects of trade shocks. One potential dimension of heterogeneity is the
magnitude of the trade de cit. Standard neoclassical theory suggests that a country's overall trade de cit is deter-
mined by macroeconomic considerations of saving and investment and struggles to nd much relevance for bilateral
trade de cits. Notwithstanding these caveats, Dix-Carneiro, Pessoa, Reyes-Heroles, and Traiberman (2020) develop a
dynamic model of endogenous trade de cits, in which the magnitude of the overall trade de cit in uences the severity
of labor market adjustment to a trade shock. Another potential dimension of heterogeneity is the depth of compar-
ative advantage. Eriksson, Russ, Shambaugh, and Xu (2019) develop a product cycle model, in which the e ects of a
trade shock on local labor markets are especially severe when industries are in a late-stage of the the product cycle,
and argue that this insight is of relevance for the e ects of the China shock on U.S. local labor markets.


Econometric Speci cation                  A third set of issues relates to econometric speci cation and interpretation. The
di erence-in-di erences speci cation in equation (2) has an interpretation as a shift-share research design follow-
ing Bartik (1991), in which one studies the impact of a set of aggregate shocks (or "shifters" ) on units di erentially
exposed to them, with the exposure measured by a set of disaggregate weights (or "shares").18 Speci cally, shift-share
regressions have the following form:
                                                                                             S
                                            Yi = Xi + Zi  + i ,                     Xi =          wis Xs                (3)
                                                                                            s=1

                                                                                       S
                                               wis  0 for all s,           and              wis  1,
                                                                                      s=1

where i indexes the exposed units (e.g. local labor markets); s indexes the level at which the aggregate shocks occur
(e.g. sectors); s is the aggregate shock for sector s; wis is the weight of sector s in local labor market i; Yi is an
outcome of interest; and Zi are control variables.
    A key issue in interpreting such shift-share speci cations is whether one believes that the exogenous source of
variation for identi cation is the aggregate shifters Xs (changes in sectoral import exposure) or the disaggregate
shares wis (shares of sectors in employment within each local labor market). Adopting the rst of these two per-
spectives, Adão, Kolesár, and Morales (2019) shows that the presence of these unobserved shift-share components
introduces a spatial dependence into the regression residuals. Using the identifying assumption that the shifters are
as good as randomly assigned conditional on the regression controls and the shares, the paper develops methods for
making statistical inference that take this spatial dependence into account. These methods essentially form clusters of
cross-section units based on sectoral composition, which have a similar variance of a weighted sum of the regression
residuals. Using both Monte Carlo evidence and two popular applications of shift-share regressions, the paper shows
that computing standard errors in the correct way matters in practice. For example, replicating the Autor, Dorn, and
Hanson (2013a) research design, the new con dence intervals for the e ects of exposure to Chinese imports on U.S.
local labor markets increase by 23-66 percent relative to those implied by state-clustered or heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors. Importantly, the change in the con dence intervals is asymmetric around the estimated coe cient,
  18 Related   research prior to Bartik (1991) includes Perlo (1957) and Freeman (1980).




                                                                         10
such that these estimated coe cients remain statistically signi cant, but the 95 percent con dence intervals now
include substantially more negative e ects of exposure to Chinese imports.
   Which of these two perspectives one takes is important not only for inference but also for identi cation. The
validity of shift-share instrument variables (SSIV) regressions hinges on the orthogonality between the shift-share
instrument and the residual across the exposed units (e.g. local labor markets). Again taking the perspective that the
aggregate shocks are the source of identifying variation, Borusyak, Hull, and Jaravel (2019) show that this orthogo-
nality condition is equivalent to the orthogonality of the aggregate shocks and an aggregate residual (e.g. at the sector
level). Therefore, the SSIV regression coe cients can be obtained from an equivalent IV regression estimated at the
level of the aggregate shocks, in which the outcome and treatment variables are rst averaged, using the exposure
shares as weights. This equivalence result is used to show that SSIV estimates are consistent if either the aggregate
shocks are as good as randomly assigned (as if arising from a natural experiment) or a law of large numbers applies
at the aggregate level of the shocks (the instrument incorporates many su ciently independent shocks, each with
su ciently small average exposure). Importantly, these conditions allow the disaggregate shares themselves to be
endogenous, as is likely to be the case for the shares of sectors in employment within each local labor market, which
could be a ected by other common industry shocks to for example tastes or technology.
   Adopting the second perspective that the disaggregate shares are the source of identifying variation, Goldsmith-
Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (2020) show that the shift-share instrumental variables (SSIV) estimator is equivalent
to an overidenti ed generalized method of moments (GMM) estimator using the disaggregate shares as instruments
and a weight matrix constructed from the aggregate shifters. An important implication of this result is that the
Bartik estimator can be decomposed into a weighted sum of just-identi ed instrumental variable estimators that
use each disaggregate share as a separate instrument. Following Rotemberg (1983), these weights depend on the
covariance between the tted value of the endogenous variable using each disaggregate share as an instrument and
the endogenous variable itself. Recovering these Rotemberg weights informs a researcher about which disaggregate
shares are driving the estimated Bartik coe cient, and hence how sensitive this estimate is to misspeci cation (i.e.
endogeneity) in any of these instruments. In an empirical application estimating the elasticity of labor supply and
instrumenting labor demand using the Bartik estimator, these Rotemberg weights are highly skewed, with over 40
percent of the weight on the top- ve industries.
   More broadly, there remain other potential concerns about the validity of the exclusion restriction in any Bartik
research design. A classic issue in the econometric literature is the so-called re ection problem, in which the aggregate
shifters are in uenced by correlated individual shocks across the disaggregate units. To alleviate this concern, many
Bartik empirical applications use a "leave-out" version of the instrument, in which the aggregate shifter for each
disaggregate unit is computed leaving out that disaggregate unit. As discussed above, to address the concern that U.S.
import exposure could be endogenous to changes in the share of manufacturing in employment in U.S. local labor
markets, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a) use import exposure constructed using the aggregate imports of other
developed countries as an instrument. Nevertheless, one could still raise identi cation concerns, such as a change
in technology that leads to a common loss of comparative advantage in both the U.S. and other developed countries,
and hence is responsible for both a decline in the share of manufacturing employment and increased imports from
China. To address this concern, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a) report a number of speci cation checks, including
an alternative measure of import exposure based on estimating a gravity equation for international trade. Further


                                                           11
support for substantial local labor markets e ects of international trade comes from the robustness of these ndings
from a wide range of di erent empirical contexts, such as the ndings from Brazil's trade liberalization discussed
above. In this vein, using the trade shock from the grain invasion that followed the 1846 Repeal of the Corn Laws and
an instrument based on the suitability of agroclimatic conditions for the cultivation of wheat, Heblich, Redding, and
Zylberberg (2020) nd substantial distributional consequences of trade across locations within England and Wales.


Theoretical Foundations A fourth set of issues relates to the theoretical foundations for the reduced-form re-
gression speci cations estimated across local labor markets. In Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a), the reduced-form
regression (2) is derived from a rst-order approximation to a gravity equation model of international trade. In Kovak
(2013), a related speci cation is derived from a rst-order approximation to the speci c-factors model of international
trade, in which labor is assumed to immobile across regions but mobile across sectors, whereas the speci c factors
are immobile across both regions and sectors.
    More broadly, the nding that local labor markets more exposed to trade shocks have substantially and statistically
signi cantly worse labor market outcomes, with little evidence of population movements, raises the question of how
these empirical results can be consistent with spatial equilibrium.19 To the extent that population is mobile across
local labor markets, and some are more adversely a ected by the trade shock than others, we would expect to observe
population movements across these local labor markets. Furthermore, looking further back in history, we have ex-
amples in which changes in economic and political opportunities led to large-scale population movements, including
for example the migration of African-Americans from the South to the North, as examined in Wilkerson (2011) and
Platt Boustan (2020). A broader puzzle for the theoretical and empirical literature is understanding the reasons why
geographical mobility (and other measures of mobility) have declined in the U.S. economy in recent decades.20 Nev-
ertheless, despite this decline in geographical mobility, some evidence has begun to emerge of population responses
to the China shock, as for example in Greenland, Lopresti, and McHenry (2019).
    One response to these empirical ndings could be that not enough time has elapsed yet, and the long-run pop-
ulation response ultimately could be larger than the short-run population response. This suggests frictions and ad-
justment costs, as in Artuç, Chaudhuri, and McLaren (2010) and Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019), and discussed
further in Section 4.8 below. Another response could be that many of the labor market outcomes are in nominal
terms, and changes in nominal wages need not be fully informative about changes in real wages, if there are o setting
changes in the prices of local goods and services, including for example housing. Both of these responses push in
the direction that the empirical ndings from these reduced-form regression provide useful moments to discipline
theoretical models, as considered further in later sections.
    A further issue for consideration is that these reduced-form regressions treat local labor markets as independent
units in a cross-section regression, whereas in reality they are linked through goods trade, commuting and migra-
tion ows, complicating inference. Although choosing commuting zones as the measure of the local labor market
minimizes commuting ows between di erent local labor markets, wherever one draws the boundaries of these com-
muting zones, there is typically some commuting ows across these boundaries. The resulting spatial correlation
introduced by linkages in goods and factor markets could help to explain the ndings of muted population responses
  19 Forevidence on departures from factor price equalization across U.S. local labor markets, see Bernard, Redding, and Schott (2013).
  20 Forevidence on the fall in geographical mobility, see Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017). For ndings of a decline in business dynamism, see
Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2014).



                                                                      12
to local labor market shocks. For workers with skills speci c to an industry, the ability to relocate geography may not
insulate them from a trade shock, if all locations specializing in that industry are hit by the same shock. An emerging
literature is starting to explore the implications of these spatial linkages between local labor markets, including Monte,
Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018) and Adão, Arkolakis, and Esposito (2019).
      The interpretation of the e ects of trade shocks can be further complicated by reallocations of resources between
locations within rms. Large U.S. manufacturing rms typically operate many plants, only some of which are in the
manufacturing sector, while other plants undertake research and development (R&D), perform headquarter services,
or operate in the wholesale and retail sectors. Although there is strong evidence of increased exit and a contraction of
employment at U.S. manufacturing plants more exposed to Chinese imports, there is also evidence that rms operat-
ing those plants simultaneously expand production at their non-manufacturing plants, as in Magyari (2017), Bloom,
Handley, Kurman, and Luck (2020) and Ding, Fort, Redding, and Schott (2019). This pattern of results is potential con-
sistent with a version of the model of o shoring of Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008), in which o shoring some
production tasks directly reduces employment for those tasks, but raises productivity and hence increases overall em-
ployment. Nevertheless, to the extent that the contracting manufacturing plants and expanding non-manufacturing
plants are in di erent local labor markets, the trade shock still has an uneven geographical incidence.


3       Modeling Economic Activity Between Cities and Regions
While the research discussed in the previous section uses the uneven distribution of economic activity within coun-
tries to quantify the distributional consequences of international trade, we now turn to research that seeks to explain
this uneven distribution of economic activity. Traditionally, research on economic geography considered stylized set-
tings with a small number of symmetric locations.21 More recent research has sought to develop quantitative spatial
models that are su ciently rich as to connect directly with the observed data on many asymmetric locations. These
frameworks incorporate di erences across locations in both rst-nature geography (locational endowments, such as
access to the coast) and second-nature geography (the proximity of economic agents relative to one another in geo-
graphic space). Typically, these models have the property that they can be inverted to recover unobserved location
characteristics (e.g. productivity, amenities and trade costs) that exactly rationalize the observed data on the endoge-
nous variables of the model as an equilibrium outcome. Therefore, these frameworks can be used to quantify the roles
of rst and second-nature geography in explaining the observed distribution of economic activity. Nevertheless, these
frameworks remain su ciently tractable as to permit an analytical characterization of the existence and uniqueness
of the general equilibrium and to be used for realistic counterfactuals.
      In this section, we examine quantitative spatial models of the distribution of economic activity across regions or
systems of cities, where geography matters because of goods trade costs and migration frictions between locations.
In a later section, we consider quantitative urban models of the internal structure of cities, which introduces another
dimension of geography in the form of commuting costs between locations. To connect with the prior theoretical
literature on economic geography across regions and cities, we consider a multi-region version of the Helpman (1998)
model, in which there is a single production sector and the costs of trading goods are the only friction between
locations. Nevertheless, a key insight of recent research on economic geography is that there is an entire class of
    21 See   the classic theoretical papers by Krugman (1991c) and Krugman and Venables (1995).




                                                                         13
quantitative spatial models with a constant trade elasticity that are isomorphic in terms of predictions for the spatial
distribution of activity, as shown in Section C of the online appendix. This class of models includes frameworks of
perfect competition and external economies of scale, such as a version of the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model (as
examined in Redding 2016) and a version of the Armington (1969) model (as considered in Allen and Arkolakis 2014).
    In this class of quantitative spatial models, the key exogenous di erences in rst-nature geography across loca-
tions are productivity (An ), amenities such as climate and scenic views (Bn ), the supply of oor space (Hn ), and
bilateral trade costs between locations (dni ). The spatial distribution of economic activity is determined by the inter-
action between these exogenous features of rst-nature geography and endogenous second-nature geography from
agglomeration and dispersion forces. In the Helpman (1998) model, agglomeration forces arise from the combination
of love of variety, increasing returns to scale and transport costs, while dispersion forces take the form of a perfectly
inelastic supply of oor space. In the wider class of quantitative spatial models with a constant trade elasticity, alter-
native sources of agglomeration forces can be introduced, such as endogenous components of productivity (An ) and
amenities (Bn ), because of external economies of scale.
    For most of this section, we focus for simplicity on a static model of worker and rm locations, such that we are
concerned with the comparative statics of steady-state distributions of economic activity. Later in this section, we
extend the analysis to incorporate multiple sectors and migration frictions, in order to connect with the reduced-form
empirical literature on local labor markets considered in the previous section. In some of these extensions, worker
and rm location decisions become dynamic, and we are concerned with both the comparative statics of steady-state
distributions of economic activity and the transition dynamics between steady-states.
    We now introduce the basic model structure. We consider an economy consisting of a set of locations indexed
by n  N . Each location is endowed with an exogenous supply of oor space (Hi ).22 The economy as a whole is
                       ¯ of workers, where each worker has one unit of labor that is supplied inelastically with zero
endowed with a measure L
disutility.23 Workers are perfectly geographically mobile and hence in equilibrium real wages are equalized across all
populated locations. Locations are connected by a bilateral transport network that can be used to ship goods subject
to symmetric iceberg trade costs, such that dni = din  1 units must be shipped from region i in order for one unit
to arrive in region n, where dni > 1 for n = i and dnn = 1.

3.1     Consumer Preferences

Preferences are de ned over goods consumption and residential oor space use. We assume that these preferences
take the Cobb-Douglas form, such that indirect utility for a worker in location n is given by:24

                                                           Bn vn
                                                 Un =       Q1-
                                                                 ,                 0 <  < 1,                                                    (4)
                                                          Pn  n

  22 Allowing  for an endogenous supply of oor space that is a constant elasticity function of its price following Saiz (2010) is straightforward.
Hsieh and Moretti (2019) show that heterogeneity in this oor space elasticity that is correlated with location productivity can have important
aggregate implications for economy-wide productivity.
  23 Although for simplicity we assume that all workers are ex ante identical with a single type of labor, an interesting area of active research is

the spatial sorting of workers who are heterogeneous in terms of human capital or skills across space, including Moretti (2013), Diamond (2016),
Fajgelbaum and Gaubert (2020), Davis and Dingel (2020) and Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte, and Schwartzman 2020.
  24 For empirical evidence using U.S. data in support of the constant housing expenditure share implied by the Cobb-Douglas functional form, see

Davis and Ortalo-Magné (2011).




                                                                        14
where Bn denotes amenities; vn is worker income; Pn is the consumption goods price index; Qn is the price of oor
space.25 The consumption goods price index is assumed to take the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) form:
                                                                                                  1
                                                                      Mi                         1-
                                                                                     1-
                                                 Pn =                      pni ( )        d            ,                                        (5)
                                                           iN     0


where Mi is the endogenous measure of varieties produced in each location; pni ( ) is the cost to a consumer in
location n of a variety  from location i; and we assume that varieties are substitutes ( > 1).

3.2     Production

Varieties are produced under conditions of monopolistic competition and increasing returns to scale. To produce a
variety in a location, a rm must incur a xed cost of F units of labor and a constant variable cost in terms of labor
that depends on that location's productivity (Ai ).26 Therefore the total amount of labor (li ( )) required to produce
xi ( ) units of a variety  in location i is:
                                                                                  xi ( )
                                                             li ( ) = F +                .                                                      (6)
                                                                                   Ai
Pro t maximization implies that equilibrium prices are a constant markup over marginal cost of supplying a variety
to a market. Therefore, the cost to a consumer in market n of consuming variety  from location i is given by:

                                                                                                wi
                                                    pni ( ) = pni =                       dni      ,                                            (7)
                                                                                -1              Ai

where wi is the wage. With free entry and exit of varieties, equilibrium pro ts are zero. Using this equilibrium pricing
rule (7) in the requirement that pro ts are zero, equilibrium output of each variety is equal to a constant that depends
on location productivity:
                                                                 ¯i = Ai ( - 1)F.
                                                        xi ( ) = x                                                                              (8)

Using this solution for equilibrium output (8) in the production technology (6), equilibrium employment for each
variety is the same for all locations: li ( ) = ¯
                                                l = F . Given this constant equilibrium employment for each variety,
labor market clearing implies that the total measure of varieties supplied by each location is proportional to the
endogenous supply of workers choosing to locate there:

                                                                                Li
                                                                  Mi =             .                                                            (9)
                                                                                F

3.3     Price Indices and Expenditure Shares

Using equilibrium prices (7) and labor market clearing (9), the price index (5) can be expressed in terms of wages and
employment in each location:
                                                                                                             1
                                                                  1                                         1-
                                                          1      1-
                                                                                                       1-
                                      Pn =                                       Li (dni wi /Ai )                ,                             (10)
                                           -1             F
                                                                           iN

   25 A straightforward generalization is to allow workers to have idiosyncratic amenity draws for each location from an extreme value distribution,

as in Redding (2016). In this generalization, each location faces an upward-sloping supply curve for labor, with an elasticity determined by the
shape parameter of the extreme value distribution.
   26 Although for simplicity we assume a representative rm in each location, a straightforward generalization is to introduce rm heterogeneity

with an untruncated Pareto productivity distribution following Melitz (2003). Similarly, the production technology can be generalized to include
intermediate inputs and input-output linkages following Caliendo and Parro (2015) and Caliendo, Parro, Rossi-Hansberg, and Sarte (2018). Finally,
another extension allows rms to have heterogeneous productivities across several locations, and choose in which of these locations to produce,
depending for example on tax incentives, as in Serrato and Zidar (2016) and Fajgelbaum, Morales, Suárez Serrato, and Zidar (2019).


                                                                           15
where the presence of employment in this expression re ects the fact that the measure of varieties produced in each
location is endogenous to the measure of workers that choose to live in that location.27
    Using the CES expenditure function, equilibrium prices (7) and labor market clearing (9), the share of location n's
expenditure on goods produced in location i is:
                                                           -                                      1-
                                                     M i p1
                                                          ni                   Li (dni wi /Ai )
                                       ni =                  1- =                                       1- .                                     (11)
                                                    kN Mk pnk                 kN   Lk (dnk wk /Ak )
The model therefore implies a "gravity equation" for goods trade, where the bilateral trade between locations n and i
depends on both "bilateral resistance" (bilateral trade costs dni ) and "multilateral resistance" (trade costs to all other
locations dnk ), as in Anderson and van Wincoop (2003). A key parameter in this gravity equation is the partial
elasticity of bilateral trade with respect to trade costs (d ln(ni /nn )/d ln dni = -( - 1)), which is determined here
by the elasticity of substitution between varieties ( ). Together (10) and (11) imply that each location's price index
can be again written in terms of its trade share with itself, such that:
                                                                                      1
                                                                        Ln           1-
                                                                                           wn
                                                     Pn =                                     .                                                  (12)
                                                             -1         F nn               An

3.4     Market Clearing

Expenditure on oor space in each location is assumed to be redistributed lump sum to the workers residing in that
location.28 Combining this lump-sum redistribution with the implication of Cobb-Douglas utility that expenditure on
 oor space is a constant share of income, we nd that income in each location (vn Ln ) is a constant multiple of labor
income in each location (wn Ln ):
                                                                                            wn Ln
                                                vn Ln = wn Ln + (1 - )vn Ln =                     .                                              (13)
                                                                                             
Goods market clearing implies that revenue in each location equals expenditure on goods produced in that location.
We assume that trade in balanced, such that expenditure equals income in each location.29 Using zero pro ts, which
implies that revenue equals labor income, and utility maximization, which implies that expenditure on goods is a
constant share of income, this goods market clearing condition can be written as:

                                                wi Li =         ni vn Ln =              ni wn Ln .                                               (14)
                                                          nN                       nN

Land market clearing implies that the supply of oor space equals the demand for oor space. Using utility maximiza-
tion in this land market clearing condition, the price of oor space (Qn ) is given by:
                                                           (1 - )vn Ln   1 -  wn Ln
                                                  Qn =                 =            .                                                            (15)
                                                                Hn             Hn

3.5     Population Mobility

Population mobility implies that workers receive the same real income in all populated locations:
                                                                      Bn vn  ¯,
                                                            Un =       Q1-
                                                                            =U                                                                   (16)
                                                                     Pn  n
   27 Although we focus for simplicity on a single consumption goods sector and the overall level of economic activity, geography can also in uence

structural transformation across sectors and the composition of economic activity, as in Fajgelbaum and Redding (2018).
   28 An alternative assumption is that expenditure on oor space is paid into an economy-wide portfolio, in which workers in each location hold

shares, as in Caliendo, Parro, Rossi-Hansberg, and Sarte (2018). Although these di erent assumptions are useful simpli cations, an interesting area
for further research is developing quantitative spatial models with distributions of asset ownership across heterogeneous agents.
   29 Following Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2007) in the quantitative international trade literature, it is straightforward to introduce exogenous trade

de cits, but a more satisfactory approach is to endogenize these de cits as in Eaton, Kortum, and Neiman (2016) and Reyes-Heroles (2016).


                                                                         16
Using the price index (12), the equality between expenditure and income in each location (13), and land market clearing
(15) in indirect utility (4), we can write this population mobility condition as follows:
                                                                               (1-)-1
                                                   1-        -/( -1)     -        -1
                                        ¯ = An Bn Hn  nn
                                        U                           
                                                                        Ln
                                                                                        .                          (17)
                                                       1           1-    1- 1-
                                              -    1  F                   

Re-arranging this population mobility condition to take population (Ln ) over to the left-hand side, and dividing this
expression by its sum across all locations, we obtain the following result that the population share of each location
        ¯ ) depends on its productivity (An ), amenities (Bn ), supply of oor space (Hn ) and domestic trade share
(n  Ln /L
(nn ) relative to those of all other locations:
                                                                                     -1
                                                           1-       -/( -1)       (1-)-1

                                    Ln              An Bn Hn  nn
                                n = ¯ =                                                  -1     .                  (18)
                                    L                         1-        -/( -1)       (1-)-1
                                                  kN   Ak Bk Hk  kk

Intuitively, locations with higher productivity (An ), amenities (Bn ), supply of oor space (Hn ), and market access
(lower own trade shares nn ) relative to other locations have higher equilibrium population shares (n ).

3.6    General Equilibrium
                                                                                                                ¯ ),
The general equilibrium of the model can be again represented by the share of workers in each location (n = Ln /L
the share of each location's expenditure on goods produced by other locations (ni ) and the wage in each location
(wn ). Using goods market clearing (14), the trade share (11), and population mobility (18), this equilibrium triple
{n , ni , wn } solves the following system of equations for all i, n  N :

                                                   wi i =         ni wn n ,                                        (19)
                                                            nN

                                                                         1-
                                                       i (dni wi /Ai )
                                           ni =                               1- ,                                 (20)
                                                       kN   k (dnk wk /Ak )
                                                                                  -1
                                                         1-      -/( -1)       (1-)-1
                                                  An Bn Hn  nn
                                    n =                                              -1     .                      (21)
                                                           1-       -/( -1)       (1-)-1
                                             kN     Ak Bk Hk  kk
   In contrast to international trade models, in which country labor endowments are exogenous, the population of
each location population is endogenously determined in this system of equations (19)-(21). This population mobility,
together with love of variety, increasing returns to scale and transport costs, gives rise to agglomeration forces from
forward and backward linkages between rms and consumers (see Hirschman 1958 and Krugman 1991a). The forward
linkage runs downstream from rms to consumers: love of variety implies that consumers demand all varieties and
transport costs imply that they want to locate close to these varieties. The backward linkage runs upstream from con-
sumers to rms: increasing returns to scale imply that rms want to concentrate production of their variety in a single
location and transport costs imply that they want this location to be close to markets. Together, these forward and
backward linkages engender a virtuous circle of cumulative causation, which acts an agglomeration force: consumers
want to locate close to rms and rms want to locate close to consumers. Working against this agglomeration force is
a congestion force from an inelastic supply of oor space: as more economic activity concentrates in a location, this
bids up the price of oor space, making that location less attractive relative to other locations.

                                                             17
    The general equilibrium distribution of economic activity that solves the system of equations (19)-(21) re ects
the interaction between these agglomeration and dispersion forces (second-nature geography) and the exogenous
di erences in productivity, amenities, oor space supply and transport costs across locations ( rst-nature geography).
If the agglomeration forces are su ciently strong relative to the dispersion forces in the model, there is the potential
for multiple equilibria, and we now turn in the next section to a formal characterization of the conditions under which
there exists a unique equilibrium versus multiple equilibria.

3.7     Existence and Uniqueness

The properties of the general equilibrium of the model can be characterized by combining the gravity structure of
international trade with the population mobility condition. Following the arguments in Allen and Arkolakis (2014), we
can use these two sets of relationships to derive the following two systems of equations linking wages and population
in each location:                                                                                1-
                                                                            1-                     (1- )
                                                                               1-          Hn
                                                                1-       Bn  w n
                                      ¯ 1- 1
                                      W
                                                      
                                                                     =
                                                                                           Ln
                                                                                                                                           (22)
                                          F           -1                                            1-
                                                                                        wi
                                                                              iN Li dni Ai

                                                    1-                               1-
                            ¯ 1- 1
                            W
                                           
                                                            =
                                                                                   wi Ai
                                                                                                                       .                   (23)
                                F          -1                          -      1-( -1) 1- 
                                                                                                 ( -1) 1-      -1

                                                                nN   d1
                                                                      ni Ln
                                                                                       
                                                                                            Hn                    
                                                                                                             Bn  wn
      ¯ is a scalar that depends on the common level of utility across all locations, as de ned in Section B7 of the
where W
online appendix. Under the assumption that trade costs are symmetric (dni = din ), the eigenvector that solves this
system of equations satis es:
                                                  1-2  -1       ( -1) 1- 
                                                                              -( -1) 1- 
                                                 wn  An Ln             
                                                                            Hn        
                                                                                            = ,                                            (24)

where  is a scalar.30 Using this relationship between wages and populations (24) in either equation (22) or (23),
we obtain the following system of N equations that determine the N populations of each location in terms of the
exogenous location characteristics (An , Bn , Hn , dni ) and parameters ( , , F ):
               ( -1)( -1)         ( -1)         ( -1)(1-)
           -                 - (2-1)       -
   L~ 1
    n An
                  2 -1
                            Bn            Hn (2-1)          =
                                            ¯ 1-                         1-            2
                                                                                                 ( -1)   ( -1)( -1)    ( -1)( -1)(1-)
                                           W                                           1
                                                               dni            L~ 1
                                                                               i           Ai 2-1 Bi      (2 -1)
                                                                                                                      Hi   (2 -1)
                                                                                                                                        , (25)
                                            F               -1
                                                    iN

                 ¯ is determined by the requirement that the labor market clear (
where the scalar W                                                                                                   ¯ ) and
                                                                                                                Ln = L
                                                                                                          nN

                                                        -1                          (1 - )
                                                  ~
                                                             ,                1            ,
                                                       2 - 1                          
                                                       ( - 1)(1 - )
                                                   2  1 +
                                                    -                 .
                                              -1             
This system of equations (25) summarizes how the population of each location (Ln ) is in uenced by rst-nature
geography (An , Bn , Hn , dni ) and second-nature geography (the population of all other locations). We are now in a
position to formally state the conditions under which there exists a unique equilibrium.

Proposition 1 Assume  (1 - ) > 1. Given the productivities, amenities and oor space in each location {An , Bn ,
Hn }, and symmetric bilateral trade frictions {dni = din } between all pairs of locations n, i  N , there exist unique
equilibrium populations in each location (Ln ) that solve the system of equations (25).
  30 For a more general characterization of the conditions for the existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium, without assuming symmetric trade

costs, see Allen, Arkolakis, and Takahashi (2019).


                                                                      18
Proof. Under the assumption  (1 - ) > 1, we have 2 /1 < 1, which implies that there exists a unique solution to
this system of equations (25), as shown in Fujimoto and Krause (1985) and Allen and Arkolakis (2014).

   When the parameter restriction  (1 - ) > 1 is not satis ed, the model exhibits multiple equilibria, such that
the spatial distribution of economic activity is not uniquely pinned down by exogenous location characteristics (An ,
Bn , Hn , dni ). This restriction on parameters for a unique equilibrium ( (1 - ) > 1) has an intuitive interpretation
and corresponds to the assumption that agglomeration forces are not too strong relative to dispersion forces. A
higher elasticity of substitution ( ) reduces consumer love of variety, which weakens agglomeration forces, because
consumers care less about locating close to large numbers of varieties. A higher share of expenditure on oor space
(1 - ) strengthens dispersion forces in the model, because as economic activity concentrates in a given location and
bids up the price of oor space, this now has a larger impact on consumers' cost of living.
   Although we have derived Proposition 1 for the Helpman (1998) economic geography model, analogous results
hold for the entire class of quantitative spatial models characterized by a constant trade elasticity, as shown for a
version of the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model from Redding (2016) and a version of the Armington (1969) model from
Allen and Arkolakis (2014) in Section C of the online appendix. As data are typically observed for discrete regions, we
have focused throughout the exposition on this case of discrete regions rather than on continuous space. Nonetheless,
we can instead consider the case of continuous space, in which case equation (25) corresponds to an integral equation,
with an integral rather than a sum on the right-hand side. For this case of continuous space, Allen and Arkolakis (2014)
show that similar results for existence and uniqueness apply using Theorem 2.19 in Zabreyko, Koshelev, Krasnoselskii,
Mikhlin, Rakovshchik, and Stetísenko (1975).
   This characterization of the conditions for existence and uniqueness in this class of quantitative spatial models with
a constant trade elasticity is important for a number of reasons. First, for parameter values for which  (1 - ) > 1,
this characterization yields an algorithm for solving for the unique xed point of this system of equations, in which
one starts with an initial guess for the vector of equilibrium populations (Ln ), and then updates that guess using the
solution of the system. Second, for these parameter values, this characterization ensures that counterfactual changes
in location characteristics (e.g. in trade costs dni as a result of transport infrastructure improvements) will have
determinate e ects on the spatial equilibrium. Therefore, we can use this class of quantitative spatial models to assess
the general equilibrium e ects of a wide range of counterfactual interventions.
   For these reasons, the literature on quantitative spatial models has largely concentrated on the range of parameter
values for which there exists a unique spatial equilibrium distribution of economic activity. This focus creates a tension
with the earlier theoretical literature on economic geography, as synthesized in Fujita, Krugman, and Venables (1999),
which was often motivated by the idea that multiple equilibrium spatial distributions of economic activity could
emerge from a "featureless plain" of symmetric space. At a more conceptual level, whether a model is characterized
by multiple equilibria may depend on its level of abstraction. If we omit from our model the relevant idiosyncratic
factors that in reality determined one allocation rather than another, our model can exhibit multiple equilibria. Once
we include more of these idiosyncratic factors into the model, the equilibrium distribution of economic activity can
become unique. Nevertheless, no model can include all such idiosyncratic factors, since otherwise it would cease to
be a model, and would instead become a description of reality. Therefore, whether one uses a model with a single
equilibrium or multiple equilibria could be viewed in part as a practical question of what is the most useful way to


                                                           19
think about the world, which in turn could depend on the question at hand and the data available.

3.8    Recovering Locational Fundamentals

As quantitative spatial models incorporate both rst-nature geography (productivity, amenities, oor space supply
and trade costs) and second-nature geography (the endogenous location of agents relative to one another), they pro-
vide frameworks for assessing the relative importance of these two sets of determinants of the spatial distribution
of economic activity. Typically, these models have an invertibility property, such that given the observed data on
the endogenous variables and values for the model parameters, one can solve for the unobserved exogenous location
characteristics that exactly rationalize the observed data as an equilibrium outcome. In the remainder of this subsec-
tion, we illustrate this invertibility property using the Helpman (1998) model, assuming that the model parameters ( ,
) are known and that we observe wages (wn ), populations (Ln ) and bilateral trade shares (ni ) between locations.
   Under our assumption that bilateral trade costs are symmetric (dni = din ) and there are no internal trade costs
(dnn = dii = 1), we can recover bilateral trade costs from the observed bilateral trade shares (ni ) using the Head
and Ries (2001) index. Using these assumptions and equation (11), we have:
                                                                 1-

                                             -        dni din     2
                                                                          ni in
                                           d1
                                            ni   =                    =         .                                    (26)
                                                      dnn dii             nn ii
Using these solutions for bilateral trade costs (dni ) and the trade share (11), we can solve for productivities from the
goods market clearing condition (14):
                                                                          1-
                                                       Li (dni wi /Ai )
                                    wi Li =                                    1- wn Ln ,                            (27)
                                              nN     kN   Lk (dnk wk /Ak )

where all variables in this equation are either observed (wn , Ln ) or already have been solved for (dni ) except for
productivity (Ai ). As the fraction on the right-hand side of this equation is homogenous of degree zero in productivity,
these productivities only can be determined up to a normalization or choice of units in which to measure them. Given
this normalization (e.g. setting productivity in one location equal to one), equation (27) determines a unique vector
of productivities in each location (Ai ), up to this normalization.
                                                      -
   Using these solutions for bilateral trade costs (d1
                                                     ni ) and productivities (Ai ), we can recover a composite of ameni-

ties and oor space supply from the location choice probabilities (18):
                                                                                -1
                                                                -/( -1)      (1-)-1

                                       Ln             An Bn nn
                                   n = ¯ =                                           -1     ,                        (28)
                                       L                          -/( -1)         (1-)-1
                                                     kN   Ak Bk kk

                                                1-
where composite amenities are de ned as Bn  Bn Hn  . Again all variables in this equation are either observed
(Ln , ni ) or already have been solved for (An ). As the fraction on the right-hand side of this equation is homogenous
of degree zero in composite amenities, they again can be determined up to a normalization or choice of units in which
to measure them. Given this normalization (e.g. setting composite amenities in one location equal to one), equation
(28) determines a unique vector of composite amenities in each location (Bi ), up to this normalization.
   Under our model assumptions, these unobserved location characteristics (dni , An , Bn ) exactly rationalize the
observed data (ni , wn , Ln ) as an equilibrium outcome. Having recovered these unobserved location characteristics
(dni , An , Bn ), we can undertake model-based decompositions to assess the relative importance of these di erent
determinants of the observed spatial distribution of economic activity, as discussed further in the next section.

                                                            20
   Although model inversion here takes a particularly simple form, this example illustrates a variety of broader
properties of quantitative spatial models. First, whether invertibility is satis ed depends on both the model and the
data. On the one hand, even in a model with multiple equilibria, invertibility can be satis ed if su cient data are
observed. Conditional on these observed data, it may be possible to use the equilibrium conditions of the model recover
the unobserved location characteristics that exactly rationalize this observed equilibrium, even if another (unobserved)
equilibrium could have occurred. On the other hand, even in a model with a single equilibrium, invertibility may not be
satis ed if some data are unobserved. Conditional on the observed equilibrium, there may not be enough information
available to uniquely determine unobserved location characteristics, or only composites of these unobserved location
characteristics may be uniquely determined (as here for composite amenities Bn ).
   Second, our assumption that bilateral trade shares are observed may not be satis ed for many empirical appli-
cations, such as those considering spatially-disaggregated regions within countries. In cases where bilateral trade is
not observed, an alternative approach is to parameterize bilateral trade costs (e.g. by assuming that they are a known
power function of distance). Given such a parameterization, productivity and composite amenities can be recovered
from equations (27) and (28) using an analogous approach as above (see for example Redding and Sturm 2008 and
Allen and Arkolakis 2014). Third, even if bilateral trade shares are observed, our assumption of symmetric bilateral
trade costs and no internal trade costs may not be satis ed, in which case the Head and Ries (2001) index in equation
(26) will not recover bilateral trade costs, but rather a generalized mean of bilateral trade costs in each direction rela-
tive to internal trade costs. A further issue that becomes particularly relevant using data for small spatial units is the
presence of zero bilateral trade ows, which only can be rationalized in this model with a continuous measure of va-
rieties by in nite bilateral trade costs. An alternative approach to rationalizing these zeros arises in stochastic models
with discreteness, in which departures from the law of large numbers in small samples can induce zero bilateral ows,
as in Eaton, Kortum, and Sotelo (2013) and Dingel and Tintelnot (2020).
   Finally, for any assumed value of the model's structural parameters ( , ), we can invert the model and recover
values of the unobserved exogenous location characteristics (dni , Ai , Bi ) that exactly rationalize the observed endoge-
nous variables (ni , wi , Li ) data as an equilibrium outcome. Therefore, the model's ability to explain these observed
endogenous variables cannot be viewed as providing support for its predictions, since we have exactly as many de-
grees of freedom (unobserved location characteristics) as data (observed endogenous variable). To validate the model,
we need to examine its separate predictions for endogenous variables not used as part of this quantitative analysis.
Relatedly, to estimate the model's structural parameters ( , ), we also require further information, which might
come in the form of additional data or orthogonality conditions in terms of the unobserved locational fundamentals,
as discussed further in later sections.

3.9    Counterfactuals

A key feature of quantitative spatial models is that they remain su ciently tractable to be used for counterfactuals
to evaluate empirically-relevant public policy interventions, such as the construction of a particular link in the U.S.
Interstate Highway System. These counterfactuals can be undertaken using the exact-hat methodology introduced
into the quantitative international trade literature by Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2007). We start with the counterfac-
tual equilibrium conditions of the model. We next rewrite these counterfactual equilibrium conditions in terms of the
observed values of the endogenous variables in the initial equilibrium and the relative changes in these endogenous


                                                            21
variables between the two equilibria. In doing so, we use a prime to denote a counterfactual value of a variable and a
                                                                                      ^  x /x. Adopting this exact-hat
hat to denote the relative change of a variable between the two equilibria, such that x
algebra approach, we can use these equilibrium conditions to solve for the counterfactual changes in the endogenous
variables, given only the observed values of the endogenous variables in the initial equilibrium, and without having to
solve for the high-dimensional unobserved location fundamentals. For example, instead of having to make additional
assumptions to parametrize unobserved bilateral trade costs, we use the observed values of bilateral trade shares in
the initial equilibrium to capture these unobserved bilateral trade costs.
   To undertake these counterfactuals, we require four key inputs. The rst is the observed values of the endogenous
variables in the initial equilibrium in the data, which are here wages (wi ), population (Li ), and bilateral trade shares
(ni ). The second are values for the model's structural parameters, which here are the elasticity of trade with respect
to trade costs ( - 1) and the share of oor space in expenditure (1 - ). The third is an assumed comparative static,
                                                             ^ni = 1 for some n, i), as a result of the construction
such as an assumed relative change in bilateral trade costs (d
of new transport infrastructure. The fourth is an assumption about what location characteristics remain constant in
response to this comparative static, such as an assumption that productivity, amenities and the supply of oor space
                  ^n = 1, B
remain unchanged (A       ^n = 1 and H
                                     ^ n = 1 for all n).

   Given these four inputs, we now re-write the system of equations for the counterfactual equilibrium (19)-(21) in
terms of relative changes and the observed values of the endogenous variables in the initial equilibrium:

                                          ^i 
                                          w  ^ i wi i =        ^ni w
                                                                   ^n ^ n ni wn n ,                                   (29)
                                                          nN
                                                                            1-
                                                      ni ^i d
                                                            ^ni w   ^i
                                                                ^i /A
                                      ^ni ni =                                       1- ,                             (30)
                                                          ^ ^ ^k /A
                                                                  ^k
                                                    kN nk k dnk w
                                                                                       -1
                                                ^  ^ ^ 1-  -/( -1)                  (1-)-1
                                              n An Bn Hn  ^nn
                                ^ n n =
                                                                                          -1    ,                     (31)
                                                        ^ ^ 1- 
                                                      ^ B       -/( -1)                (1-)-1
                                             kN   k   Ak k Hk  ^kk
                                                                                     ^ni = 1 for some n, i and A
where recall that for our example of a change in transport infrastructure, we assume d                         ^n = 1,
^n = 1 and H
B          ^ n = 1 for all n.

   Given the observed endogenous variables in the initial equilibrium (wn , Ln , ni ), we can solve this system of
equations (29)-(31) for the unique counterfactual changes in the endogenous variables (w    ^n, 
                                                                                       ^n , L   ^ni ). For parameter
values for which the model has a unique equilibrium ( (1 - ) > 1), these counterfactual changes in the endogenous
variables are unique, and can be recovered with a similar xed point algorithm to that discussed above for solving for
general equilibrium. Key advantages of this model-based approach is that we can evaluate counterfactual interven-
tions that have not yet occurred; we can incorporate general equilibrium e ects; and we can evaluate the e ects of
these interventions on model-based objects such as welfare. From the population mobility condition (17), the welfare
e ects of a transport infrastructure improvement that changes bilateral trade costs (dni ) can be evaluated using the
two su cient statistics of the changes in a location's trade share with itself (                          ^ n ):
                                                                                ^nn ) and its population (L
                                                                      (1-)-1
                                              ^
                                              ¯ = -/( -1) ^ -            -1
                                              U  ^nn     Ln                    .                                      (32)

Therefore, having recovered the counterfactual changes in own trade shares (                       ^ n ) from solving
                                                                            ^nn ) and populations (L
the system of equations (29)-(31), we can compute the counterfactual changes in welfare using equation (32).

                                                               22
    In international trade models with a constant trade elasticity, labor is immobile between countries, and hence the
change in each country's domestic trade share (^nn ) is a su cient statistic for the change in its welfare in response to
a change in trade costs, as shown in Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012). Intuitively, holding all domestic
characteristics constant, if a country's share of expenditure on its own goods falls (^nn < 1), this implies that foreign
prices must have fallen relative to domestic prices, thereby improving a country's terms of trade and raising its welfare.
In contrast, in this economic geography model with labor mobility, both the change in a location's domestic trade share
(                                        ^ n ) must be taken into account, as shown in Redding (2016). Intuitively, if
 ^nn ) and the change in its population (L
one location experiences a larger fall in its domestic trade share (lower ^nn ) and hence a larger increase in its real
                                                                       ^ n ), until the price of oor space adjusts, such
income than another location, this attracts a population in ow (higher L
that the change in real income is the same across all populated locations.
    Although these counterfactuals are primarily of interest for evaluating policy interventions that have not yet
occurred, they also can be used to evaluate the model's predictions for natural experiments within sample. Suppose
that we have data both before and after the construction of new highway. Using the data from beforehand, we can
use the model to generate predictions for the impact of the new highway, and then compare these model's predictions
to what actually happened in the observed data. Naturally, we would not expect the model to perfectly predict what
happened in the data, because other location characteristics could have changed at the same time as the highway was
constructed (e.g. productivity and amenities). Nevertheless, if we have a su ciently large natural experiment, we
would expect the model's predictions to have some explanatory power for the data.
    Alternatively, we can use our model inversion techniques from the previous section to recover the changes in
all location characteristics before and after the new highway. In this case, the model will perfectly predicted the
observed data, but this cannot be counted as a success of the model, because we have allowed ourselves enough
degrees of freedom as to exactly rationalize the observed data. Nevertheless, we can undertake counterfactuals, in
which we change one or more of these unobserved location characteristics at time, and solve for the counterfactual
equilibrium. Comparing the results of these counterfactuals to the observed data (which corresponds to the case in
which all unobserved location characteristics change) provides a model-based decomposition that allows us to assess
the relative importance of di erent mechanisms in the model.


4    Empirical Evidence Between Cities and Regions
In this section, we examine the empirical evidence on the predictions of this class of quantitative spatial models for
the distribution of economic activity between cities and regions. In Subsection 4.1, we review recent reduced-form
evidence on the impact of transport infrastructure on the location of economic activity. In Subsection 4.2, we show that
these quantitative spatial models provide microfoundations for empirical measures of market access that incorporate
the e ects of changes in transport infrastructure. In Subsection 4.3, we characterize the theoretical properties of these
measures of market access. In Subsection 4.4, we show how these measures of market access can be estimated from
observed data on bilateral trade between locations. In Subsection 4.5, we discuss the measurement of bilateral trade
costs in these measures of market access. In Subsection 4.6, we examine the empirical evidence on the role of market
access in determining wages, the price of oor space and population.




                                                           23
4.1        Transport Infrastructure

A key implication of the class of quantitative models introduced in the previous section is that trade costs shape the
distribution of economic activity across locations within countries. An important determinant of these trade costs is
the network of transport infrastructure, in the form of canals, ports, railways and highways. With the increasingly
availability of geographic information systems (GIS) data on transport networks and spatially-disaggregated data on
economic activity within countries, a growing body of empirical research has provided reduced-form evidence on the
impact of transport infrastructure on the location of economic activity.31
    One of the main challenges in analyzing the relationship between transport infrastructure and the location of
economic activity is that investments in transport infrastructure are unlikely to be randomly assigned. On the one
hand, these transport investments are often made by private-sector companies, whose search for pro ts could lead
them to select regions that otherwise would have grown more rapidly even in the absence of these investments. On
the other hand, federal, state and local governments often promote investments in transport infrastructure in lagging
regions, which could target locations that otherwise would have grown less rapidly. As part of the broader credibility
revolution in applied econometrics discussed in Angrist and Pischke (2010), one of the key contributions of recent
empirical research has been to use quasi-experimental sources of variation to provide credible evidence on the causal
impacts of transport infrastructure improvements.
    Most of this reduced-form empirical research on transport infrastructure and the location of economic activity
has estimated cross-section regression speci cations of the following form:

                                                   ln yit = A0 + A1 rit + xit B0 +              it ,                                        (33)

where  ln yit is the log change in an economic outcome of interest (e.g. population); rit is a measure of the intensity
of treatment with transport infrastructure, such as the number of new highway rays; xit is a matrix of controls for
other determinants of the economic outcome of interest; and                    it   is a stochastic error.
    This regression speci cation (33) has a "di erence-in-di erences" interpretation, where the rst di erence is over
time, and the second di erence is between locations that receive di erent intensities of treatment with transport
infrastructure. By taking di erences over time, we di erence out any xed e ect in the level of the economic outcome
of interest. With a single cross-section of data, the regression constant (A0 ) captures any common macro shocks that
a ect the economic outcome of interest across all locations.
    To address the endogenous placement of transport infrastructure, this empirical literature has followed three main
instrumental variables (IV) strategies, which we categorize using the taxonomy introduced in Redding and Turner
(2015). The rst approach, the planned route IV, is an instrumental variables strategy that uses planning maps and
documents as a source of quasi-experimental variation in transport infrastructure. The second strategy, the historical
route IV, uses historical exploration and transportation routes as sources of such variation. The third method, the
inconsequential place approach, relies on choosing a sample of spatial units that are inconsequential in the sense that
the characteristics of these units did not a ect the placement of the transport infrastructure.


Planned Route IV This approach was pioneered by Baum-Snow (2007), which uses a 1947 plan of the U.S. interstate
highway network as an instrument for the actual network. In particular, Baum-Snow (2007) counts the number of
  31 For   reviews focusing on transport costs and the location of economic activity, see Donaldson (2015) and Redding and Turner (2015).


                                                                         24
radial highways entering a metropolitan area on the 1947 plan and uses this variable to predict the actual number
of radial highways.32 The idea behind this instrument is that the 1947 plan was developed for military purposes and
the identifying assumption is that these military purposes are orthogonal to economic considerations. A variation on
this approach is to use transport infrastructure that was planned but not constructed in Placebo speci cations, as in
Donaldson (2018). To the extent that economic activity is unrelated to these planned but not constructed links, this
provides evidence that the planning process was not selecting routes based on economic considerations.


Historical Route IV          This approach was introduced in a sequence of papers by Duranton and Turner (2011), Duran-
ton and Turner (2012) and Duranton, Morrow, and Turner (2014), which use the U.S. railroad network around 1898 and
the routes of historical exploration expeditions between 1535 and 1850 as sources of quasi-experimental variation for
the U.S. interstate highway network at the end of the 20th century.33 Conditional on the control variables included in
the regression, the identifying assumption is that the factors that a ected these historical routes do not directly a ect
patterns of economic activity at the end of the 20th century. The inclusion of these controls is important, because they
can be used to capture other channels through which historical factors could have long-lived e ects. For this reason,
most studies include controls for initial levels of economic activity at the beginning of the sample period.


Inconsequential Units Approach This approach was developed in Chandra and Thompson (2000) in their analysis
of the impact of access to the interstate highway system on rural counties in the U.S.. This idea behind this instrument
is that if transport infrastructure is built to connect urban areas, and follows a convenient route between those cities,
the characteristics of rural locations along the way are inconsequential for the route chosen. Under this identifying
assumption, the transport infrastructure is as good as randomly assigned to the rural locations along the way. A
variation on this approach involves constructing hypothetical transport networks as instruments, such as connecting
historical treaty ports in China to major interior trading centers in Banerjee, Du o, and Qian (2020). Another variation
on this approach is to construct least-cost path networks between cities, which take into account the costs of traversing
di erent types of terrain (e.g. hills versus valleys) in constructing highways, as in the analysis of the impact of the
construction of China's National Trunk Highway System in Faber (2014).


Discussion Although any identifying assumption can be questioned, we now have a growing body of credible
evidence on the causal impact of transport infrastructure investments from these studies using quasi-experimental
sources of variation. A number of the most convincing studies use multiple instruments from these di erent ap-
proaches, including Duranton and Turner (2011), Duranton and Turner (2012), and Duranton, Morrow, and Turner
(2014). With more instruments than endogenous variables, the regression speci cation can be estimated using either
all instruments together or subsets of these instruments. Additionally, over-identi cation tests can be used as speci -
cation checks under the identifying assumption that one of the instruments is valid. Given that the instruments from
these approaches use quite di erent sources of variation, if one obtains similar results using the di erent instruments,
this strengthens the evidence in support of a causal interpretation of the results.
  32 Other papers using planned route instrumental variables include Michaels (2008), Duranton and Turner (2011), Duranton and Turner (2012),

Duranton, Morrow, and Turner (2014), Michaels, Rauch, and Redding (2019), and Baum-Snow (2019).
  33 Other studies using historical route instrumental variables include Baum-Snow, Brandt, Henderson, Turner, and Zhang (2017) (using Chinese

road and rail networks from 1962), Garcia-López, Holl, and Viladecans-Marsal (2015) (using 18th-century postal routes and Roman roads for Spain),
Hsu and Zhang (2014) (using historical Japanese railroad networks), and Martincus, Carballo, and Cusolito (2017) (using the Inca roads for Peru).




                                                                       25
Main Findings In principle, the e ects of transport infrastructure investment could be di erent for di erent trans-
port technologies (e.g. roads versus rail) and could depend on how a particular investment changes the entire trans-
port network. For example, as argued in Glaeser and Kohlhase (2004), rail transport is relatively infrastructure-heavy,
which favored a hub-and-spoke structure that reduced travel times into central locations. In contrast, road transport
is relatively infrastructure-light, with dense networks of lateral connections, which are likely to have reduced travel
times between outlying locations. Of these transport technologies, highways have received somewhat more attention
than railways, although several empirical studies have considered both.
   We focus in this section on evidence from more reduced-form approaches, before discussing more structural ap-
proaches in Section 4.6 below. Perhaps the most robust nding from this existing reduced-form literature is that
improvements in transport infrastructure lead to a decentralization of population, in the sense of a decline in the
share of the central city in the total population of the metropolitan area (see in particular Baum-Snow 2007). A num-
ber of studies also nd evidence of employment decentralization, in the analogous sense of a decline in the share of
the central city in the total employment of the metropolitan area (see for example Baum-Snow 2019).
   Using U.S. data from 1983-2003, Duranton and Turner (2011) nd positive e ects on interstate highways on urban
growth, with a 10 percent increase in a city's initial stock of highways causing about a 1.5 percent increase in its
employment over this twenty-year period. Using U.S. data on interstate highways in metropolitan areas, Duranton
and Turner (2012) nd that vehicle kilometers travelled increase one for one with interstate highways, con rming what
has been termed the "fundamental law of highway congestion," and thus suggesting that increased highway provision
is unlikely to relieve congestion. Again using data on U.S. cities and the interstate highway network, Duranton,
Morrow, and Turner (2014) nd that more highways within cities raise the weight of exports but have no e ect on the
value of exports, where as highways between cities raise both the weight and value of trade. One interpretation of
these results within cities is that more highways within cities change the composition of economic activity towards
sectors with low value to weight ratios, highlighting the potential for transport infrastructure to a ect economic
activity through changes in comparative advantage across sectors.
   In a study of China's National Trunk Highway System, which was built to connect provincial capitals and cities
with an urban population above 500,000, Faber (2014) nds that these network connections reduce GDP growth among
non-targeted peripheral counties. This pattern of results is con rmed in Baum-Snow, Brandt, Henderson, Turner, and
Zhang (2017). These ndings connect with the theoretical literature on economic geography, in which reductions in
transport costs can increase the concentration of economic activity in existing centers through home market e ects
(see in particular Krugman 1991c). These ndings also highlight that transport infrastructure improvements need not
be a panacea for left-behind regions: transport connections run in both directions and it is quite possible that such
transport infrastructure improvements accelerate rather than retard the decline of backward regions.
   In a study of fteen sub-Saharan African cities whose largest city is a port, Storeygard (2016) uses changes in the
price of oil and variation in the distance of peripheral cities from this main port to identify the impact of transport
costs on economic activity. An oil price increase of the magnitude experienced between 2002 and 2008 is found to
raise the income of cities near that port by 7 percent relative to otherwise identical cities 500 kilometers farther away.
Consistent with transport costs varying across di erent types of transport infrastructure, paved and unpaved roads
have systematically di erent e ects.



                                                           26
Interpretation Although we now have a large body of credible reduced-form evidence on the causal e ects of
transport infrastructure investments, there remain a number of areas for further debate and elaboration. As for the
empirical evidence on the local labor market e ects of international trade, most of the empirical evidence is from
"di erence-in-di erence" regression speci cations, which identify relative e ects on locations that receive more ver-
sus less transport infrastructure, but do not identify aggregate or general equilibrium e ects that are common across
all locations. Therefore, these speci cations cannot distinguish the reallocation of existing economic activity from the
creation of new economic activity, and cannot be used to identify welfare e ects.
   Furthermore, these reduced-form speci cation focus on the direct treatment e ect of transport investments on
locations receiving those investments. But the class of quantitative spatial models developed above suggests that
there are likely to be indirect or general equilibrium e ects that vary across locations. For example, a road built
between locations A and B that increases economic activity in those locations may a ect the nearby location C more
than it a ects the further away location D. Relatedly, the IV estimates of these reduced-form speci cations have an
interpretation as a local average treatment e ect (LATE). But the class of quantitative spatial models developed above
suggests that transport improvements are likely to have heterogeneous treatment e ects, depending on how they
a ect the entire transport network and relative levels of market access across locations.
   Finally, one intriguing nding from this reduced-form literature is that the IV estimates are often larger than the
ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates. If transport infrastructure was selectively placed in locations that otherwise
would have grown more rapidly even in the absence of those investments, one would expect the opposite pattern
of results, with IV estimates that are smaller than the OLS estimates. One interpretation could be that transport
infrastructure is selectively placed in locations that otherwise would have grown less rapidly for political economy
reasons. Further research on the political economy of transport investments, and comparing actual with alternative
transport investments is an interesting area for further research, as discussed in Section 4.5 below.

4.2   Microfounding Market Access

A large reduced-form empirical literature in regional science has examined the relationship between a variety of
economic outcomes and ad hoc measures of access to surrounding economic activity. Following Harris (1954), market
potential was typically de ned in this literature as the distance-weighted sum of surrounding population:

                                                                 Lit
                                                 M Pnt =               .                                            (34)
                                                                distni
                                                           iN

   Although these market potential measures were typically found to be both statistically signi cant and quantita-
tively relevant for a range of economic outcomes, the economic mechanisms underlying these reduced-form correla-
tions were largely unexplored. The class of quantitative spatial models developed above provides microfoundations
for such empirical measures of access to surrounding economic activity and highlights potential underlying economic
mechanisms. We now use the structure of the Helpman (1998) model to derive a theoretically-founded measure of
market access. From pro t maximization and zero pro ts, equilibrium output is a constant (x
                                                                                          ¯i ) that depends only on
location productivity (Ai ) and parameters in equation (8). Using this result together with CES demand and market
clearing, it follows that equilibrium prices of each variety in location i must be such as to sell exactly this constant




                                                           27
amount (x
        ¯i ), given demand in all markets:

                                                                                  -1
                                         ¯i = p-
                                         x     i
                                                 
                                                         d1-
                                                          ni (wn Ln ) (Pn )            .                                (35)
                                                    nN

But pro t maximization also implies that equilibrium prices are a constant mark-up over marginal cost in equation
(7). Using this result in equation (35), and re-arranging terms, we obtain a key prediction of this class of quantitative
spatial models that the equilibrium wage depends on a measure of rm market access (FMA):
                                                        -1
                                              -1                -1
                                                                      ¯ - 1                1
                                      wi =                   Ai       l  (FMAi )  .                                     (36)
                                              
where rm market access (FMA) corresponds to a measure of trade-cost weighted access to markets and is de ned as:

                                                           -                     -1
                                         FMAi            d1
                                                          ni (wn Ln ) (Pn )            .                                (37)
                                                    nN

   The equilibrium wage in each location (wi ) in equation (36) is increasing in rm market access (FMAi ) and pro-
ductivity (Ai ). Other things equal, locations with low trade costs (dni ) to surrounding markets have high rm market
access (FMAi ). Intuitively, the lower trade costs to these surrounding markets, the greater the revenue left over after
incurring these trade costs to remunerate domestic factors of production, and hence the higher wages. Both wages
(wi ) and rm market access (FMAi ) are endogenous variables. Therefore, the wage equation (36) corresponds to an
equilibrium relationship between these endogenous variables, which presents econometric challenges in estimating
the relationship between wages and market access, as discussed further below.
   Although this class of quantitative spatial models provides microfoundations for measures of market access, the
theoretically-correct measure of market access in equation (37) di ers from the reduced-form measure of market
potential in equation (34) in several ways. First, demand in each market in the theoretically-correct measure depends
not only on population, but also on wages and price indexes. Second, trade costs in the theoretically-correct measure
                                                   -                 (1- )
can be modeled as a power function of distance (d1
                                                 ni  = distni                 ), but the exponent on distance need not equal
minus one, and is instead equal to the elasticity of trade ows with respect to distance ((1 -  )).
   In the class of quantitative spatial models developed above, market access also matters for the consumption goods
price index, which depends on consumers' access to tradeable varieties from surrounding locations. We summarize
this access to tradeable varieties using consumer market access (CMAn ):
                                                                      1
                                                   Pn = (CMAn ) 1- ,                                                    (38)

                                                                          1-
                                             CMAn             Mi (dni pi )       .                                      (39)
                                                         iN

   Recalling that varieties are substitutes ( > 1), consumer market access in equation (39) is increasing in the mass
of rms in each location (Mi ) and decreasing in the price of varieties in each location (pi ) and trade costs to other
locations (dni ). Intuitively, the lower trade costs to these surrounding sources of supply, the lower the cost of sourcing
varieties from those locations, and hence the lower the cost of living.
   As market access a ects both wages in equation (36) and the consumption goods price index in equation (38),
it also plays an important shaping the spatial distribution of population. Using the relationship between income
and expenditure (13) and land market clearing (15), we can write the population mobility condition (16) in terms
of population, wages and the consumption goods price index. Using the relationship between wages and market

                                                              28
access (36) and the relationship between the price index and consumer market access (38), we can further re-write
this population mobility condition to express equilibrium population in each location in terms of rm and consumer
market access, exogenous location characteristics and parameters:
                                 (  -1 ) 1-
                                          1                             
                           Ln = An1-  Bn    
                                             Hn (FMAn ) (1-) (CMAn ) (1-)(-1) ,                                      (40)

where  is a scalar that includes the common level of utility across all locations.
   Therefore, equilibrium population is increasing in productivity (An ), amenities (Bn ), the supply of oor space
(Hn ), rm market access (F M An ) and consumer market access (CM An ). Intuitively, locations with greater rm
and consumer market access have higher wages and lower price indexes, which attracts population until the price
of the immobile factor ( oor space) is bid up, such that real income is the same in all populated locations. Again
both population and rm and consumer market access are endogenous. Therefore, this population mobility condition
(40) should be interpreted as an equilibrium relationship between endogenous variables, which presents econometric
challenges estimating this relationship, as discussed further below. From the characterization of the existence and
uniqueness of the equilibrium in Section 3.7 above, equilibrium population in each location can be expressed solely
in terms of the exogenous characteristics of all locations in the system of equations (25).
   These theoretically-consistent measures of market access incorporate the e ects of changes in transport infras-
tructure, through bilateral trade costs (dni ), and have a number of advantages over the reduced-form speci cations
considered in the previous subsection. First, these measures of market access are explicitly derived from an underly-
ing theoretical model, which can be used to examine general equilibrium e ects that are common across all locations
(including model-based objects such as welfare). Second, these measures of market access capture not only the direct
e ects of transport infrastructure investments on the locations receiving those investments, but also indirect e ects
on nearby locations, through the trade-cost weighted sums across locations. Third, these measures of market access
capture heterogeneous treatment e ects of transport infrastructure investments, because the e ect of a reduction in
bilateral trade costs (dni ) between a pair of locations depends on levels of economic activity in those locations and
surrounding locations (as captured by wages, population and price indexes).

4.3   Firm and Consumer Market Access

In general, rm and consumer market access are likely to be closely related to one another. If bilateral trade costs
are symmetric (dni = din ), they are in fact proportional to one another in this class of quantitative spatial models, as
shown in Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016). To demonstrate this result, we start by using the de nitions of rm market
access (37) and consumer market access (39) to obtain a rst relationship between these variables:
                                                           -            -1
                                         FMAi           d1
                                                         ni (wn Ln ) CMAn .                                          (41)
                                                   nN

   We next derive a second relationship between these variables using the gravity structure of trade and market
clearing. First, from the price index (10) and the de nition of consumer market access (39), we have:
                                                                            1-
                                                       Li      wi
                                       CMAn                          dni         .                                   (42)
                                                       F      - 1 Ai
                                                  iN

Second, the gravity equation (11) implies that aggregate bilateral trade between locations n and i (Xni ) is:
                                                            1-
                                         Li       wi               -             -1
                                 Xni =                           d1
                                                                  ni (wn Ln ) CMAn ,                                 (43)
                                         F       - 1 Ai

                                                            29
where we have used the fact that total expenditure on consumption goods (Xn ) is a constant fraction of total income:
Xn = vn Ln = wn Ln . Summing across destinations and using the requirement of balanced trade that total income
equals total expenditure (Xi =     nN   Xni = wi Li ), we have:
                                                          1-
                                        Li      wi                       -            -1
                              wi Li =                                 d1
                                                                       ni (wn Ln ) CMAn .                           (44)
                                        F      - 1 Ai
                                                                 nN

Using the de nition of rm market access (37), we can rewrite this expression for total income (44) as:
                                                                 1-
                                             Li      wi                   wi Li
                                                                      =         .                                   (45)
                                             F      - 1 Ai                FMAi

Using this result in our expression for consumer market access (42) above, we obtain a second relationship between
 rm and consumer market access:
                                                             -            -1
                                          CMAn            d1
                                                           ni (wi Li ) FMAi .                                       (46)
                                                    iN

Under the assumption of symmetric trade costs (dni = din ), the eigenvector that solves this system of two equations
(41) and (46) satis es:
                                                   FMAi =  CMAi ,                                                   (47)

where  is a scalar. Using this relationship between rm and consumer market access (47) in either equation (41) or
equation (46), we obtain the following recursive solution for rm market access:

                                                         -              -1
                                         FMAi          d1
                                                        ni (wn Ln )  FMAn ,                                         (48)
                                                  nN

where population (Ln ) can be determined from the general equilibrium system of equations (25) and wages (wn ) can
be obtained from population (up to a scalar or normalization) using equation (24). Therefore, under the assumption
of symmetric bilateral trade costs (dni = din ), rm and consumer market access are perfectly correlated with one
another and can be recovered (up to a scalar or normalization) from the system of equations (48).

4.4    Measuring Market Access

We now show how the gravity structure of international trade can be used to estimate these theoretically-correct
measures of rm and consumer market access, following Redding and Venables (2004). From the gravity equation
(11), the aggregate value of bilateral trade from location i to location n can be re-written as follows:

                                                         - 1-      -1
                                             Xni = Mi p1
                                                       i  dni Xn Pn   .                                             (49)

Collecting terms, aggregate bilateral trade depends on a measure of exporter supply capacity (si ), a measure of im-
porter market capacity (mn ) and bilateral trade costs (dni )

                                                              -
                                                   Xni = si d1
                                                             ni mn ,                                                (50)

                                                    -                     -1
                                          si  Mi p1
                                                  i   ,          mn  Xn Pn   ,                                      (51)

Given data on aggregate bilateral trade (Xni ) and proxies for bilateral trade costs (dni ), supply capacity (si ) and
market capacity (mn ) can be estimated as the exporter and importer xed e ects in this gravity equation (up to a
normalization or choice of units in which to measure these xed e ects). Using estimates of bilateral trade costs (dni ),

                                                            30
supply capacity (si ) and market capacity (mn ), the theoretically-correct measures of rm market access (F M An ) and
consumer market access (CM An ) can be computed as follows:
                                                            -                                         -
                                       F M Ai =           d1
                                                           ni mn ,              CM An =          si d1
                                                                                                     ni ,
                                                    nN                                      iN

where we have again used our assumption of symmetric trade costs (dni = din ).
    Consistent with the theoretical result in the previous section, Redding and Venables (2004) nds that rm and
consumer market access estimated from international trade data are extremely highly correlated with one another.
The fact that this correlation is not perfect is in line with the idea that in practice bilateral trade costs need not be
perfectly symmetric, as found for example in Waugh (2010).

4.5     Measuring Trade Costs

One important issue for estimating market access in the previous section is the measurement of bilateral trade costs
(dni ). In the empirical trade literature using international trade data between countries, the traditional approach
is to compute the Great-circle distance between countries' capital cities or the population-weighted average of the
distance between countries' major cities.34 Particularly at ne spatial scales within countries, this measure has obvious
limitations, such as not taking into account the transport network. With the increasing availability of geographic
information systems (GIS) data on transport networks and spatially-disaggregated data within countries, research in
spatial economics increasingly uses least-cost path measures of bilateral trade costs that take into account both the
structure of the transport network and the relative costs of alternative modes of transport.
    In a path-breaking paper along many dimensions, Donaldson (2018) uses a measure of lowest-cost route e ective
distance, in which bilateral trade costs (dni (R,  )) are modeled using graph theory as depending on a set of nodes and
arcs (R) and the cost of traveling along each arc ( ). In empirical applications, nodes are typically nely-distributed
points in space and arcs are the available means of transportation between the nodes (e.g. a rail, road, river or coast
connection). The cost of traveling along each arc is a vector ( =  rail ,  road ,  river ,  coast ) that summarizes the
per unit distance cost of using each mode of transport. One of these per unit distance costs is normalized to one
(e.g.  rail = 1) and the others are typically either assumed based on relative travel speeds (as in Ahlfeldt, Redding,
Sturm, and Wolf 2015 and Heblich, Redding, and Sturm 2020) or estimated using for example observed data on price
di erences (as in Donaldson 2018). Given the vector of per unit distance costs ( ) and the transport network (R), the
lowest-cost route e ective distance between any pair of locations n and i (dni (R,  )) is assumed to equal the cost of
traveling along the least-cost path between those locations using the available transport network. For any discrete set
of nodes and arcs, this lowest-cost route e ective distance can be computed e ciently using Dijkstra's shortest-path
algorithm (Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin 1993).
    In another path-breaking contribution along many fronts, Allen and Arkolakis (2014) uses analogous methods
for constructing bilateral trade costs in continuous space. Suppose that geographic space (S ) is a nite-dimensional
compact manifold in RN . Let  : S  R+ be a continuous function where  (i) gives the "instantaneous" trade cost
incurred by crossing point i  S . De ne t(n, i) as the solution to the following least-cost path minimization problem:
                                                                          1
                                                                                         dg (t)
                                              t(n, i) =      inf               (g (t))          dt,                                         (52)
                                                          g (n,i)     0                   dt
  34 Great-circle distance is the shortest distance between two points on the surface of a sphere and can be computed from latitude and longitude

coordinates using the Haversine formula. Both Great-circle distance measures are available in CEPII's GEODIST dataset (Mayer and Zignago 2011).


                                                                       31
where g : [0, 1]  S is a path and (n, i) g  C 1 |g (0) = n, g (1) = i is the set of all possible continuous and
once-di erentiable paths that lead from location n to location i; and · represents the Euclidean norm.
   Geographic bilateral trade costs are de ned in Allen and Arkolakis (2014) as the assumption that the bilateral
trade cost function is such that for all n, i  S , d(n, i) = f (t(n, i)), for some monotonically increasing function
f : R+  [1, ) with f (0) = 1. Under this assumption, there exists a unique mapping from the instantaneous trade
cost function  to the bilateral trade costs d. Two implications of this assumption are that geographic bilateral trade
costs are symmetric (T (n, i) = T (i, n)), and that nearby locations face similar trade costs to all other destinations,
because the topography of the surface is smooth.
   The solution to the problem (52) satis es an eikonal partial di erential equation whose solution can be charac-
terized using the Fast Marching Method (FMM) of Sethian (1996). Intuitively, starting at any initial point i  S , the
FMM constructs iso-trade cost contours around that point. As the instantaneous trade costs are positive everywhere,
bilateral trade costs always increase as one "marches" outward from any iso-cost contour. As a result, contours further
from each point can be constructed using only the immediately previous contour, thereby bringing substantial gains
in computational e ciency. This FMM can be interpreted as a generalization of Dijkstra's algorithm to continuous
space: bilateral trade costs can be determined by approximating a surface with a grid (i.e. a graph of nodes and arcs)
and taking the appropriate weighted average over di erent paths along the grid (see Tsitsiklis 1995). Nevertheless, this
discretization will be subject to a digitization bias, because any chosen grid necessarily restricts the possible directions
of travel (see Mitchell and Keirsey 1984).
   Empirical research on trade and geography now commonly uses rich data on the transport network and either the
Dijikstra algorithm (for applications in discrete space) or the Fast Marching algorithm (for applications in continuous
space) to compute bilateral trade costs between locations. In principle, both methods can accommodate asymmetries in
bilateral trade costs (T (n, i) = T (i, n)). Depending on the spatial scale of the application, one consideration that can
be important in practice is that some modes of transports can only be joined at particular points in geographic space
(stations for railways or ramps for limited-access highways). Additionally, there can be costs incurred in changing
modes of transport (the costs loading goods on or o railway cars or the costs of waiting for a bus or a train), which can
be consequential for least-cost paths and bilateral trade costs. For example, in an in uential analysis of the impact of
the construction of the U.S. railroad network during the 19th century on the value of agricultural land, Donaldson and
Hornbeck (2016) allows for transshipment costs of 50 cents per ton whenever transferring goods to/from a railroad
car, river boat, canal barge, or ocean liner.
   In most existing research on trade and geography, the transport network itself is taken as exogenously given,
whereas in reality investments in transport infrastructure are likely to be endogenous to economic incentives. A small
number of studies have creatively exploited natural experiments from history to examine the endogenous response
of trade routes. Pascali (2017) nds that the invention of the steamship had a powerful e ects on bilateral trade and
development by weakening the dependence of trade routes on wind patterns. Feyrer (2009) uses the closure of the Suez
Canal from 1967-75 following the outbreak of con ict in the Middle East as an exogenous shock to trading distances
to estimate the relationships between trade and distance and income and trade.
   Another interesting area for further research is microfounding bilateral trade costs and tracing the general equi-
librium implications of these microfoundations. Brancaccio, Kaloupsidi, and Papageorgiou (2020) develop an explicit
model of the transport sector, in which ships and exporters match with one another, and embed this speci cation of


                                                            32
the matching process in a general equilibrium model of trade. The presence of matching frictions attenuates di er-
ences in comparative advantage, introduces externalities such that trade costs between any pair of countries depends
on economic activity in their neighbors, and shapes the way in which trade shocks propagate through the trading
network. Other research has explored the implications of containerization and deep-port technologies for the spatial
distribution of economic activity, including Bernhofen, El-Sahli, and Kneller (2016), Brooks, Gendron-Carrier, and Rua
(2019) and Ducruet, Juhász, Nagy, and Steinwender (2020)
   To develop an approach for evaluating the welfare e ects of transport infrastructure improvements, Allen and
Arkolakis (2017) embed a speci cation of endogenous route choice in the spatial general equilibrium model of Allen
and Arkolakis (2014). Individual traders experience extreme-value distributed idiosyncratic shocks to trade costs
along each route and choose the least-cost route taking into account these idiosyncratic shocks. A key implication of
this framework is that the welfare e ects of a small improvement in a transport link is equal to the percentage cost
savings achieved multiplied by the initial value of trade along that link. Although this result is derived for particular
functional forms, this implication is closely related to the celebrated result of Hulten (1978) that a su cient statistic for
the welfare e ect of a small productivity shock in an e cient economy can be summarized by the appropriate Domar
weight. Implementing this framework for the U.S. interstate highway network, Allen and Arkolakis (2017) nd the
highest ratios of bene t to costs for highway links on the North-East corridor close to New York. One area for further
research is improving our understanding of the costs of these transport investments and their determinants. For the
U.S. interstate highway network, these costs appear large relative to other countries and have risen substantially over
time, as shown in Brooks and Liscow (2019) and Duranton, Nagpal, and Turner (2020).
   In a fundamental contribution, Fajgelbaum and Schaal (2020) develop a framework for characterizing optimal
transport networks in spatial equilibrium. This characterization is challenging, because the problem is high dimen-
sional and can be non-convex. The paper shows that the problem of nding the optimal transport network can be
transformed into the problem of nding the optimal ow in a network, which has been studied in the operations
research literature. The planner chooses the optimal amount to invest in each link in the transport network, where
the trade costs for each link are assumed to be increasing in the volume of tra c on that link and decreasing the level
of the investment for that link. This model of transport infrastructure investments is then embedded within the class
of quantitative spatial models introduced above and used to evaluate the observed transport networks in a number of
European countries. In counterfactuals comparing the optimal and observed transport networks, the average welfare
gain is 2 percent and these welfare gains range from 0.1 to 7 percent. In the coming years, developing models of en-
dogenous transport investments and evaluating the implications for the spatial equilibrium distribution of economic
activity is likely to be an exciting area for further research.

4.6    Empirical Evidence on Market Access

Motivated by the microfoundations provided above, a substantial empirical literature examined the relationship be-
tween wages and market access. Using data on U.S. counties, Hanson (2005) structurally estimates the equation for
nominal wages from the Helpman (1998) model. This estimation yields plausible estimates for the structural parame-
ters of the model and the theory-based measure of market access from the model is found to have greater explanatory
power than traditional ad hoc measures of market potential (such as inverse distance weighted GDP). Using data on
Japanese regions and countries, Davis and Weinstein (1999, 2003) provide evidence in support of the home market


                                                             33
e ect prediction of new economic geography models that an increase in expenditure on a good leads to a more than
proportionate increase in production of that good. Using data on regions of the European Union, and exploiting both
cross-section and time-series variation, Breinlich (2006) and Head and Mayer (2006) provide further support for the
empirical relationship between nominal wages and market access.35
    While there is strong evidence of a clear association between wages and market access, a key challenge for the
empirical literature has been to establish that this association is causal. In particular, it is di cult empirically to
disentangle the e ects of market access from other leading determinants of comparative economic development, such
as locational fundamentals or institutions. For example, the prosperity of a group of neighboring regions could re ect
good access to one another's markets, but it could equally well re ect common good institutions or common favorable
natural endowments. To empirically disentangle market access from these other leading determinants of comparative
economic development, one requires exogenous variation along at least one dimension. One approach is therefore
to use instruments for market access, such as lagged population levels or growth rates. However, a challenge is that
institutions and natural endowments are strongly persistent, raising questions about the identifying assumption that
lagged population only a ects economic activity solely through market access.36
    An alternative approach is to use trade liberalizations as a source of variation in market access. In in uential
work, Hanson (1996, 1997) has used Mexico's trade liberalization of 1985 as a natural experiment that changes the
relative market access of regions. Following liberalization, there is evidence of a re-orientation of economic activity
within Mexico towards the U.S. border and a shift from domestic production to o shore assembly for foreign (largely
U.S.) rms. Consistent with the predictions of new economic geography models, these changes in the location of
production lead to a re-orientation of the strong regional wage gradient previously centered on Mexico City towards
the U.S. border.37 While evidence based on trade liberalizations has bolstered the case for a causal interpretation of
the relationship between market access and wages, there remain potential concerns. In particular, a political economy
literature models trade policy as itself an endogenous outcome that could be in uenced by market access.
    To provide further evidence of a causal role for market access, Redding and Sturm (2008) uses the division of
Germany after the Second World War as a natural experiment that provides plausibly exogenous variation in market
access. The division of Germany has a number of attractive features for isolating the role played by market access.
First, in contrast to cross-country studies, there is no obvious variation in institutions across cities within West Ger-
many. Second, there are no obvious changes in natural advantage, such as access to navigable rivers or coasts, climatic
conditions or the disease environment. Third, the change in market access following German division is much larger
than typically observed in other contexts and the e ects can be observed over a long period of time. Fourth, the
drawing of the border dividing Germany into East and West Germany was based on military considerations that are
unlikely to be correlated with pre-division characteristics of cities.
    The population mobility condition (40) implies that a reduction in relative market access in some locations leads to
a population out ow to other locations until the price of oor space adjusts to restore real wage equalization. In line
with these predictions, Redding and Sturm (2008) nds that the imposition of the East-West German border leads to a
  35 Although most empirical research on market access has focused on either wages or production structure, Redding and Schott (2003) and Dekle

and Eaton (1999) consider human capital accumulation and land rents respectively.
  36 For other instrumental variables approaches using a range of identifying assumptions, see Redding and Venables (2004), Hanson (2005),

Costinot, Donaldson, Kyle, and Williams (2019) and Bartelme (2020).
  37 Other studies using trade liberalization as a source of variation in market access include Overman and Winters (2006) for the United Kingdom,

Tirado, Paluzie, and Pons (2002) for early-twentieth century Spain, and Wolf (2007) for early-twentieth century Poland.



                                                                       34
sharp decline in population growth of West German cities close to the East-West border relative to other West German
cities. Over the forty-year period of division, the East-West border cities experience a decline in their annualized rate
of population growth of 0.75 percentage points, implying a cumulative reduction in their relative size of around one
third.38 A variety of additional pieces of evidence are provided in support of a market-access-based explanation and
against other potential explanations, such as di erences in industrial structure, war-related disruption, fear of further
armed con ict, and Western European integration.39
    In the class of quantitative spatial models developed above, the treatment e ect of division on border cities is
shaped by two parameter combinations that capture (a) the strength of agglomeration and dispersion forces and (b)
the elasticity of trade with respect to distance. Redding and Sturm (2008) undertake a quantitative analysis of the
model and show that for plausible values of these parameter combinations, the model can account quantitatively for
both the average treatment e ect of division and the larger treatment e ect of division for small cities than for large
cities. In the model, smaller cities experience this larger treatment e ect, because they have smaller own markets, and
hence are more dependent on markets in other cities.
    Combining a general equilibrium trade model with archival data from colonial India, Donaldson (2018) evaluates
the impact of India's vast railroad network. The empirical analysis is structured around an extension of Eaton and
Kortum (2002) to incorporate multiple agricultural commodities, which shares many features with the class of quan-
titative spatial models developed above. This model delivers four key theoretical predictions that are taken to the
data. First, for goods that are traded between regions, price di erences between those regions can be used to measure
bilateral trade costs. Second, the model yields a gravity equation for bilateral trade ows that can be used to estimate
the response of trade ows to trade costs. Third, railroads increase real income levels, as measured by the real value of
land income per unit area. Fourth, as in the theoretical framework developed above, each location's trade share with
itself is a su cient statistic for welfare. Consistent with these predictions of the model, there is a strong and statis-
tically signi cant estimated e ect of railroads on real income levels, but this e ect becomes statistically insigni cant
after controlling for the model's su cient statistic of a region's own trade share. These results provide evidence that
the estimated e ects of railroads are capturing the goods trade mechanism emphasized in the model.
    Using data for the U.S. during the 19th century, Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) investigate the impact of the
expansion of the railroad network on the agricultural sector. In contrast to the reduced-form studies discussed above,
the analysis captures not only the direct e ect of a railroad connection but also the indirect e ects through changes
in economic activity in neighboring locations. In particular, motivated by the class of quantitative spatial models
discussed above, the analysis uses measures of market access that capture each location's access to surrounding eco-
nomic activity. In constructing market access, measures of bilateral trade costs are used that take into account the
transport network of railroads and waterways, and compute lowest-cost county-to-county freight routes. County
agricultural land values are found to increase substantially with increases in county market access, as the railroad
network expanded from 1870 to 1890. Removing all railroads in 1890 is estimated to decrease the total value of U.S.
agricultural land by 60 percent, with limited potential for mitigating these losses through feasible extensions to the
   38 Using detailed data on whether West German municipalities quali ed for the Zonenrandgebiet (ZRG) place-based policy, Ehrlich and Seidel

(2018) nd even larger e ects of market access at the municipality level after conditioning on quali cation for this policy.
   39 Using the opening of Central and Eastern European markets after the fall of the Iron Curtain in 1990, Brülhart, Carrère, and Trionfetti (2012)

  nd substantial increases in both wages and employment for Austrian municipalities within 50 kilometers of the former Iron Curtain. Using the
economic separation of Japan and Korea after the Second World War and implementing the same empirical speci cation as in Redding and Sturm
(2008), Nakajima (2008) nds a similar pattern of market access e ects.



                                                                        35
canal network or improvements to country roads. This reduction in agricultural land values generates annual income
losses equal to 3.22 percent of gross national product (GNP), which is somewhat larger than the estimate of 2.7 percent
based on a social savings approach in Fogel (1964).
    Finally, using data on 39 countries from Sub-Saharan Africa over 50 years from 1960-2010, Jedwab and Storeygard
(2020) provides evidence in support of another of the key implications of measures of market access, namely the
heterogeneous e ects of transport infrastructure investments.

4.7     Multiple Equilibria and Path Dependence

As discussed above, recent quantitative research on economic geography has focused on region of the parameter
space for which there exists a unique equilibrium, thereby ensuring that counterfactuals for transport improvements
and other interventions have determinate predictions for the spatial distribution of economic activity. In contrast,
a key implication of early theoretical research on economic geography was the potential for multiple equilibria. In
the presence of such multiple equilibria, temporary shocks can have permanent e ects on the spatial distribution of
economic activity, if they shift the economy between these multiple equilibria.
    Motivated by this theoretical prediction, a number of empirical studies have sought to provide empirical evidence
on the extent to which economic activity is path dependent in the sense that temporary shocks can have permanent
e ects on the spatial distribution of economic activity. In two path-breaking papers, Davis and Weinstein (2002, 2008)
used Japanese war-time bombing as such an exogenous temporary shock, and found little evidence of path dependence
for either the distribution of population as a whole or employment in individual industries.40 Subsequent studies have
provided evidence of path dependence using a variety of sources of quasi-experimental variation. Dell (2010) provides
compelling evidence of persistent e ects of the mining mita, which was an extensive forced mining labor system that
was practiced in the areas of present-day Peru and Bolivia between 1573 and 1812. Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2011)
 nd path dependence in the location of Germany's air hub using the natural experiment of Germany's division and
reuni cation.41 Bleakley and Lin (2012) provides strong evidence that the temporary historic advantage of U.S. portage
sites has had permanent e ects on the location of economic activity. Hornbeck and Keniston (2017) nd long-lived
e ects of the Boston re on plot-level land values through the potential for large-scale rebuilding. Michaels and Rauch
(2018) provide evidence of path dependence using data on the location of Roman cities.
    Although these studies provide several convincing examples of path dependence, there remain many open ques-
tions of interpretation and areas for further research. In particular, empirical evidence of path dependence does not
necessarily imply multiple equilibria. For example, historical advantages could lead to initial investments in durable
infrastructure in a location. Once these initial investments have been incurred, it may be pro table to maintain them,
and to continue to concentrate economic activity in that location, even after the original historical advantages have
become obsolete. More generally, further theory and evidence is needed clarifying the conditions under which we
either should or should not expect to observe path dependence, which relates to the debate in the economic growth
literature regarding the role of history and expectations in selecting equilibria, as in Krugman (1991b) and Matsuyama
(1991). In an important contribution in this area, Allen and Donaldson (2020) develop a dynamic economic geography
  40 Other  research using war-time bombing as an exogenous shock includes Bosker, Brakman, Garretsen, and Schramm (2007), Brakman, Garret-
sen, and Schramm (2004), Miguel and Roland (2011), and Dell and Querubin (2018).
  41 For structural estimations of models of the location of particular economic activities, see Holmes (2005) for headquarter location choices and

Holmes (2011) for the expansion of Walmart's distribution and retail network.



                                                                        36
model, in which there is either a unique steady-state equilibrium regardless of initial conditions, or there are multiple
steady-state equilibria, with initial conditions determining which of these equilibria is selected.

4.8     Modeling the Geographic Incidence of Trade Shocks

In the baseline class of quantitative spatial models developed above, workers are perfectly mobile, and hence real
income is equalized across all populated locations. Therefore, there is a single national labor market, and although
an international trade shock can have heterogeneous e ects on employment, nominal wages and price indexes across
locations, it has exactly the same e ect on welfare across all locations. Motivated by the reduced-form evidence on
the distributional consequences of international trade across local labor markets, researchers have sought to develop
quantitative spatial models that are consistent with these reduced-form moments and allow for the possibility that
trade shocks can have uneven e ects on welfare across local labor markets.
    A particularly in uential paper is Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019), which incorporates a dynamic discrete
choice model of household location decisions into a quantitative spatial model with multiple sectors and input-output
linkages.42 In this framework, the world consists of N locations and J sectors, where there is a competitive labor
market in each region-sector combination. We use n or i to index locations and j or k to reference sectors. The timing
of decisions is as follows. At the beginning of each period, each household starts out in a region-sector, where sector
zero in each region corresponds to unemployment. Households observe the economic conditions in all labor markets
and the realizations of idiosyncratic shocks to mobility costs. If they begin the period in a labor market, they work
and earn the market wage. If they are unemployed in a region, they get home production. Then, both employed and
unemployed households have the option to relocate.
                                                                                                 nj
    Under these assumptions, the lifetime utility of a household in region-sector nj at time t (vt  ) equals current
instantaneous utility plus the expected continuation payo from choosing a region-sector to maximize next period's
lifetime utility:
                                    nj      nj                                  ik     nj,ik               ik
                                   vt  = U Ct  +               max           E vt+1 -        +             t                                  (53)
                                                           {i,k}N,J
                                                                i=1,k=0


                                                   nj                   bn         if j = 0
                                                U Ct  =              nj                     .                                                 (54)
                                                                    wt  /Ptn      otherwise
                              nj
where bn is home production; wt  is the wage in sector j in location n at time t; Ptn is the consumption goods price
index in location n at time t;  is the discount factor;  nj,ik are common mobility costs of relocating from region-
                                      ik
sector nj to region-sector ik ;       t    is an idiosyncratic shock to mobility costs for region-sector ik ; and  is a parameter
that scales the variance of this idiosyncratic shock.
                                                                                               ik
    Under the assumption that the idiosyncratic shock to mobility costs (                      t )   is independently and identically dis-
tributed over time and distributed Type-I extreme value with zero mean, the expected lifetime utility of a representa-
tive household in region-sector nj at time t (Vtnj = E vt
                                                        nj
                                                           ) can be written as:

                                                                        N     J
                                                                                        mh     nj,mh 1/
                                    Vtnj = U Ct
                                              nj
                                                 +  log                           e(Vt+1 -           )       .                                (55)
                                                                       m=1 h=0

   42 There is a rich tradition in international trade of using dynamic discrete choice models to analyze the distributional consequences of trade,

including Artuç, Chaudhuri, and McLaren (2010), Dix-Carneiro (2014) and Traiberman (2019).




                                                                        37
and the probability that a household chooses to relocate from region-sector nj to region-sector ik is:
                                                              ik     nj,ik 1/
                                                        e(Vt+1 -    )
                                     µnj,ik
                                      t       =                       nj,mh 1/
                                                                               .                                      (56)
                                                             e(Vt+1 -      )
                                                  N       J      mh
                                                  m=1       h=0

Using these relocation probabilities, the distribution of labor across region-sectors evolves over time as follows:
                                                        N     J
                                              Lnj
                                               t+1 =               µik,nj
                                                                    t     Lik
                                                                           t .                                        (57)
                                                        i=1 k=0

   For a given allocation of labor across region-sectors at time t, the static (or temporary) equilibrium takes the same
form as in the quantitative international trade literature. In particular, Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019) considers
a multi-sector version of the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model with input-output linkages between sectors following
                                                           nj
Caliendo and Parro (2015), which determines the real wage wt  /Ptn in instantaneous utility (54).
   Two key di erences between this dynamic model and the static model of the distribution of economic activity
developed in Section 3 are as follows. First, this dynamic model implies a period of gradual adjustment in response to
an exogenous shock (such as the China trade shock), because households only gradually relocate when they receive
favorable shocks to idiosyncratic mobility costs. Second, in this dynamic model, there is an option value in each
region-sector that depends on the expected value of relocating in the future, where the welfare gains from trade
depend on both current instantaneous utility and this option value.
   One of the key contributions of Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019) is to show that this dynamic discrete choice
formulation permits a dynamic version of the exact-hat algebra counterfactuals introduced in Section 3.9 above. In
particular, counterfactuals can be undertaken using the observed values of the endogenous variables in an initial
equilibrium and values of the model's structural parameters, without having to solve for unobserved fundamentals
for each location. Using this approach, the paper analyzes the distributional consequences of the rise in China's
trade using data on 22 sectors, 38 countries and 50 U.S. states. With each sector-state combination corresponding
to a separate labor market, this yields more than one thousand labor markets. Consistent with the reduced-form
empirical ndings discussed in Section 2 above, those region-sectors more exposed to the China trade shock experience
larger reductions in manufacturing employment. In contrast to the earlier di erence-in-di erence speci cations, the
model can now be used to evaluate aggregate e ects and compute model-based objects such as welfare. Overall, the
China trade shock is predicted to reduce aggregate employment in U.S. manufacturing by around 0.55 million, which
corresponds to about 16 percent of the observed decline from 2000 to 2007. Although the China trade shock increases
aggregate U.S. welfare by around 0.2 percent, there is substantial dispersion in these welfare e ects across region-
sectors because of the mobility frictions, with the predicted welfare changes ranging from -0.8-1 percent. Taking
these quantitative results together with the reduced-form evidence from Section 2 provides a good example of how
these two methodologies can complement one another in shedding light on important economic issues.
   There remain many exciting areas for further research on dynamic models of trade and geography. One substantive
issue for which mobility frictions are salient is the response of the economy to environmental change. Balboni (2019)
combines a dynamic discrete choice model of worker locations decisions with a static model of economic geography to
examine how coastal ooding a ects the returns to transport infrastructure investments. Although road investments
concentrated in coastal regions between 2000 and 2010 had positive returns, they would have been outperformed by
allocations concentrated further inland even in the absence of sea level rise. Future inundation considerably reduces

                                                             38
the welfare e ects of existing road investments. Under a central sea level rise scenario, a more foresighted road
allocation that avoids the most vulnerable regions would have achieved 72 percent higher welfare.
      Although migration decisions are one source of dynamics, there are several other sources of dynamics that are
likely to be quantitatively important, including physical and human capital accumulation and innovation. Two path-
breaking contributions to the geography of innovation are Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2014) and Desmet, Nagy, and
Rossi-Hansberg (2018), which show how to tractably embed endogenous innovation decisions in high-dimensional
spatial models. A key insight from these frameworks is that some of the largest e ects of geography on economic de-
velopment and welfare may occur through the rate of growth rather than the level of economic activity. Using data for
the whole world economy at a 1 degree × 1 degree level of geographic resolution, Desmet, Nagy, and Rossi-Hansberg
(2018) nds that fully liberalizing migration restrictions between countries would increase the present discounted
value of utility about threefold, with much of this e ect occurring through innovation and growth. Nagy (2020)
shows that a model of trade and geography incorporating innovation is quantitatively successful in accounting for
patterns of city formation in the United States prior to the Civil War. Desmet, Kopp, Kulp, Nagy, Oppenheimer, Rossi-
Hansberg, and Strauss (2020) show that dynamics from both migration and innovation are quantitatively important
in shaping the impact of coastal ooding on the global economy.
      Another exciting area for further research is applications of su cient statistics methodologies to economic ge-
ography. Galle, Yi, and Rodriguez-Clare (2018) combines a standard quantitative model of international trade with
a Roy model of the sorting of workers in each local labor market across sectors. The paper shows that the welfare
gains from trade for workers from each local labor market can be expressed in terms of the domestic trade share for
the aggregate economy in each sector and a measure of the degree of specialization of workers from each local labor
market across sectors. Adão, Arkolakis, and Esposito (2019) uses a su cient statistics approach to extend shift-share
empirical speci cations to incorporate indirect or general equilibrium e ects that arise in spatial models from interac-
tions between locations. Notably, the indirect e ects from the exposure of other markets to the China shock are found
to reinforce the negative impact of a market's own exposure to the China shock, thereby leading to employment and
wage losses that are substantially larger than those conventionally found.
      Finally, one striking feature of the reduced-form ndings for the China shock in Section 2 is the importance of
unemployment bene ts, disability and income assistance as adjustment margins to the shock. Although one can
interpret these adjustment margins as home production in neoclassical models, these ndings raise the question of
the potential relevance of other labor market frictions in explaining these responses, as explored in Kim and Vogel
(2020) and Rodriguez-Clare, Ulate, and Vasquez (2018).


5       Modeling Economic Activity Within Cities
We now turn to quantitative spatial models of the organization of economic activity within cities, where commuting
becomes relevant.43 We consider a city that is embedded within a wider economy. The city consists of a discrete set of
locations (N ). The economy as a whole is populated by an endogenous measure of workers, who are geographically
mobile, and choose whether to live in the city or the wider economy. Population mobility implies that the expected
    43 For   a recent review of research on cities in the developing world, see Bryan, Glaeser, and Tsivanidis (2020).




                                                                             39
                                                                                             ¯ .44 If a worker chooses
utility from living in the city equals the reservation level of utility in the wider economy U
the city, she observes idiosyncratic preference draws for each possible pair of residence and workplace, and choose a
residence n and a workplace i to maximize her utility. With a continuous measure of workers, the law of large numbers
applies, and the expected values of variables for each residence and workplace pair are equal to their realized values.45
Locations can di er from one another in terms of their attractiveness for both production and residence, as determined
by productivity, amenities, the supply of oor space, and transport connections.

5.1     Workplace-Residence Choices

Worker preferences are de ned over consumption goods and residential oor space. We assume that these preferences
take the Cobb-Douglas form, such that the indirect utility for a worker  residing in n and working in i is:46

                                                         Bn bni ( )wi
                                           Uni ( ) =           Q1-
                                                                      ,                0 <  < 1,                                            (58)
                                                         ni Pn   n

where we suppress the time subscript, except where important; Pn is the price index for consumption goods, which
may include both tradeable and non-tradeable consumption goods; Qn is the price of oor space; wi is the wage; ni
is an iceberg commuting cost; Bn captures residential amenities that are common across all workers and could be
endogenous to the surrounding concentration of economic activity through agglomeration forces; and bni ( ) is an
idiosyncratic amenity draw that captures all the idiosyncratic factors that can cause an individual to live and work in
particular locations within the city.
    This speci cation of indirect utility (58) is consistent with an entire class of quantitative urban models, as shown
in Heblich, Redding, and Sturm (2020). This class of models includes the canonical urban model with a single tradeable
 nal good as in Lucas and Rossi-Hansberg (2002) and Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2015), an Armington model
in which goods are di erentiated by origin as in Armington (1969), Allen and Arkolakis (2014) and Allen, Arkolakis,
and Li (2017), a Ricardian model in which regions specialize in di erent goods as a result of technology di erences
as in Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Redding (2016), and a new economic geography model in which an endogenous
measure of rms in each location supplies horizontally di erentiated varieties as in Helpman (1998), Redding and
Sturm (2008) and Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018). Although idiosyncratic heterogeneity is modeled in
terms of worker preferences (bni ( )) in equation (58), there is a closely-related formulation in terms of heterogeneity
in worker productivity (e ective units of labor). Both formulations are isomorphic in terms of the choice probabilities,
but di er in that the speci cation using e ective units of labor interprets income in the data as wages times average
e ective units of labor. Similarly, although commuting costs (ni ) are modeled in terms of utility in equation (58), they
enter the indirect utility multiplicatively with the wage, which implies that there is also a closely-related formulation
in terms of the opportunity cost of time spent commuting.
    We assume that idiosyncratic amenities (bni ( )) are drawn from an independent extreme value (Fréchet) distri-
bution for each residence-workplace pair and worker:

                                                                   -
                                                     G(b) = e-b ,                     > 1,                                                  (59)
  44 Although we take this reservation level of utility in the wider economy as given here, this model of a single city can be embedded in model

system of cities that determines this common reservation level of utility across all cities, as in Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018).
  45 For a relaxation of the assumption of a continuous measure of workers and an exploration of granularity, see Dingel and Tintelnot (2020)
  46 For empirical evidence using U.S. data in support of the constant housing expenditure share implied by the Cobb-Douglas functional form, see

Davis and Ortalo-Magné (2011).



                                                                       40
where we normalize the Fréchet scale parameter in equation (59) to one, because it enters the worker choice probabili-
ties isomorphically to common amenities Bn in equation (58); the Fréchet shape parameter regulates the dispersion of
idiosyncratic amenities, which controls the sensitivity of worker location decisions to economic variables (e.g. wages
and the cost of living). The smaller the shape parameter , the greater the heterogeneity in idiosyncratic amenities,
and the less sensitive are worker location decisions to economic variables.47
    Using standard results for extreme value distributions, the probability that a worker chooses to reside in n and
work in i is given by:
                                                                                 1-         -
                                             Lni                 (Bn wi )   ni Pn Qn
                                     ni =        =                                                       -   ,                            (60)
                                             LN                           (Bk w )       Q1-
                                                                                    k Pk
                                                          kN          N                  k

where Lni is the measure of commuters from n to i and LN is the measure of workers that choose the city.
    A rst key implication of the extreme value speci cation for idiosyncratic amenities is that bilateral commuting
 ows in equation (60) satisfy a gravity equation. Therefore, the probability of commuting between residence n and
workplace i depends on the characteristics of that residence n, the attributes of that workplace i and bilateral com-
muting costs and amenities ("bilateral resistance"). Furthermore, this probability also depends on the characteristics
of all residences k , all workplaces and all bilateral commuting costs ("multilateral resistance"). A large reduced-form
literature in urban economics provides empirical evidence that the gravity equation provides a good approximation
to commuting ows, as reviewed in Fortheringham and O'Kelly (1989) and McDonald and McMillen (2010).
    Summing across workplaces i, we obtain the probability that a worker lives in residence n (R
                                                                                               n = Rn /LN ).

Summing across residences n, we obtain the probability that a worker is employed in workplace i (L
                                                                                                 i = Li /LN ):

                                             1-          -                                                            1-    -
                      iN   (Bn wi )     ni Pn Qn                                       nN    (Bn wi )            ni Pn Qn
      R
      n =                                                    -    ,       L
                                                                          i =                                                   -   ,     (61)
                                (Bk w )         Q1-
                                            k Pk                                                 (Bk w )               Q1-
                                                                                                                   k Pk
                  kN        N                    k                                  kN       N                          k

where Rn denotes employment by residence in location n and Li denotes employment by workplace in location i.
    A second key implication of the extreme value speci cation is that expected utility is equalized across all pairs of
residences and workplaces within the city and is equal to the reservation level of utility in the wider economy:
                                                                                                 1


                                          ¯ =                                   1- -
                                          U                    (Bk w )      k Pk Qk                  ,                                    (62)
                                                    kN N

where the expectation is taken over the distribution for idiosyncratic amenities;   (( - 1)/ ); and (·) is the
Gamma function.
    The intuition for this second result is that bilateral commutes with attractive economic characteristics (high work-
place wages and low residence cost of living) attract additional commuters with lower idiosyncratic amenities, until
expected utility (taking into account idiosyncratic amenities) is the same across all bilateral commutes and equal to
the reservation utility. A closely related implication is that workplaces and residences face upward-sloping supply
functions in real wages for workers and residents respectively (as captured in the choice probabilities (60)). To ob-
tain additional workers, a location must pay higher wages to attract workers with lower realizations for idiosyncratic
amenities for that workplace. Similarly, to acquire additional residents, a location must o er a lower cost of living to
entice residents with lower realizations for idiosyncratic amenities for that residence.
   47 Modeling idiosyncratic preferences using the extreme value distribution has a long tradition in transportation economics, dating back to

McFadden (1974). A related literature models workers' migration decisions using extreme value distributed preferences, as in Grogger and Hanson
(2011), Kennan and Walker (2011), Bryan and Morten (2019) and Morten and Oliveira (2018).



                                                                      41
   In this speci cation, workers are ex ante homogenous, and ex post heterogeneous in terms of their idiosyncratic
preference draws. An interesting generalization is to introduce multiple groups of ex ante heterogeneous workers,
as for example in Redding and Sturm (2016), Tsivanidis (2018), Almagro and Domínguez-Iino (2019), and Couture,
Gaubert, and Handbury (2020). If these di erent types of workers have di erent dispersion parameters for idiosyn-
cratic preferences, or if preferences are non-homothetic, there will be systematic spatial sorting of each group of
workers across neighborhoods with di erent characteristics within the city.

5.2    First and Second-Nature Geography

We now combine this speci cation of workplace-residence choices with assumptions on production structure and
the supply of oor space and show how this model of the internal structure of cities can be used to quantify the
role of rst and second-nature geography. We assume that the researcher observes employment by residence (Rn ),
employment by workplace (Li ), the price of oor space (Qn ), and geographical land area (Kn ), and show how the
model can be inverted to recover the unobserved locational fundamentals that exactly rationalize the observed data
as an equilibrium outcome.
   The remainder of our analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we use the observed data and the model's bilateral
commuting predictions to recover unobserved wages (wi ). Second, we use assumptions on production structure and
the observed data to recover unobserved productivity (Ai ). Third, we use the observed data and the model's predic-
tions for residential choice probabilities to recover unobserved amenities (Bi ). Fourth, we use assumptions on the
supply of oor space (Hn ) to recover a measure of the density of development for each location (i ).
   Starting with the rst step for wages, using the commuting probability (ni ) in equation (60) and the residence
probability (R
             n ) in equation (61), the conditional probability that a worker commutes to workplace i conditional on

living in residence n is:
                                                  ni          (wi /ni )
                                         R
                                         ni|n =      =                  ,                                         (63)
                                                  R
                                                  n           N (w /n )

   Using this conditional commuting probability in the commuter market clearing condition that equates employment
in each workplace with the number of residence commuting to that workplace, we have:

                                                         (wi /ni )
                                          Li =                     Rn ,                                           (64)
                                                 nN      N (w /n )


Given the observed data on employment (Li ) and residents (Rn ) and a parameterization of commuting costs (ni ),
equation (64) provides a system of N equations that can be solved for the unique wage in each location (wn ) that
satis es this commuter market clearing condition. A natural baseline parameterization of commuting costs is to
assume that they are an exponential function of travel times (ni ), such that ni = eni . Although this speci cation
typically provides a good approximation to observed commuting data (see for example Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm, and
Wolf 2015), it could be further enriched to introduce congestion, such that bilateral commuting costs for a residence-
workplace pair depend on the ow of commuters for that pair.
   Moving to the second step for productivity, we assume a single nal good that is costlessly traded within the
city and chosen as the numeraire (Pn = 1 for all n). Under these assumptions, unobserved productivity (An ) can be
recovered from the zero-pro t condition that equates price and unit cost, together with the solutions for wages from




                                                         42
above (wn ) and the observed price of oor space (Qn ):

                                                   1-
                                            Ai = wi Qi ,          0 <  < 1,                                           (65)

where we assume for simplicity no arbitrage between residential and commercial use of oor space, such that there is
a single price for oor space in each location. This zero-pro t condition has an intuitive interpretation: Higher wages
(wi ) and higher prices of oor space (Qi ) in a location imply that productivity (Ai ) must be higher, in order to satisfy
the requirement that pro ts are zero if the nal good is produced. In principle, productivity also could be endogenous
to the surrounding concentration of economic activity through agglomeration forces.
                                                                       ¯ ) from equation (62) and de ning a measure
   Continuing to the third step for amenities, using expected utility (U
of commuting market access (CM An ), the residential choice probabilities (61) can be re-written as follows:
                                                                                                  1

                              Bn
                     R
                     n   =    ¯ /     Q-
                                       n
                                         (1-)
                                              CM An ,               CM An =          (w /n )          .               (66)
                              U                                                  N

                                                                           ¯ ), the observed data on residential choice
Given a choice of units in which to measure amenities (a normalization for U
probabilities (R
               n ) and the price of oor space (Qn ), our parameterization of commuting costs (ni ), and our solutions

for wages from above (wn ), we can determine unique values for residential amenities in each location (Bn ) from these
residential choice probabilities.
   Turning to the fourth and nal step, we can recover the density of development (n ) from the market clearing
condition that equates the demand and supply for oor space:

                                                   R    L
                                                  Hn + Hn = n Kn ,                                                    (67)

where Kn is geographical land area; n is the density of development (the ratio of oor space to geographical land
                                         R                    L
area); and the demands for residential (Hn ) and commercial (Hn ) oor space use can be obtained from workers' and
 rms' rst-order conditions using the observed data and the solutions from the previous steps above.
   In the case in which productivity (An ), amenities (Bn ) and the density of development (n ) are exogenous, there
exists a unique spatial equilibrium distribution of economic activity, as shown in Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm, and Wolf
(2015). In contrast, if productivity and amenities are endogenous because of agglomeration forces, whether the model
has a unique equilibrium or multiple equilibria depends on the strength of these agglomeration forces relative to the
exogenous di erences in characteristics across locations. Nevertheless, this quantitative urban model is invertible,
in the sense that unique values of productivity (An ), amenities (Bn ) and the density of development (n ) can be
recovered conditional on the observed equilibrium in the data, regardless of whether or not another equilibrium
could have occurred. Intuitively, the equilibrium conditions in the model, such as utility maximization, population
mobility, pro t maximization and zero pro ts, contain enough information given the observed data to uniquely pin
down these unobserved location characteristics.
   A related property of this quantitative urban model is that it is recursive, in the sense that the overall values
of productivity (An ) and amenities (Bn ) can be determined, without having to specify the extent to which these
variables are exogenous or endogenous to agglomeration forces, and without having to specify the functional form
of these agglomeration forces. Having recovered overall productivity (An ) and amenities (Bn ), we can undertake
model-based decompositions to examine the relative importance of these variables and commuting market access in
explaining the observed variation in internal city structure.

                                                           43
   Exactly how the model is used to recover these unobserved location characteristics depends on both model as-
sumptions and the data available to the researcher. From a data perspective, we assumed in this section that the
researcher observed employment by workplace (Li ) and employment by residence (Rn ), but not bilateral commuting
 ows. Therefore, we parameterized bilateral commuting costs (ni ) and solved for wages (wn ), which yields model
predictions for bilateral commuting ows. In other applications, direct data on bilateral commuting ows may be
available, as in Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018), Heblich, Redding, and Sturm (2020) and Owens III, Rossi-
Hansberg, and Sarte (2020). From a model perspective, we assumed in this section that there is a single tradeable nal
good and recovered productivity from the zero-pro t condition. In contrast, in models in which goods are di erenti-
ated by origin or rm, productivity instead can be recovered from the market clearing condition that income in each
location equals expenditure on the goods produced by that location.

5.3    Estimating Agglomeration Forces

One application of quantitative urban models is estimating the strength of agglomeration forces, which raises similar
identi cation challenges as those for market access discussed above. Although high land prices and levels of economic
activity in a group of neighboring locations are consistent with strong agglomeration forces, they are also consistent
with shared amenities that make these locations attractive places to live (e.g., leafy streets and scenic views) or common
natural advantages that make these locations attractive for production (e.g., access to natural water). To separate these
two sets of determinants of levels of economic activity, one typically needs both some additional model structure and
exogenous variation in the surrounding concentration of economic activity.
   We begin by introducing this additional model structure, before discussing potential exogenous sources of varia-
tion in surrounding economic activity. We allow productivity (An ) to depend on production fundamentals (an ) and
production externalities (L
                          n ). Production fundamentals capture features of physical geography that make a location

more or less productive independently of neighboring economic activity (e.g. access to natural water). Production
externalities capture productivity bene ts from the surrounding employment density and are typically modeled in
urban economics as depending on the travel time weighted sum of surrounding employment density:
                                                                  N
                                                 L                       L           Lk
                                  Ai = ai L
                                          i          ,    L
                                                          j            e-       ik
                                                                                          ,                           (68)
                                                                                     Kk
                                                                 k=1

where  L controls the relative importance of production externalities; L determines their rate of spatial decay; and
recall that Ki is geographical land area.
   Similarly, we allow residential amenities (Bn ) to depend on residential fundamentals (bn ) and residential exter-
nalities (n ). Residential fundamentals capture features of physical geography that make a location a more or less
attractive place to live independently of neighboring economic activity (e.g. green areas). Residential externalities
capture the e ects of the surrounding density of residents and are modeled symmetrically to production externalities:
                                                                  N
                                                 R                          R        Rk
                                  Bi = bi R
                                          i          ,    R
                                                          i            e-       ik
                                                                                          ,                           (69)
                                                                                     Kk
                                                                 k=1

where  R controls the relative importance of residential externalities; and R determines their rate of spatial decay.
   In separating agglomeration forces and locational fundamentals, we again use invertibility properties of this class
of quantitative urban models. Given the values of productivity (An ) and amenities (Bn ) that were recovered from

                                                           44
the equilibrium conditions of the model and the observed data in the previous section, and given values for the
agglomeration parameters ( L , L ,  R , R ), we can solve for unique values of unobserved production fundamentals
(an ) and residential fundamentals (bn ). These unobserved fundamentals correspond to structural residuals that ensure
that the model exactly rationalizes the observed data.
    The agglomeration parameters ( L , L ,  R , R ) can be estimated using orthogonality conditions on these struc-
tural residuals. In Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2015), these orthgonality conditions use the exogenous change
in the surrounding concentration of economic activity from the division of Berlin in the aftermath of the Second World
War and its reuni cation following the fall of the Iron Curtain. In particular, these orthogonality conditions assume
that the log changes in production (an ) and residential (bn ) fundamentals are uncorrelated with indicator variables
for grid cells for the distance of West Berlin city blocks from the pre-war Central Business District (CBD) just East of
the Berlin Wall. This identifying assumption requires that the change in the organization of economic activity within
Berlin is explained by the model's agglomeration and dispersion forces, rather than by systematic changes in loca-
tional fundamentals. As this approach conditions on the observed equilibrium in the data, and the model is invertible
in the sense that there is a one-to-one mapping from the observed variables to the structural residuals, no assumptions
are required for parameter estimation about whether the model has a single equilibrium or multiple equilibria. All
that is required for the estimation to consistently estimate the model parameters is that the structural residuals for
the observed equilibrium satisfy the assumed orthogonality conditions.
    Using these orthogonality conditions, Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2015) nd evidence of agglomeration
economies in both production and residential decisions. For production, the estimated elasticity of productivity with
respect to the density of employment is 0.07, which is towards the high end of the 3-8 percent range stated in the sur-
vey by Rosenthal and Strange (2004), but less than the elasticities from some quasi-experimental studies (e.g. Green-
stone, Hornbeck, and Moretti 2010 and Kline and Moretti 2014a).48 Consistent with other research using spatially-
disaggregated data within cities, such as Arzaghi and Henderson (2008), these productivity externalities are highly
localized, such that they decline to close to zero by 10 minutes of travel time. For residential decisions, the estimated
elasticity of amenities with respect to the density of residents is larger at around 0.15, which is in line with a grow-
ing body of research that emphasizes endogenous amenities, including Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz (2001) and Diamond
(2016). Again these residential externalities are highly localized, and decline to close to zero by 10 minutes of travel
time. This nding of localized residential externalities is consistent with the results of Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte, and
Owens (2010), which nds that housing externalities fall by approximately half every 1,000 feet.
    An important area for further research is discriminating between alternative possible microfoundations for these
speci cations of agglomeration forces in production and residence. Many existing models of agglomeration were
inspired by thinking about the concentration of manufacturing industries in cities in the late-19th century. Yet em-
ployment in cities today is overwhelmingly concentrated in service sectors. Furthermore, even within sectors, the
types of economic activities performed in cities have changed dramatically over time, as shown in Michaels, Rauch,
and Redding (2019) using the verbs from occupational descriptions to capture the tasks performed by workers in those
occupations. Whereas the tasks most concentrated in cities in 1880 involved the manipulation of the physical word,
such as Thread and Sew, those most concentrated in cities in 2000 involve human interaction, such as Advise and
  48 For   meta-analyses of empirical estimates of agglomeration forces, see Melo, Graham, and Noland (2009) and Ahlfeldt and Pietrostefani (2019).




                                                                         45
Confer.49 Given these large-scale changes in the types of economic activities performed in urban versus rural areas
over time, it is at least reasonable to ponder whether the nature and scope of agglomeration economies could have
changed over time. Consistent with this idea, Autor (2019) nds substantial changes in the urban wage premium for
workers with di erent levels of skills over time. At the beginning of the sample period in the 1970s, average wages
were sharply increasing in population density for both low-skill workers (high-school or less) and high-skill workers
(some college or greater). By the end of the sample period in 2015, this wage premium to population density had
increased for high-skill workers but almost disappeared for low-skill workers.
    Finally, most theories of agglomeration focus on production, yet the growing number of empirical ndings of
endogenous amenities call out for further research on the microfoundations for agglomeration forces in residential
decisions. One important mechanism for endogenous amenities is agglomeration in the consumption of local ser-
vices. Using barcode data for the consumer goods sector in the U.S., Handbury and Weinstein (2015) nd substantial
di erences in the range of product varieties available across cities of di erent sizes. Using data on U.S. core-based
statistical areas (CBSAs), Couture, Gaubert, Handbury, and Hurst (2018) provide evidence that non-homotheticities
in consumption play an important role in gentri cation and the spatial sorting of workers with di erent levels of
income between the central city and the suburbs. Using Japanese smartphone global positioning system (GPS) data,
Miyauchi, Nakajima, and Redding (2020) show that non-commuting trips within urban areas are both frequent and
closely related to the availability of local services. The paper shows that incorporating these consumption trips into
models of internal city structure is quantitatively relevant for rationalizing both the observed spatial distribution of
land prices and the counterfactual impact of transport infrastructure investments.

5.4        Quantifying the Impact of Transport Infrastructure Improvements

The constant elasticity structure of this class of quantitative urban models implies that exact-hat algebra techniques
again can be used to quantify the impact of transport improvements on the location of economic activity. In particular,
Heblich, Redding, and Sturm (2020), develop a methodology for evaluating the impact of transport infrastructure
investments that holds in an entire class of quantitative urban models, because it only uses the assumptions of (i) a
gravity equation in commuting, (ii) land market clearing, and (iii) payments for commercial and residential oor space
are constant multiples of labor income by workplace and residence respectively.
    This methodology is combined with spatially-disaggregated data for London from 1801-1921 to show that this
class of quantitative urban models is remarkably successful in explaining the rst large-scale separation of workplace
and residence that occurred following the invention of the steam railway. This methodology is well suited to the
data-scarce environment of the 19th century, because it can be implemented using only bilateral commuting data in
a baseline year and property values and employment by residence in other years. Within the structure of this class of
quantitative urban models, these data provide su cient statistics that can be used to isolate the e ect of the change in
commuting costs from the construction of the railway network on employment by workplace, while controlling for
other unobserved changes over time in productivity, amenities, the costs of trading goods, the supply of oor space
and the reservation level of utility in the wider economy.
    This methodology uses a combined land and commuter market clearing condition in this class of quantitative
urban models. Using the assumption of Cobb-Douglas utility and production, expenditure on residential oor space
  49 For   a model of a system of cities in which the costly exchange of ideas is the force for agglomeration, see Davis and Dingel (2019).



                                                                          46
is a constant multiple of income by residence, and expenditure on commercial oor space is a constant multiple of
income by workplace. Combining both of these results, the land market clearing condition can be written as:

                                                                      H
                                        Qnt = (1 - ) vnt Rnt +          wnt Lnt ,                                   (70)
                                                                      L

where (1 - ) is the share of residential oor space in household expenditure;  H is the share of commercial oor
space in rm costs;  L is the share of labor in rm costs; and we have now made explicit the time subscript. In this
land market clearing condition, the average per capita income of residents (vnt ) depends on the wage (wnt ) and the
conditional commuting probabilities (R
                                     nit|n ) as follows:


                                                 vnt =        R
                                                              nit|n wit                                             (71)
                                                         iN

while employment (Lnt ) and residents (Rnt ) are linked through the commuter market clearing condition (64).
   Substituting commuter market clearing (64) and average per capita income (71) into the land market clearing
condition (70), we obtain a combined land and commuter market clearing condition. Rewriting this combined land
and commuter market clearing condition in another year ( = t) in terms of relative changes (x
                                                                                            ^nt = xn /xnt ) and
the observed values of variables in the baseline year t, we obtain:

                                                              R
                                                              nit|n w
                                                                    ^it ^-
                          ^ nt Qnt
                          Q          = (1 - )                            nit
                                                                                      w       ^ nt Rnt
                                                                                      ^it wit R
                                                    iN
                                                              N   R
                                                                  n   t|n
                                                                            ^ t
                                                                            w  ^-
                                                                                n t
                                                                                                                    (72)
                                         H                      R
                                                                int|i w
                                                                      ^nt ^-
                                     +  w
                                        ^ w                                int         ^ it Rit ,
                                                                                       R
                                       L nt nt         iN           R
                                                                  N i t|i w
                                                                          ^ t^-
                                                                              i t



where property values equal the price times the quantity of oor space: Qnt = Qnt Hnt .
   Given data on bilateral commuting (R
                                      nit|n ), property values (Qnt ), residents (Rnt ) and wages (wnt ) in the baseline
                                                                   ^ nt ) and residents (R
year of t = 1921, and data on relative changes in property values (Q                     ^ nt ) for years going back

to the early 19th century, Heblich, Redding, and Sturm (2020) use this combined land market clearing condition to
solve for the impact of the construction of the railway network on historical employment by workplace. In particular,
using calibrated values for the expenditure shares and Fréchet shape parameter ((1 - ),  H ,  L , ) and estimates
of the impact of the railway network on commuting costs (^-
                                                          nit ) from bilateral commuting ows in the baseline year

of t = 1921, the paper uses the combined land and commuter market clearing condition (72) to solve for historical
relative changes in wages (w
                           ^it ). Given these solutions for historical relative changes in wages (w
                                                                                                  ^it ) and the observed
data in the baseline year of t = 1921, historical values for employment by workplace and bilateral commuting ows
can be recovered from the conditional commuting probabilities (64).
   This class of quantitative spatial models is remarkably successful at explaining the large-scale separation of work-
place and residence that emerged following the invention of the railway. Figure 2 compares the model's predictions
for workplace employment in the City of London against the limited data that are available for this location from the
City of London day censuses for 1866, 1881, 1891 and 1911. Whereas the population census records population by
residence (based on where people sleep on census night), these day censuses recorded the number of people present
during the daytime on census day (regardless of where they slept). This methodology conditions on the observed
historical changes in employment by residence, which implies that employment by residence is identical in the model
and data for all years. Similarly, this methodology conditions on employment by workplace in the baseline year of
1921, which implies that the model predictions and the data for workplace employment necessarily coincide for this


                                                           47
year. Although the model's predictions and the data can diverge from one another in other years, the model closely
captures the sharp increase in workplace employment that occurs in the City of London in the second half of the 19th
century. In another speci cation check using historical data on commuting distances, the model also successfully
captures the fact that most workers lived within 5 kilometers of their workplace at the dawn of the railway age.

                           Figure 2: Predicting the Impact of the Removal of the Railway Network


                                                     400
                                                              Data Employment Residence
                                                              Data Day Population
                                                     350      Model Employment Workplace




                                                     300



                                                     250
                            Employment (Thousands)




                                                     200



                                                     150



                                                     100



                                                     50



                                                      0
                                                      1831   1841     1851      1861       1871          1881   1891   1901   1911   1921
                                                                                                  Year




Source: Heblich, Redding, and Sturm (2020); "Data Night Population" is residential population from the population census; "Data Day Population"
is day population from the City of London Day Census for 1866, 1881, 1891 and 1911 and workplace employment in the population census for
1921; "Model Employment Workplace" is the data on workplace employment from the population census for 1921 and the model's predictions for
workplace employment for the other years based on a calibrated Fréchet shape parameter of = 5.25; the model's predictions use the estimated
change in commuting costs from removing the railway network and condition on observed changes in population and rateable values.


    This pattern of the results has an intuitive explanation within this class of quantitative urban models. The hub
and spoke structure of the railway network disproportionately reduced commuting costs into central locations within
Greater London. If these central locations have high productivity relative to amenities compared to suburban locations,
this improvement in transport technology enables them to specialize as a workplace, while the suburbs specialize as
a residence. These results are consistent with a large literature in economic history that discusses the transformation
of central cities from residential to commercial activity following 19th-century transport improvements, including
in particular Jackson (1987). They are also consistent with the reduced-form literature discussed in Section 4.1 that
 nds evidence of employment decentralization following transport improvements. Although the City of London
experiences the largest absolute increase in employment, the largest percentage rates of growth of both employment
and population occur in the suburbs. As a result, there is employment decentralization in the sense that the gradient of
log employment density in distance from central London again declines from 1831-1921, and the share of employment
in Greater London within 5 kilometers of the center declines from around 68-48 percent over this period.




                                                                                              48
5.5   Counterfactuals

An advantage of the methodology developed in the previous section is that it holds in an entire class of quantitative
urban models and can be used to evaluate the impact of a transport improvements while controlling for changes in
other determinants of economic activity (such as productivity and amenities). However, another question of interest
is the counterfactual of how the spatial distribution of economic activity would have evolved if the only thing that
changed were the railway network, holding constant other determinants of economic activity. Again this counter-
factual question can be addressed using exact-algebra techniques that use the observed values of the endogenous
variables in an initial equilibrium to control for unobserved locational fundamentals. A key di erence between these
counterfactuals and the methodology developed in the previous section is that we no longer condition on the observed
changes in property values and employment by residence in the data.
   In undertaking these counterfactuals, it again becomes relevant whether the model has a single equilibrium or
multiple equilibria. In the special case of the model in Subsections 5.2 and 5.3 above in which productivity (An ),
amenities (Bn ) and the density of development (n ) are exogenous (no agglomeration forces such that  L =  R = 0),
Ahlfeldt, Redding, Sturm, and Wolf (2015) show that there exists a unique equilibrium. Therefore, these counterfac-
tuals have determinate predictions for the spatial distribution of economic activity. In the presence of agglomeration
forces ( L > 0 and  R > 0), there is the potential for multiple equilibria in the model, depending on the strength
of these agglomeration forces relative to the exogenous di erences in fundamentals across locations. In the presence
of such multiple equilibria, researchers must specify an equilibrium selection rule, and the typical approach is to
solve for a counterfactual equilibrium using the initial values of variables equal to their observed values in the data,
which implicitly searches for the closest counterfactual equilibrium to the observed equilibrium. More generally, the
quantitative analysis of spatial models with multiple equilibria is an area where more research is needed.
   The counterfactual impact of the transport improvement on welfare depends importantly on assumptions made
about population mobility with the wider economy. In an open-city speci cation with perfect population mobility, the
expected utility of workers is pinned down by the reservation level of utility in the wider economy. In this case, the
transport improvement leaves worker welfare unchanged, and instead a ects total city population. As in the classical
approach to valuing public goods using land values following George (1879), the welfare gains from the transport
improvement are experienced by landlords through changes in the price of oor space. In contrast, in a closed-city
speci cation with an immobile city population, workers also experience welfare gains from the transport improve-
ment. More generally, Heblich, Redding, and Sturm (2020) consider the intermediate case of imperfect population
mobility, with an elasticity of labor supply to the city determined by the Fréchet shape parameter . In this intermedi-
ate case, the transport improvement a ects both worker welfare and total city population, with the relative magnitude
of these two e ects depending on this elasticity of labor supply to the city.
   In particular, Heblich, Redding, and Sturm (2020) undertake counterfactuals for removing the railway network
under a range of alternative assumptions about the elasticity of supply of oor space and agglomeration forces: (i) an
perfectly inelastic supply of oor space and no agglomeration forces ("Inelastic No Agglom"); (ii) a calibrated oor
space supply elasticity of 1.83 and no agglomeration forces ("Elastic No Agglom"); (iii) a calibrated oor space supply
elasticity of 1.83 and only production agglomeration forces with an estimated elasticity of productivity to employment
density of 0.086 ("Elastic Prod Agglom"); (iv) a calibrated oor space supply elasticity of 1.83 and both production and



                                                           49
residential agglomeration forces, with an estimated elasticity of productivity to employment density of 0.086, and an
estimated elasticity of amenities to residents density of 0.172 ("Elastic Prod + Amen Agglom").
    Three key ndings from these counterfactuals are as follows. First, much of the increased separation of workplace
and residence in Greater London during the 19th century can be explained by the pure change in commuting costs from
the new transport technology alone. Under the assumption of an inelastic supply of oor space and no agglomeration
forces, removing the entire railway network reduces net commuting into the City of London from around 370,000
in 1921 to 98,173 in 1831, which compares to 30,375 in the baseline quantitative analysis in the previous section that
allows for changes in other determinants of economic activity. Second, this new transport technology has sizable
e ects on overall economic activity. Using the calibrated oor space supply elasticity and estimated values of both
production and residence agglomeration forces, removing the entire railway network decreases the total population
of Greater London by 51.45 percent to 3.59 million in 1831.
    Third, the net present value of the counterfactual changes in property values exceeds historical estimates of the
construction costs of the railway network for plausible values of the discount rate. Allowing for a positive oor
space supply elasticity substantially enhances the impact of the railway network on property values, highlighting
the role of complementary expansions in the supply of oor space in in uencing the e ects transport infrastructure
improvements. Introducing agglomeration economies in production and residence further magni es the impact of the
railway network on property values, illustrating the relevance of endogenous changes in productivity and amenities
for cost-bene t evaluations of transport improvements.
    In the class of quantitative urban models considered here with a single type of worker, all workers are a ected
in the same way by the transport improvement. In settings with multiple groups of ex ante heterogeneous workers,
improvements in transport infrastructure or other public policy interventions can have distributional e ects on these
di erent groups of workers, depending on patterns of spatial sorting. To analyze the impact of Bogotá's Bus Rapid
Transit system, Tsivanidis (2018) develops a quantitative spatial model with low and high-skilled workers who have
non-homothetic preferences over neighborhoods and transit modes. Although low-skilled workers use public transit
the most, they have a larger elasticity of commuting decisions to commuting costs, and hence have larger labor
supply response to the transport improvement, thus inducing a subtle distributional e ects between these two groups
of workers. Similarly, using data from Dar es Salaam's Bus Rapid Transit system, Balboni, Bryan, Morten, and Siddiqi
(2020) nd distributional e ects between low and high-income workers. Although these interventions are place-based
in the sense that they are built in speci c neighborhoods, they induce changes in patterns of spatial sorting throughout
the city, and hence need not bene t the residents initially living in those neighborhoods.


6    Conclusions
The last decade has seen substantial research progress on geography and trade. A key contribution of recent empirical
research has been to show that geography is an important dimension along which the distributional consequences
of international trade occur. If industries are unevenly spatially distributed and factors of production are imperfectly
mobile, di erent local labor markets within countries are di erentially exposed to trade shocks. In in uential work,
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013a) have shown that local labor markets more exposed to Chinese import growth expe-
rience larger reductions in manufacturing employment as a share of the working-age population, the employment to



                                                          50
population ratio and mean log weekly earnings, as well as larger increases in per capita unemployment, disability, and
income assistance transfer bene ts. These empirical ndings have stimulated a productive dialogue between theory
and empirics, as researchers have developed models to rationalize these empirical ndings.
   A key theoretical advance has been the development of quantitative spatial models that are su ciently rich as to
connect directly with the observed data on many asymmetric locations. These frameworks incorporate di erences
across locations in both rst-nature geography (locational endowments, such as access to the coast) and second-nature
geography (the proximity of economic agents relative to one another in geographic space). Typically, these models
have the property that they can be inverted to recover unobserved location characteristics (e.g. productivity, amenities
and trade costs) that exactly rationalize the observed data on the endogenous variables of the model as an equilibrium
outcome. Therefore, these frameworks can be used to quantify the roles of rst and second-nature geography in ex-
plaining the observed distribution of economic activity. Nevertheless, these frameworks remain su ciently tractable
as to permit an analytical characterization of the existence and uniqueness of the general equilibrium and to be used
for realistic counterfactuals. Importantly, these counterfactuals can be undertaken using the observed values of en-
dogenous variables in an initial equilibrium to control for a wide range of unobserved locational fundamentals that
a ect the spatial distribution of economic activity.
   We distinguish between models of regions or systems of cities (where goods trade and migration take central
stage) and models of the internal structure of cities (where commuting becomes relevant). All three types of spatial
interactions are well approximated by gravity equations in which spatial interactions decline sharply in the distance
between economic agents. From models of regions or systems of cities, we now have a good understanding of the role
of market access in shaping the spatial distribution of economic activity, the circumstances under which there is path
dependence such that temporary shocks can have permanent e ects on the spatial distribution of economic activ-
ity, and the role of imperfect factor mobility in rationalizing ndings from the reduced-form literature on local labor
markets. From models of the internal structure of cities, we now have a good understanding of overall magnitude
of agglomeration forces and the implications of transport infrastructure improvements for the internal organization
of economic activity within cities. In both these areas, reduced-form methods and quantitative models have comple-
mented one another: the empirical moments from reduced-form studies provide discipline for model parameters; the
predictions of the quantitative models shed light on general equilibrium e ects and model-based objects such as a
welfare that are di cult to recover from reduced-form speci cations alone.
   Looking ahead, there is much that remains to be done. The explosion of new sources of geographical information
systems (GIS) data provides an heretofore unprecedented level of detail on economic activity at a ne spatial scale.
These new sources of data include ride-hailing data (e.g. Uber and Lyft), smartphone data with Global Positioning
System (GPS) information, rm-to- rm transactions data from sales (VAT) tax records, credit card data with consumer
and rm location, barcode scanner data with consumer and rm location, public transportation data on commuting,
and satellite-imaging data. Whereas theoretical and empirical research on spatial linkages has traditionally focused on
international trade between countries for reasons of data availability, we now increasingly have the ability to measure
these linkages between locations at ne spatial scales. Promising areas for further research are combining quantitative
spatial models with this wealth of empirical information to shed light on a whole host of issues, such as discriminat-
ing between alternative mechanisms for agglomeration, understanding the implications of new technologies for the
organization or work, and assessing the causes, consequences and policy implications of spatial sorting.


                                                          51
References
A      , R., C. A                     ,      F. E                  (2019): "Spatial Linkages, Global Shocks, and Local Labor Markets: Theory
    and Evidence," NBER Working Paper, 25544.

A      , R., M. K                 ,         E. M                 (2019): "Shift-Share Designs: Theory and Inference," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 134(4), 1949­2010.

A               , G.,        E. P                          (2019): "The Economic E ects of Density: A Synthesis," Journal of Urban Eco-
    nomics, 111, 93­107.

A               , G., S. R                , D. S           ,           N. W       (2015): "The Economics of Density: Evidence from the Berlin
    Wall," Econometrica, 83(6), 2127­2189.

A       , R. K., T. L. M                     ,           J. B. O         (1993): Network Flows: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications. Prentice-
    Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

A       , T.,           C. A                    (2014): "Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 129(3), 1085­1140.

            (2017): "The Welfare E ects of Transportation Infrastructure Improvements," Dartmouth College.

A       , T., C. A                    ,         X. L (2017): "Optimal City Structure," Yale University, mimeograph.

A       , T., C. A                    ,      Y. T                      (2019): "Universal Gravity," Journal of Political Economy, 128(2), 393­433.

A       , T.,           D. D                     (2020): "The Geography of Path Dependence," Dartmouth College, mimeograph.

A            , M.,         T. D                     I          (2019): "Location Sorting and Endogenous Amenities: Evidence from Amster-
    dam," New York University, mimeograph.

A       , M.,           A. M                (2018): "The Persistence of Local Joblessness," American Economic Review, 108(7), 1942­
    1970.

A      , M., M. D , R. C. F                          ,          J. R          (2017): "How Did China's WTO Entry A ect U.S. Prices?," NBER
    Working Paper, 23487.

A               , J. E.,         E.          W                 (2003): "Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle," American
    Economic Review, 93(1), 170­192.

A           , J. D.,           J. S. P              (2010): "The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Economics: How Better Research
    Design Is Taking the Con out of Econometrics," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 3­30.

A                , C., A. C                 ,            A. R                 C       (2012): "New Trade Models, Same Old Gains?," American
    Economic Review, 102(1), 94­130.

A                 , P. S. (1969): "A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of Production," IMF Sta Papers,
    16, 159­178.


                                                                                     52
A       , E., S. C                         ,           J. M L                (2010): "Trade Shocks and Labor Adjustment: A Structural Empirical
    Approach," American Economic Review, 100(3), 1008­45.

A            , M.,        J. V. H                               (2008): "Networking O Madison Avenue," Review of Economic Studies, 75(4),
    1011­1038.

A        , B., E. G                ,            L. S                  (2018): "Jobs for the Heartland: Place-Based Policies in 21st-Century Amer-
    ica," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 151­232.

A       , D. (2019): "Work of the Past, Work of the Future," American Economic Review, 109(5), 1­32, Richard Ely Lecture.

A       , D., D. D            , G. H                    ,            K. M          (2020): "Importing Political Polarization? The Electoral Conse-
    quences of Rising Trade Exposure," American Economic Review, forthcoming.

A       , D., D. D        ,                G. H. H                   (2013a): "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market E ects of Import Com-
    petition in the United States," American Economic Review, 103(6), 2121­68.

          (2013b): "The Geography of Trade and Technology Shocks in the United States," American Economic Review,
    103(3), 220­225, Papers and Proceedings.

A       , D., D. D         , G. H. H                        , G. P             ,    P. S        (2020): "Foreign Competition and Domestic Innovation:
    Evidence from U.S. Patents," American Economic Review: Insights, forthcoming.

A       , D., D. D            , G. H. H                         ,       J. S       (2014): "Trade Adjustment: Worker-Level Evidence," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 129(4), 1799­1860.

A       , D. H., D. D              ,             G. H. H                 (2016): "The China Shock: Learning from Labor Market Adjustment to
    Large Changes in Trade," Annual Review of Economics, 8, 205­240.

             (2019): "When Work Disappears: Manufacturing Decline and the Falling Marriage-Market Value of Young
    Men," American Economic Review: Insights, 1(2), 161­178.

B         , C. (2019): "In Harm's Way? Infrastructure Investments and the Persistence of Coastal Cities," MIT, mimeo-
    graph.

B         , C., G. B               , M. M                   ,         B. S         (2020): "Transportation, Gentri cation, and Urban Mobility: The
    Inequality E ects of Place-Based Policies," MIT, mimeograph.

B        , R., S. J            ,               K. G. S                  (2015): "Made in China, Sold in Norway: Local Labor Market E ects of an
    Import Shock," Journal of Public Economics, 127, 137­44.

B            , A., E. D                ,         N. Q               (2020): "On the Road: Access to Transportation Infrastructure and Economic
    Growth in China," Journal of Development Economics, 145, 1­36.

B             , D. (2020): "Trade Costs and Economic Geography: Evidence from the US," University of Michigan, mimeo-
    graph.




                                                                                           53
B        , T. J. (1991): Who Bene ts from State and Local Economic Development Policies? W. E. Upjohn Institute for
    Employment Research, Kalamazoo MI.

B       S       , N. (2007): "Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2), 775­780.

B       S       , N. (2019): "Urban Transport Expansions and Changes in the Spatial Structure of US Cities: Implications
    for Productivity and Welfare," Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

B       S       , N., L. B               , J. H                        , M. A. T            ,       Q. Z      (2017): "Roads, Railroads and Decentraliza-
    tion of Chinese Cities," Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(2), 435­448.

B           , A. B., J. B. J              ,             P. K. S               (2006): "Survival of the Best Fit: Exposure to Low-Wage Countries and
    the (Uneven) Growth of U.S. Manufacturing Plants," Journal of International Economics, 68, 219­37.

B           , A. B., S. J. R                  ,          P. K. S              (2013): "Testing for Factor Price Equality with Unobserved Di erences
    in Factor Quality or Productivity," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5(2), 135­163.

B              , D., Z. E S                   ,          R. K                (2016): "Estimating the E ects of the Container Revolution on World
    Trade," Journal of International Economics, pp. 36­50.

B           , H.,         J. L        (2012): "Portage: Path Dependence and Increasing Returns in U.S. History," Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 127(2), 587­644.

B       , N., M. D             ,         J. V           R              (2016): "Trade Induced Technical Change? The Impact of Chinese Imports
    on Innovation, IT and Productivity," Review of Economic Studies, 83, 87­117.

B       , N., K. H                   , A. K                 ,         P. L      (2020): "The impact of Chinese trade on US Employment: The Good,
    The Bad and the Debatable," Stanford University, mimeograph.

B            , K., P. H          ,       X. J                   (2019): "Quasi-Experimental Shift-share Research Designs," University College
    London, mimeograph.

B            , K.,        X. J                    (2018): "The Distributional E ects of Trade: Theory and Evidence from the U.S.," London
    School of Economics, mimeograph.

B        , M., S. B                   , H. G                      ,          M. S               (2007): "Looking for Multiple Equilibria When Geography
    Matters: German City Growth and the WWII Shock," Journal of Urban Economics, 61, 152­167.

B           , S., H. G                        ,          M. S                  (2004): "The Strategic Bombing of German Cities during WWII and
    its Impact on City Growth," Journal of Economic Geography, 4(2), 201­218.

B               , G., M. K                          ,           T. P                       (2020): "Geography, Transportation and Endogenous Trade
    Costs," Econometrica, 88(2), 657­691.

B                    , L. G., B. K. K                   , J. M           ,          A. V             (2019): "The China Shock and Employment in Por-
    tuguese Firms," Carnegie Mellon University, mimeograph.




                                                                                           54
B               , H. (2006): "The Spatial Income Structure in the European Union - What Role for Economic Geography?,"
    Journal of Economic Geography, 6(5), 593­617.

B        , L., N. G                  C                ,        G. R           (2019): "The Local Impact of Containterization," George Washington
    University, Washington DC.

B        ,      L.,          Z. D. L                       (2019):                 "Infrastructure Costs,"     SSRN Working Paper,       pp. 385­399,
    http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3428675.

B               , M., C. C               ,          F. T                      (2012): "How Wages and Employment Adjust to Trade Liberalization:
    Quasi-experimental Evidence from Austria," Journal of International Economics, 86, 68­81.

B       , G., E. G               ,           N. T                       (2020): "Cities in the Developing World," Annual Review of Economics, 12,
    273­297.

B       , G.,         M. M                   (2019): "The Aggregate Productivity E ects of Internal Migration: Evidence from Indone-
    sia," Journal of Political Economy, 127(5), 2229­2268.

C            , L., M. D                  ,        F. P          (2019): "Trade and Labor Market Dynamics: General Equilibrium Analysis
    of the China Trade Shock," Econometrica, 87(3), 741­835.

C            , L.,        F. P               (2015): "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare E ects of NAFTA," Review of Economic Studies,
    82(1), 1­44.

C            , L., F. P          , E. R           H                     ,      P. D. S         (2018): "The Impact of Regional and Sectoral Productivity
    Changes on the U.S. Economy," Review of Economic Studies, 85(4), 2042­2096.

C            , A.,         E. T                       (2000): "Does Public Infrastructure a ect Economic Activity? Evidence from the
    Rural Interstate Highway System," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 30(4), 457­490.

C    , Y., Y. L , J. R. P                    , P. K. S              ,          Z. T      (2020): "Did Trade Liberalization with China In uence U.S.
    Elections?," Yale of School of Management, mimeograph.

C     , J., I. K             , E. L. W                          ,             G. W          (2020): "Local Employment and Political E ects of Trade
    Deals: Evidence from NAFTA," Princeton University, mimeograph.

C       , F., J. G           ,           J. P. P           (2016): "Winners and Losers from a Commodities-for-Manufacturees Trade
    Boom," Journal of International Economics, 102, 50­69.

C            , A., D. D                        , M. K      ,                H. W            (2019): "The More We Die, The More We Sell? A Simple
    Test of the Home-Market E ect," Quarterly Journal of Economics,, 134(2), 843­894.

C            , V., C. G              ,           J. H                       (2020): "Income Growth and the Distributional E ects of Urban Spatial
    Sorting," University of Chicago, mimeograph.

C            , V., C. G              , J. H                ,                E. H      (2018): "Income Growth and the Distributional E ects of Urban
    Spatial Sorting," University of California Berkeley, mimeograph.


                                                                                          55
D       , W., S. F                       ,         J. S               (2014): "The Rise of the East and the Far East: German Labor Markets and
    Trade Integration," Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(6), 1643­1675.

D      , D. R.,            J. D                  (2019): "A Spatial Knowledge Economy," American Economic Review, 109(1), 153­70.

          (2020): "The Comparative Advantage of Cities," Journal of International Economics, 123, 1­27.

D      , D. R.,            D. E. W                          (1999): "Economic Geography and Regional Production Structure: An Empirical
    Investigation," European Economic Review, 43(2), 379­407.

          (2002): "Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The Geography of Economic Activity," American Economic Review,
    92(5), 1269­1289.

             (2003): "Market Access, Economic Geography and Comparative Advantage: an Empirical Test," Journal of
    International Economics, 59(1), 1­23.

             (2008): "A Search for Multiple Equilibria in Urban Industrial Structure," Journal of Regional Science, 48(1),
    29­65.

D      , M. A.,             F. O                   M          (2011): "Housing Expenditures, Wages, Rents," Review of Economic Dynamics,
    14(2), 248­261.

D        , R., J. H                               , R. J          ,     J. M        (2014): "The Role of Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation
    and Economic Dynamism," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28, 3­24.

D       , R.,         J. E                   (1999): "Agglomeration and Land Rents: Evidence from the Prefectures," Journal of Urban
    Economics, 46(2), 200­214.

D       , R., J. E           ,           S. K               (2007): "Unbalanced Trade," American Economic Review, 97(2), 351­355.

D     , M. (2010): "The Persistent E ects of Peru's Mining Mita," Econometrica, 78(6), 1863­1903.

D     , M.,          P.                          (2018): "Nation Building Through Foreign Intervention: Evidence from Discontinuities in
    Military Strategies," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2), 701­764.

D         , K.,           J. V. H                         (2015): "The Geography of Development Within Countries," in Handbook of Regional
    and Urban Economics, vol. 5, chap. 22, pp. 1457­1517. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

D         , K., R. K             , S. A. K           , D. K. N        , M. O            , E. R    H         ,     B. H. S       (2020): "Eval-
    uating the Economic Cost of Coastal Flooding," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

D         , K., D. K. N              ,            E. R        H             (2018): "The Geography of Development," Journal of Political Econ-
    omy, 126(3), 903­983.

D         , K.,           E. R               H               (2014): "Spatial Development," American Economic Review, 104(4), 1211­1243.

D             , R. (2016): "The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers' Diverging Location Choices by Skill:
    1980-2000," American Economic Review, 106(3), 479­524.


                                                                                   56
D     , X., T. F           , S. J. R                   ,         P. K. S            (2019): "Structural Change Within Versus Across Firms: Evidence
    from the United States," Princeton University, mimeograph.

D          , J. I.,        F. T                        (2020): "Spatial Economics for Granular Settings," NBER Working Paper, 27287.

D     C                , R. (2014): "Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics," Econometrica, 82(3), 825­885.

D     C                , R.,               B. K. K               (2015): "Trade Liberalization and the Skill Premium: A Local Labor Markets
    Approach," American Economic Review, 105(5), 551­557, Papers and Proceedings.

             (2017): "Trade Liberalization and Regional Dynamics," American Economic Review, 107(10), 1908­2946.

D     C                , R., J. P                   , R. R         H            ,      S. T              (2020): "Globalization, Trade Imbalances, and
    Labor Market Adjustment," New York University, mimeograph.

D                  , D. (2015): "The Gains from Market Integration," Annual Review of Economics, 7, 619­647.

             (2018): "Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure," American Economic
    Review, 108(4-5), 899­934.

D                  , D.,          R. H                       (2016): "Railroads and American Economic Growth: A Market Access Approach,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2), 799­858.

D           , V., V. M                 ,            A. M               (2014): "Do Di erences in the Exposure to Chinese Imports Lead to Di er-
    ences in Local Labour Market Outcomes? An Analysis for Spanish Provinces," Regional Studies, 49(10), 1746­1764.

D             , C., R. J               , D. K. N             ,         C. S                   (2020): "All Aboard: The Aggregate E ects of Port Devel-
    opment," CREI, Pompeu Fabra, mimeograph.

D                 , G., P. M                    ,          M. A. T             (2014): "Roads and Trade: Evidence from the US," Review of Economic
    Studies, 81(2), 681­724.

D                 , G., G. N                ,          M. A. T                (2020): "Transportation Infrastructure in the US," NBER Working Paper,
    27254.

D                 , G.,        M. A. T                        (2011): "The Fundamental Law of Road Congestion: Evidence from US Cities,"
    American Economic Review, 101(6), 2616­52.

             (2012): "Urban Growth and Transportation," Review of Economic Studies, 79(4), 1407­1440.

E         , J.,        S. K                 (2002): "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Econometrica, 70(5), 1741­1779.

E         , J., S. K               ,            B. N               (2016): "Obstfeld and Rogo 's International Macro Puzzles: A Quantitative
    Assessment," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 72, 5­23.

E         , J., S. K           ,            S. S             (2013): "International Trade: Linking Micro and Macro," in Advances in Economics
    and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Tenth World Congress, ed. by D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano, and E. Dekel.
    Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.


                                                                                         57
E         , M.,            T. S           (2018): "The Persistent E ects of Place-Based Policy: Evidence from the West-German
    Zonenrandgebiet," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(4), 344­374.

E             , K., K. N. R            , J. C. S              ,     M. X (2019): "Trade Shocks and the Shifting Landscape of US
    Manufacturing," NBER Working Paper, 25646.

F      , B. (2014): "Integration and the Periphery: The Unintended E ects of New Highways in a Developing Country,"
    Review of Economic Studies, 81(3), 1046­1070.

F                , P.,           C. G              (2020): "Optimal Spatial Policies, Geography, and Sorting," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 135(2), 959­1036.

F                , P.,           A. K                  (2016): "Measuring the Unequal Gains from Trade," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 131, 1113­1180.

F                , P., E. M               , J. C. S       S          ,     O. Z      (2019): "State Taxes and Misallocation," Review of
    Economic Studies, 86, 333­376.

F                , P.,           S. R              (2018): "Trade, Structural Transformation and Development: Evidence from Ar-
    gentina 1869-1914," NBER Working Paper, 20217.

F                , P. D.,          E. S            (2020): "Optimal Transport Networks in Spatial Equilibrium," Econometrica, 88(4),
    1411­1452.

F             , R. C., H. M ,               Y. X (2019): "US Exports and Employment," Journal of International Economics, 120,
    46­58.

F        , J. (2009): "Distance, Trade, and Income - The 1967 to 1975 Closing of the Suez Canal as a Natural Experiment,"
    NBER Working Paper, 15557.

F      , R. W. (1964): Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric History. Johns Hopkins University
    Press, Baltimore, MD.

F                        , S.,         M. O'K         (1989): Spatial Interaction Models: Formulations and Applications. Kluwer, Dor-
    drecht.

F            , R. B. (1980): "An Empirical Analysis of the Fixed Coe cient `Manpower Requirement' Mode, 1960-1970,"
    Journal of Human Resources, 15(2), 176­199.

F             , T.,        U. K            (1985): "Strong Ergodicity for Strictly Increasing Nonlinear Operators," Linear Algebra
    Applications, 71(1), 101­12.

F       , M., P. K                 ,      A. J. V             (1999): The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions, and International Trade. MIT
    Press, Cambridge MA.

G       , S., M. Y ,              A. R                C       (2018): "Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the Aggregate and Distributional
    Consequences of Trade," University of Calirfornia, Berkeley, mimeograph.


                                                                           58
G         L            , M. À., A. H         ,             E. V              M         (2015): "Suburbanization and Highways: When the Ro-
    mans, the Bourbons and the First Cars Still Shape Spanish Cities," Journal of Urban Economics, 85, 52­67.

G          , C., P. K           ,       D. Y                (2020): "Place-based Redistribution," University of California, Berkeley.

G         , H. (1879): Progress and Poverty. Doubleday, Page & Company, New York.

G         , E. L.,           J. G                    (2005): "Urban Decline and Durable Housing," Journal of Political Economy, 113(2),
    345­375.

G         , E. L.,          J. E. K                        (2004): "Cities, Regions and the Decline of Transport Costs," Papers in Regional
    Science, 83, 197­228.

G         , E. L., J. K             ,       A. S           (2001): "Consumer City," Journal of Economic Geography, 1(1), 27­50.

G                  P          , P., I. S               ,          H. S      (2020): "Bartik Instruments: What, When, Why, and How," Ameri-
    can Economic Review, 110(8), 2586­2624.

G              , A., J. L               ,             P. M H             (2019): "Import Competition and Internal Migration," Review of Eco-
    nomics and Statistics, 101(1), 44­59.

G                  , M., R. H                    ,         E. M           (2010): "Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers: Evidence from Win-
    ners and Losers of Large Plant Openings," Journal of Political Economy, 118(3), 536­598.

G          , J.,         G. H               (2011): "Income Maximization and the Selection and Sorting of International Migrants,"
    Journal of Development Economics, 95(1), 42­57.

G             , G. M.,          E. R         H                     (2008): "Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of O shoring," American Economic
    Review, 98(5), 1978­97.

H             , S.,        J. M L                (2016): "Looking for Local Labor Market E ects of NAFTA," Review of Economics and
    Statistics, 98(4), 728­741.

H             , J.,        D. E. W                         (2015): "Goods Prices and Availability in Cities," Review of Economic Studies, 82,
    258­296.

H          , K.,           N. L         (2017): "Policy Uncertainty, Trade and Welfare: Theory and Evidence for China and the
    United States," American Economic Review, 107(9), 2731­83.

H         , G. H. (1996): "Localization Economies, Vertical Organization, and Trade," American Economic Review, 86(5),
    1266­1278.

          (1997): "Increasing Returns, Trade, and the Regional Structure of Wages," Economic Journal, 107(1), 113­133.

          (2005): "Market Potential, Increasing Returns, and Geographic Concentration," Journal of International Eco-
    nomics, 67(1), 1­24.

H        , C. D. (1954): "The Market as a Factor in the Localization of Industry in the United States," Annals of the
    Association of American Geographers, 44(4), 315­348.

                                                                                  59
H      , K.,         T. M             (2006): "Regional Wage and Employment Responses to Market Potential in the EU'," Regional
    Science and Urban Economics, 36(5), 573­594.

H      , K.,            J. R       (2001): "Increasing Returns versus National Product Di erentiation as an Explanation for the
    Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade," American Economic Review, 91(4), 858­876.

H          , S., S. R                     ,            D. S          (2020): "The Making of the Modern Metropolis: Evidence from London,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(4), 2059­2133.

H          , S., S. R                 ,             Y. Z                   (2020): "The Distributional Consequences of Trade: Evidence from the
    Repeal of the Corn Laws," Princeton University, mimeograph.

H              , E. (1998): "The Size of Regions," in Topics in Public Economics: Theoretical and Applied Analysis, ed. by
    D. Pines, E. Sadka, and I. Zilcha, pp. 33­54. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

          (2018): Globalization and Inequality. Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.

H              , E., O. I                     , M. A. M                ,       S. J. R        (2017): "Trade and Inequality: From Theory to Esti-
    mation," Review of Economic Studies, 84(1), 357­405.

H              , E., O. I                     ,        S. J. R         (2010): "Inequality and Unemployment in a Global Economy," Economet-
    rica, 78(4), 1239­1283.

H                 , A. (1958): The Strategy of Economic Development. Yale University Press, New Haven.

H         , T. J. (2005): "The Location of Sales O ces and the Attraction of Cities," Journal of Political Economy, 113(3),
    551­81.

          (2011): "The Di usion of Walmart and the Economies of Density," Econometrica, 79(1), 253­302.

H               , R.,          D. K                      (2017): "Creative Destruction: Barriers to Urban Growth and the Great Boston Fire
    of 1872," American Economic Review, 107(6), 1365­98.

H      , C. T.,             E. M                       (2019): "Housing Constraints and Spatial Misallocation," American Economic Journal:
    Macroeconomics, 11(2), 1­39.

H , W. T.,                H. Z                    (2014): "The fundamental law of highway congestion revisited: Evidence from national
    expressways in Japan," Journal of Urban Economics, 81, 65­76.

H         , C. R. (1978): "Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs," Review of Economic Studies, pp. 511­518.

J         , K. T. (1987): Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

J              , L. S., R. J. L L                  ,       D. G. S             (1993): "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers," American Economic
    Review, 83(4), 685­709.

J        , R.,              A. S                           (2020): "The Average and Heterogeneous E ects of Transportation Investments:
    Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa 1960-2010," NBER Working Paper, 27670.


                                                                                         60
K         , G.,           S. S                       W     (2017): "Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Interstate Migration," Inter-
    national Economic Review, 58(1), 57­94.

K         , J.,           J. R. W            (2011): "The E ect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Decisions," Econometrica,
    79(1), 211­251.

K , R.,                J. V           (2020): "Trade Shocks and Labor Market Adjustment," American Economic Review: Insights,
    forthcoming.

K              , B., E. L ,              S. R             (2020): "International Friends and Enemies," NBER Working Paper, 27587.

K      , P.,            E. M             (2014a): "Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies, and the Big Push: 100
    Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 275­331.

          (2014b): "People, Places, and Public Policy: Some Simple Welfare Economics of Local Economic Development
    Policies," Annual Review of Economics, 6, 629­662.

K       , B. K. (2013): "Regional E ects of Trade Reform: What is the Correct Measure of Liberalization?," American
    Economic Review, 103(5), 1960­1976.

K              , P. (1991a): Geography and Trade. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.

          (1991b): "History Versus Expectations," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2), 651­667.

          (1991c): "Increasing Returns and Economic Geography," Journal of Political Economy, 99(3), 483­499.

K              , P.,           A. V                 (1995): "Globalization and the Inequality of Nations," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    110(4), 857­880.

L       , R. E.,              E. R       H               (2002): "On the Internal Structure of Cities," Econometrica, 70(4), 1445­1476.

M          , I. (2017): "Firm Reorganization, Chinese Imports, and US Manufacturing Employment," Columbia Univer-
    sity, mimeograph.

M         , C. F. (1993): "Identi cation of Endogenous Social E ects: The Re ection Problem," Review of Economic Studies,
    60(3), 531­542.

M                 , C. V., J. C                 ,        A. C         (2017): "Roads, Exports and Employment: Evidence from a Devel-
    oping Country," Journal of Development Economics, 125, 21­39.

M                  , K. (1991): "Increasing Returns, Industrialization, and Indeterminacy of Equilibrium," Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, CVI, 617­50.

M       , T.,             S. Z               (2011): "Notes on CEPII's Distances Measures: The GeoDist Database," CEPII Working
    Paper, 25.

M D               , J.,          D. M M               (2010): Urban Economics and Real Estate: Theory and Policy. John Wiley & Sons,
    Hoboken, NJ.


                                                                             61
M F             , D. (1974): "The Measurement of Urban Travel Demand," Journal of Public Economics, 3(4), 303­328.

M        , M. J. (2003): "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity,"
    Econometrica, 71(6), 1695­725.

M      , P. C., D. J. G                         ,          R. B. N        (2009): "A Meta-analysis of Estimates of Urban Agglomeration
    Economies," Regional Science and Urban Economics, 39(3), 332­342.

M            , G. (2008): "The E ect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence from the Interstate Highway System,"
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(4), 683­701.

M            , G.,        F. R                  (2018): "Resetting the Urban Network: 117-2012," Economic Journal, 128(608), 378­412.

M            , G., F. R                 ,           S. R          (2019): "Task Specialization in U.S. Cities from 1880-2000," Journal of the
    European Economic Association, 17(3), 754­798.

M            , G., F. R             ,           S. J. R           (2012): "Urbanization and Structural Transformation," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 127, 535­586.

M        , E.,          G. R                    (2011): "The Long-run Impact of Bombing Vietnam," Journal of Development Economics,
    96, 1­15.

M            , J. S.,       D. M. K                        (1984): "Planning Strategic Paths through Variable Terrain Data," Technical Sym-
    posium East (International Society for Optics and Photonics, 1984), pp. 172­179.

M            , Y., K. N                     ,          S. R          (2020): "Consumption Access and Agglomeration: Evidence from Smart-
    phone Data," Princeton University, mimeograph.

M        , F., S. R             ,               E. R          H          (2018): "Commuting, Migration and Local Employment Elasticities,"
    American Economic Review, 108(12), 3855­3890.

M            , E. (2013): The New Geography of Jobs. Mariner Books, New York.

M         , M.,          J. O                       (2018): "The E ects of Roads on Trade and Migration: Evidence from a Planned Capital
    City," Stanford University, mimeograph.

N      , D. K. (2020): "Hinterlands, City formation and Growth: Evidence from the U.S. Westward Expansion," CREI,
    Pompeu Fabra, mimeograph.

N             , K. (2008): "Economic Division and Spatial Relocation: The Case of Postwar Japan," Journal of the Japanese
    and International Economics, 22, 383­400.

N               , E.,      J. S                         (2018): "Identi cation in Macroeconomics," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3),
    59­86.

N     , D. (1995): "Industry-speci c Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers," Journal of Labor Economics,
    13, 653­677.



                                                                                 62
O            , H. G., S. J. R             ,       A. J. V           (2003): "The Economic Geography of Trade, Production and
    Income: A Survey of Empirics," in Handbook of International Trade, ed. by E. Kwan-Choi, and J. Harrigan, pp. 353­
    87. Basil Blackwell, Oxford.

O            , H. G.,       L. A. W               (2006): "Trade Shocks and Industrial Location: the Impact of EEC Accession on
    the UK," CEP Discussion Paper, 588.

O        III, R., E. R            H           ,      P. D. S      (2020): "Rethinking Detroit," American Economic Journal, 12(2),
    258­305.

P        , L. (2017): "The Wind of Change: Maritime Technology, Trade, and Economic Development," American Eco-
    nomic Review, 107(9), 2821­54.

P           , H. S. (1957): "Interrelations of State Income and Industrial Structure," Review of Economics and Statistics,
    39(2), 162­171.

P       , J. R.,        P. K. S           (2016): "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing Employment," American
    Economic Review, 106(7), 1632­62.

          (2020): "Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from U.S. Counties," American Economic Review: Insights,
    2(1), 47­64.

P       B              , L. (2020): Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migrants in Northern Cities and Labor Markets.
    Princeton University Press, Princeton.

R           , S. J. (2010): "The Empirics of New Economic Geography," Journal of Regional Science, 50(1), 297­311.

            (2011): "Economic Geography: a Review of the Theoretical and Empirical Literature," in Palgrave Handbook
    of International Trade, ed. by D. Bernhofen, R. Falvey, D. Greenaway, and U. Kreickemeier. Palgrave Macmillan,
    London.

            (2016): "Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare," Journal of International Economics, 101, 148­167.

R           , S. J.,      E. R        H              (2017): "Quantitative Spatial Models," Annual Review of Economics, 9, 21­58.

R           , S. J.,     P. K. S           (2003): "Distance, Skill Deepening and Development: Will Peripheral Countries Ever
    Get Rich?," Journal of Development Economics, 72(2), 515­41.

R           , S. J.,     D. M. S          (2008): "The Costs of Remoteness: Evidence from German Division and Reuni cation,"
    American Economic Review, 98(5), 1766­1797.

            (2016): "Neighborhood E ects: Evidence from the Streets of London," Princeton University, mimeograph.

R           , S. J., D. M. S          ,       N. W      (2011): "History and Industry Location: Evidence from German Airports,"
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3), 814­831.

R           , S. J.,      M. A. T             (2015): "Transportation Costs and the Spatial Organization of Economic Activity,"
    in Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, ed. by G. Duration, J. V. Henderson, and W. Strange, chap. 20, pp.
    1339­1398. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

                                                                      63
R             , S. J.,        A. J. V              (2004): "Economic Geography and International Inequality," Journal of International
    Economics, 62(1), 53­82.

R         H              , R. (2016): "The Role of Trade Costs in the Surge of Trade Imbalances," Federal Reserve Board, Wash-
    ington DC.

R                 C          , A., M. U        ,        J. P. V            (2018): "New Keynesian Trade: Understanding the Employment
    and Welfare E ects of Sectoral Shocks," University of California, Bekeley.

R                 , S. S.,        W. C. S               (2004): "Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration Economics," in
    Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, ed. by J. V. Henderson, and J. Thisse, vol. 4. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

R       H                   , E., P. D. S     ,         R. I. O       (2010): "Housing Externalities," Journal of Political Economy, 118(3),
    485­535.

R       H                   , E., P. D. S     ,        F. S                  (2020): "Cognitive Hubs and Spatial Redistribution," Princeton
    University, mimeograph.

R                 , J. J. (1983): "Instrumental Variable Estimation of Misspeci ed Models," MIT Sloan Working Paper, 1508-83.

R             , S., S. F         , R. G            , J. G         , E. M      , J. P   ,    M. S       (2018): "IPUMS USA," Minneapolis,
    MN.

S     , A. (2010): "The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3), 1253­1296.

S             , J. C. S.,        O. Z       (2016): "Who Bene ts from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A Local Labor Market Approach
    with Heterogeneous Firms," American Economic Review, 106(9), 2582­2624.

S             , J. (1996): "A Fast Marching Level Set Method for Monotonically Advancing Fronts," Proceedings of the Na-
    tional Academy of Sciences, 93, 1591­1595.

S                  , A. (2016): "Farther on Down the Road: Transport Costs, Trade and Urban Growth," Review of Economic
    Studies, 83(3), 1263­1295.

T           , D. A., E. P               ,   J. P       (2002): "Economic Integration and Industrial Location: the Case of Spain Before
    WWI," Journal of Economic Geography, 2(3), 343­63.

T              , P. (2010): "Factor Immobility and Regional Impacts of Trade Liberalization: Evidence on Poverty from
    India," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(4), 1­41.

T                   , S. (2019): "Occupations and Import Competition: Evidence from Denmark," Econometrica, 109(12), 4260­
    4301.

T               , J. (1995): "E cient Algorithms for Globally Optimal Trajectories," Transactions on Automatic Control, 40,
    1528­1538.

T                , N. (2018): "The Aggregate And Distributional E ects Of Urban Transit Infrastructure: Evidence From
    Bogotá's TransMilenio," University of California, Berkeley, mimeograph.

                                                                               64
U         N           (2018): World Urbanization Prospects: The 2018 Revision. United Nations, Department of Economic
    and Social A airs, New York.

W      , Z., S. J. W , X. Y ,       K. Z     (2018): "Re-Examining the E ects of Trading with China on Local Labor
    Markets: A Supply Chain Perspective," NBER Working Paper, 24886.

W        , M. (2010): "International Trade and Income Di erences," American Economic Review, 100(5), 2093­2124.

W              , I. (2011): The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America's Great Migration. Vintage, New York.

W      , N. (2007): "Endowments versus Market Potential: What Explains the Relocation of Industry after the Polish
    Reuni cation in 1918?," Explorations in Economic History, 44(1), 22­42.

W             , R. (2019): The Left Behind: Decline and Rage in Small-Town America. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Z             , P., A. K        , M. K             , S. M         , L. R           ,      V. S            (1975): Integral
    Equations: A Reference Text. Noordho Int. Publ., Leiden, Netherlands.




                                                             65
