                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ABSTENTIONS AND SOCIAL NETWORKS IN CONGRESS

                                       Marco Battaglini
                                   Valerio Leone Sciabolazza
                                      Eleonora Patacchini

                                       Working Paper 27822
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27822


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marco Battaglini, Valerio Leone Sciabolazza, and Eleonora Patacchini. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Abstentions and Social Networks in Congress
Marco Battaglini, Valerio Leone Sciabolazza, and Eleonora Patacchini
NBER Working Paper No. 27822
September 2020
JEL No. D72,D74,D91

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the extent to which personal connections among legislators influence abstentions in the
U.S. Congress. Our analysis is conducted by observing representatives' abstention for the
universe of roll call votes held on bills in the 109th-113th Congresses. Our results show that a
legislator's propensity to abstain increases when the majority of his or her alumni connections
abstains, even after controlling for other well-known predictors of abstention choices and a vast
set of fixed effects. We further reveal that a legislator is more prone to abstain than to take sides
when the demands from personal connections conflict with those of the legislator's party.


Marco Battaglini                                  Eleonora Patacchini
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Uris Hall                                         Cornell University
Cornell University                                430 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14850                                  Ithaca, NY 14853
and EIEF, CEPR                                    and CEPR
and also NBER                                     ep454@cornell.edu
battaglini@cornell.edu

Valerio Leone Sciabolazza
Department of Economics
and Business
University of Naples Parthenope
Naples, Italy
valerio.leonesciabolazza@uniparthenope.it
                                                                                                  2


       "Before one vote ­on a measure about which Byrd did not have strong
       feelings but on which he would ordinarily have voted no­Johnson con-
       fided to a Senate aide that he might persuade him to abstain instead.
       "Harry Byrd is a man of principle, he said. "I can't ask Harry to do
       anything against his principles. But I can ask Harry Byrd­and may
       oblige me­to stay away [during the vote].""1

                                       I.   Introduction

   A long standing question in political economy is legislators' participation in roll
call voting. There are many theories explaining politicians' turnout and absten-
tion. None of them, however, considers the importance of personal social ties. A
growing literature in political science and economics has provided causal evidence
that the social networks of legislators have a major impact on their future politi-
cal carrers and their legislative activities (see Battaglini and Patacchini [2019] for
a recent review).
   The goal of this paper is to determine whether and how the decision of a leg-
islator to abstain is swayed by the behavior of his or her personal contacts. We
examine participation on the universe of roll calls held on bills in the U.S. House
of Representatives from 2005 to 2015 (i.e. from the 109th Congress (2005-2007) to
the 113th Congress (2013-2015)). Following extant literature (Cohen and Malloy
[2014], Battaglini and Patacchini [2018], Battaglini et al. [2020]), social connec-
tions are measured by looking at legislators' alumni connections: two Congress
members are connected if they graduated from the same institution within a given
time window. The advantage of this approach is that these connections cannot
be the consequence of the behavior we attempt to explain.
   To isolate the effect of personal contact from the influence of confounding fac-
tors, we assemble and hand-collect data from a variety of sources and use an
empirical design based on a comprehensive set of control variables and fixed ef-
fects. In particular, we collect novel information on the identity of the party
leaders during each roll call vote together with their voting behavior to identify
the votes that are relevant to each party. Prior research (e.g., Rothenberg and
Sanders [1999, 2000, 2002]) relies on the definition of key votes provided by the
Congressional Quarterly Almanac (CQA). Such a categorization, however, have
been often subject to criticism (Shull and Vanderleeuw [1987]), because it is not
precise and votes salient to a given party are not always defined as key votes
in all Congresses. We also use a novel definition of votes that are salient to a
legislator's agenda by merging information on the legislator's sponsorship and
cosponsorship activity with the content of the bill under vote. This is done by
identifying the most recurrent policy issue in the bills sponsored or cosponsored

    1 Citation Ch. 19 ("Old Harry") p. 474 in Caro [2013] in which R. Caro discusses how Lyndon B.
Johnson cultivated and used his personal relationship with Senator Harry Byrd of Virginia to advance
his legislative projects.
                                                                                                     3


by a legislator, and then selecting the set of roll call votes in which this issue is
discussed. Prior research instead defines vote salience by looking at the extent
to which the economic activities of the legislator's district could be potentially
affected by the outcome of the roll call vote. This was done by categorizing the
content of a roll call vote as being related to a certain industry, and then assuming
that the vote's outcome is relevant for the economy of the legislator's district if
there is at least one firm in that industry in the district (Cohen and Noll [1991],
Cohen and Malloy [2014]).
   Our identification strategy relies primarily on the use of fixed effects for each
legislator and roll call topic. Specifically, we are interested in the difference be-
tween a legislator's abstention behavior in a roll call vote on a specific topic when
a given share of alumni connections abstain and that legislator's behavior in a
roll call on the same topic if a different share of his or her alumni connections
happen to abstain, controlling for roll call, Congress and time-varying individual
characteristics.
   Our results show that a legislator's propensity to abstain increases when the
majority of his or her alumni connections choose to abstain. This finding is
robust when conditioning on the party affilliations of the connected alumni and
on the shared interests in law-making of connected legislators, as captured by
their cosponsorship activity. In addition, because multiple roll call votes are held
on the same bill, we are able to provide a model specification with bill fixed
effects and to show that the estimated network effects are not determined by a
specific predisposition of the legislator and his or her social connections toward
the characteristics of the bill under vote.
   A unique feature of our data and empirical design is that we are able to examine
situations where network mechanisms may be responsible for a dissent from party
lines. A literature in political science documents that facing divergent pressures
when casting a vote may motivate the choice to abstain. The choice to abstain
may in fact be a strategic behavior of legislators who are cross-pressured between
competing demands from a conflictual constituency (Cohen and Noll [1991]), dif-
ferent party wings (M¨   uhlb¨ock [2017]), or constituency on the one hand, and the
party leadership on the other hand (Longley [2003]). In these circumstances, ab-
staining may represent the least costly option, even though it may be interpreted
by constituents as evidence of poor representation, and by the leadership as an
indication of poor party discipline. We consider the situation in which a legislator
is likely to receive a strong pressure by personal connections to support a bill in
a roll call vote, while he or she is pushed from the majority of party colleagues
to vote against it. This is the case when the majority of a legislator's party
colleagues vote against the bill sponsored or cosponsored by an alumni connec-
tion. Our results shows that, if the bill under vote is not focal in a legislator's
agenda and if the vote is not close, the legislator is more likely to abstain in these
situations of conflict than without conflict.2
  2A   long standing theoretical literature beginning with the seminal works by Downs [1957], and Riker
                                                                                                     4


   The effect of social connections is found to be heterogenous across several di-
mensions. Perhaps unsurprisingly, we find that the impact of social ties on the
choice to abstain is lower when the demand for party unity is strongest, that is
when there the bill in question is salient to the party. On the contrary, we find
no evidence that the influcence of social connections over a legislator's decision
to abstain significantly varies when it increases the closeness of the vote. Demo-
graphics are another factor that modifies the extent to which social connections
impact the choice to abstain. Specifically, we find that ethnic minorities seem
to be more supportive of their social connections than other groups, and they
are more likely than others to abstain with their political ties. The same is not
true when looking at gender, meaning that social connections have similar effects
for male and female legislators. The role played by social connections also varies
with party affiliation because Democrats show a higher propensity to follow the
behavior of connected peers with respect to Republicans. Interestingly, we find
that the institutional position held by a Congress member does not interfere with
the role played by social connections: the effect of alumni peers is not statistically
different for the chair of a committe and the committee members. Also, whereas
geography plays a central role in explaining individual turnout (see among oth-
ers Poole and Rosenthal [1997], Rothenberg and Sanders [1999, 2002], Brown
and Goodliffe[2017]), we find that legislators are equally affected by their social
connections regardless of how far they must travel to reach Washington D.C..
   Our paper adds to a large literature studying the determinats of legislators'
abstention in different contexts.3 We contribute to this literature by uncovering
a novel factor in shaping abstention behavior and revealing a possible mechanism
behind this effect.
   Building on theoretical work from Fiorina [1974], a small literature focuses
specifically on the extent to which the probability of abstention in voting is pre-
dicted by the presence of a conflictual situation.4 Cohen and Noll [1991] study
the roll call votes held on eight bills concerning the funding of the Clinch River
Breeder Reactor program during three Congresses (the 94th through the 97th).
They find that a legislator is more likely to abstain when he or she faces a con-
flictual constituency: e.g., constituent groups with opposing views on the same
issue. Longley [2003] examines legislators' participation in a single vote held in
the Canadian House of Representatives to implement the Canada-U.S. Free Trade
Agreement in August 1988. He finds that the probability of abstention increases

and Ordeshook [1968] predicts that abstention is more likely to occur when the policy stakes of the
legislator are low and when his/her potential policy influence is minimal.
    3 Specifically, the US House of Representatives (Cohen and Noll [1991]; Poole and Rosenthal [1997];
Rothenberg and Sanders [1999, 2000, 2002]), the US Senate (Forgette and Sala [1999]; Jones [2003]), the
US state legislatures (Brown and Goodliffe [2017]), the Canadian House of Commons (Longley [2003]),
the European Parliament (Carrubba et al. [2006], M¨   uhlb¨ock and Yordanova [2017]; Noury [2004]), and
                                          ¨
the Swedish Parliament (Willumsen and Ohberg      [2013]).
    4 Theories of abstention in environments with common values and asymmetric information are pre-
sented by Dekel and Piccione [2000], Battaglini [2005] and Battaglini, Morton and Palfrey [2007]. These
theories focus on the study of how abstention affects information aggregation in elections.
                                                                                                       5


when the interest of the party conflicts with the individual ideology of the leg-
islator, or with the interest of his or her consituency. More recently, M¨   uhlb¨
                                                                                 ock
and Yordanova [2017] contribute to this strand of research by considering a larger
set of roll call votes. Specifically, they investigate abstention during the 6th leg-
islature of the European Parliament, and find that legislators are more prone to
abstain on a roll call vote when torn between different requests from their na-
tional party, their transnational party group, and their country's minister. With
respect to this literature, we consider a measure of conflict beyond those currently
explored and adopt an improved empirical design that helps with identification
issues.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data
and defines the variables used in our empirical investigation. While Section 3 is
devoted to a first exploration of the data, Section 4 presents the empirical model
and the estimation results. Sections 5 and 6 present some additional results and
robustness checks. Finally, Section 7 concludes.

                          II.    Data and Definition of Variables


  We combine data from several sources.
  Abstention in roll call votes. Roll call votes are retrieved from the dataset
"Members Votes" of the "Voteview: Congressional Roll-Call Votes Database".5
We consider all votes on bills which took place in the House of Representatives
from the 109th Congress (2005-2007) to the 113th Congress (2013-2015).6 For
each member of Congress, the data indicate whether he or she abstained or cast
a vote (either 'yeah' or 'nay') on each roll call. Actual abstention behavior,
however, is not so easy to identify. Because the list of representatives changes
over a legislature, a problem with using this data to study abstention behavior is
that a Congress member is recorded as abstaining on a given roll call vote also
when that vote was held while he or she was not serving as a representative.
For this reason, we retrieve the official list of representatives on each day of a
legislature from the official GitHub page of the government of the United States
(https://github.com/unitedstates/congress-legislators), which records the name
of all Congress members who served at the House in a given legislature, and
the time period in which they were in office. By using this data, we are able
to correctly identify the list of actual abstainers in each roll call vote in the
considered time period.
  Our dependent variable, Abstainij , is a dummy variable equal to one if Congress
member i abstained on roll call vote j , and equal to zero if Congress member i

   5 Lewis, Jeffrey B., Keith Poole, Howard Rosenthal, Adam Boche, Aaron Rudkin, and Luke Sonnet
(2019). Voteview: Congressional Roll-Call Votes Database. https://voteview.com/
   6 We do not consider roll call votes held on Congressional resolutions because the data sources on
these votes are much more limited with respect to those available on bills. Roll call votes held on bills
represent 81% of the roll call votes in our sample
                                                                                                          6


voted either yeah or nay on roll call vote j. 7
   Drivers of abstention behavior. Several factors are indicated in the existing
literature as drivers of legislative turnover. A large literature documents that ab-
senteeism is low on partisan-salient votes, that is when most of the party leaders
vote in the same way, the so-called key votes (Forgette and Sala [1999]; Rothen-
berg and Sanders [1999, 2000, 2002]), and when the margin of the vote is small
(Poole and Rosenthal [1997]), because these are circumstances when Congress
members have the chance to maximize their policy influence.8
   We identify the key votes using a dummy variable, keyvotesij , which equals
one if all of the leaders of Congress member i 's party vote in the same way on
roll call vote j, and equals zero otherwise. The construction of this variable is
challenging because party leaders may change over the course of a single legisla-
ture. To make sure that a key vote is defined by looking at the vote choice of the
party leaders who were in charge during the day in which the vote was held, we
retrived i) the day in which the vote was held and ii) the list of Congress members
who were leaders on that specific day.9 The first component is taken from the
dataset "Congressional Votes" of the "Voteview: Congressional Roll-Call Votes
Database." The second component is hand-collected. Specifically, the names of
party leaders and the time period in which they served in this role were collected
from the official website of the "History, Art & Archives of the U.S. House of
Representatives" (https://history.house.gov/People/).10
   In our data, key votes represent 74.4% of votes cast by Democrats, and 71.7%
of votes cast by Republicans, respectively. The second variable predicted to be
associated with low rates of abstentionism is the closeness of a given roll call: the
closer a vote is, the greater the chance an additional vote could determine the
outcome. Closeness of vote has been measured in different way by the literature
    7 Note that paired abstention, that is an arrangement between two Congress members of oppos-
ing parties that allows them to miss occasional votes in the House and nullify the effect of ab-
sences on the outcome of recorded votes, did not occurr in the Congresses under analysis. According
to the report on "Pairing in Congressional Voting" prepared by the Congressional Research Service
(https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/98-970.pdf), the last paired abstention occured in the House of Represen-
tatives was registered during the 108th Congress. According to literature (see Cohen and Noll [1991] and
Forgette and Sala [1999] among others), paired abstention should be discarded from data.
    8 A different behavior is observed among U.S. state legislators, who are found to be favoring reelection
concerns over policy influence: i.e. they prefer to skip high-profile votes and take an inoffensive position
so as not to alienate the support of their constituency (Brown and Goodliffe [2017]).
    9 We use the official definition of party leaders provided by the Office of Clerk of the U.S. House
of Representatives (http://clerk.house.gov/member info/leadership.aspx). According to this definition,
Democrat leaders are: the Speaker of the House (if Democrats are the majority party), the Major-
ity/Minority leader and the Majority/Minority Whip (depending on whether Democrats are the majority
or the minority party), the House Assistant Democratic Leader, the Democratic Caucus Chairman, and
the Democratic Caucus Vice Chair; while Republican leaders are: the Speaker of the House (if Republi-
cans are the majority party), the Majority/Minority leader and the Majority/Minority Whip (depending
on whether Republicans are the majority or the minority party), the Republican Conference Chair, the
Republican Conference Vice Chair, and the Republican Policy Committee Chair.
   10 Observe that this information is not contained in existing data sets, such as those provided by the
Centre for Legislative Effectiveness (https://thelawmakers.org/). Existing data record whether someone
has been a party leader during a legislature, but they do not provide information about the exact time
period in which he or she was a party leader, thus making it impossible to observe the vote choice of the
party leaders during a given roll call vote.
                                                                                                            7


on abstention (see among others Cohen and Noll [1991], Poole and Rosenthal
[1997], Forgette and Sala [1999], Rothenberg and Sanders [2000], Noury [2004]).
We follow the recent approach proposed by Noury [2004] and measure it as 1 -
  #Y eah -#N ayj
| #Y eahj
        j +#N ayj
                  |, where #Y eahj and #N ayj count the number of legislators who
respectively voted 'yeah' and 'nay' on roll call vote j. This is a continuos variable
that ranges from zero to one. It is equal to zero when there is a unanimous vote
(all voting legislators vote either in favor of or against the issue under roll call),
and it approaches one when the vote is close and there is almost an even number
of voters in favor of and against the issue under roll call. We expect abstention
to decrease as vote closeness increases.
   In addition to the above mentioned characteristics of the roll call, the literature
also indicates a few characterictics of the Congress member typically associated
with low levels of abstentionism. The first is individual ideology as measured by
the absolute value of the first dimension of the DW ideology score (McCarty et
al. [1997]). This variable is used extensively in studying legislative voting. It is
readily available in the dataset "Members Ideology" of the "Voteview: Congres-
sional Roll-Call Votes Database." As this variable approaches zero, the legislator
is considered a moderate, and when it is close to one, the legislator is considered
an extremist. Legislators holding extremist positions are usually less supportive
of their party because their ideological preferences are often indifferent between
the policy change proposed by a fellow party member in a bill under vote and
the status quo (Poole and Rosenthal [1997]). As a consequence, they are more
likely to abstain than moderates (Hibbing [1982]). In the literature on abstention
behavior (Noury [2004], Poole and Rosenthal [1997], Rothenberg and Sanders
[1999, 2000, 2002]), this information is also used to construct another variable,
called Ideology distance differential. For each vote j, it measures the ideological
position of the Yeah and Nay alternatives on roll call vote j compared to the
ideological position of the Congress member i (Rothenberg and Sanders, 2000).
It is measured using Xi (Yj - Nj ) where Xi is equal to the first dimension of the
DW nominate score of Congress member i, while Yj and Nj are equal to the first
dimension of the average value of the DW nominate scores of the Congress mem-
bers who voted Yeah and Nay, respectively, on roll call vote j (Poole [2005]).11
The value (Yj - Nj ) is referred to as the midpoint estimate of bill j (Poole and
Rosenthal [1997]), and it is provided in the dataset "Congressional Votes" of the
"Voteview: Congressional Roll-Call Votes Database." There is vast evidence on
the US House of Representatives that a Congress member is likely to cast a vote,

                                                                                                        2
  11 To   be precise, the Ideology distance differential is equal to - s                k=1 Xik - Yjk       -
  s                  2
  k=1   Xik - Njk , where k is the dimension of the DW ideology score. Since we only consider the
first dimension of this score (i.e. k = 1), the formula reduces to - (Xi - Yj )2 - (Xi - Nj )2 , which can
be rewritten as - (Xi - Yj )2 - (Xi - Nj )2 = -2Xi (Nj - Yj ) + (Nj - Yj ) (Nj + Yj ). This shows that
Ideology distance differential is equal to the sum of a specific value assigned to each legislator i who
voted on roll call j, that is -2Xi (Nj - Yj ) = 2Xi (Yj - Nj ), and a value common to all legislators who
voted on roll call j, i.e. (Nj - Yj ) (Nj + Yj ). Since the latter term is a simple rescaling factor, one can
discard it and proxy the variable Ideology distance differential with the value Xi (Yj - Nj ).
                                                                                         8


and therefore absenteeism is low, when his or her ideological position is close to
one of the alternative position, and far from the other alternative position: i.e.
the value of the Ideology distance differential is high (Rothenberg and Sanders
[1999, 2000, 2002]).
  Turning to the variables traditionally associated with the occurence of absten-
tion behavior in roll calls, it is well documented that absenteeism is higher on
Monday and Friday because legislators spend extended weekends in their dis-
tricts (Noury [2004] and Rothenberg and Sanders [1999, 2000, 2002]), and when
a legislator misses other votes on a particular day because the legislator may be
away from Capitol Hill (Brown and Goodliffe [2017]). The physical distance of a
Congress member's district from Washington D.C., and the competing obligations
of a legislator are also likely to prevent participation in some votes. In fact, a
legislator may be forced to take prolonged leave from Congress when long travel is
required to meet his or her own constituency (see among others Poole and Rosen-
thal [1997], Rothenberg and Sanders [1999, 2002], Brown and Goodliffe[2017]). To
account for these factors, we create the following variables. First, we construct a
dummy variable corresponding to the so-called Thursday-Tuesday club behavior.
This takes the value one if vote j occured on a Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday,
and zero otherwise. Second, we create the variable Abstained more than once
that day, which takes the value one if vote j occured on day t in which Congress
member i abstained from more than one vote, and zero otherwise. Next, following
the approach by Hart and Munger [1989] and Rothenmberg and Sanders [2002],
we create a variable that records the distance in kilometers between a legislator's
district centroid and Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C. The maps used to create
this variable are taken from the "Digital Boundary Definitions of United States
Congressional Districts" project (http://cdmaps.polisci.ucla.edu). Finally, using
the "House Committee Assignments Data" we record whether a legislator has a
prominent institutional role by creating a dummy variable, chairmanship, which
tracks those who are a chairman of a committe in a given legislature.12
  Last but not least, an important determinant of vote participation is the salience
of the subject under vote. In fact, the policy area discussed in the roll call vote
might be more or less relevant in a given legislature, and political groups may
not react in the same way to different issues (Noury [2004]). We identify the
policy content of a roll call using data retrieved from the Policy Agendas Project
(PAP) topic system (www.comparativeagendas.net/us). PAP data provides in-
formation about the policy content of all roll calls votes held on bills. Specifically,
PAP associates the policy content of each roll call vote to one out of 250 topic
subject categories, which are uniquely associated to one out of 20 major policy
areas: i.e., Macroeconomics, Civil Rights, Health, Agriculture, Labor, Educa-
tion, Environment, Energy, Immigration, Transportation, Law and Crime, So-
cial Welfare, Housing, Domestic Commerce, Defense, Technology, Foreign Trade,

  12 House Committee Assignments Data are obtained from http://web.mit.edu/17.251/www/data
page.html#2.
                                                                                                               9


International Affairs, Government Operations, Public Lands, and Culture. A
precise definition of the policy content related to each PAP category is available
at https://www.comparativeagendas.net/pages/master-codebook, and reported
in Appendix, Table A4. We create a dummy variable for each major policy area
coded by the PAP topic system. The dummy variable associated with a major
policy area takes the value one if the policy content of roll call vote j on day t
refers to that policy area, and zero otherwise.
   Vote participation is not only shaped by the salience of the policy area of the
roll call in the legislature, but also by the relevance of the topic subject for the
legislator's policy agenda. Legislators may indeed be indifferent to specific topic
subjects, and not interested in investing time to form a position or to participate in
the vote on those topic subjects (Forgette and Sala [1999], Scully [1997]). On the
contrary, when the topic subject of a proposal is salient to a Congress member, he
or she is less likely to abstain. For each Congress member, we identify the specific
policy interest on a given roll call in the following way. We retrieve the data
provided by the Congressional Bills Project (http://congressionalbills.org), which
categorizes the bills sponsored and cosponsored by each Congress member using
the same policy topic coding system provided by the PAP data. For each Congress
member i, we count the bills where the Congress member i was an original sponsor
or an original cosponsor in each policy topic subject (250 categories) and identify
his or her most recurrent topic subject category.13 We assume that Congress
member i has a specific interest in roll call vote j if the bill under vote is in his or
her most recurrent topic subject category. Figure 1 shows the number of Congress
members with a particular policy interest on a specific topic subject, as inferred
by their cosponsorship activity. In the figure, the x-axis reports the PAP Code
relative to the topic subject of the bills sponsored or cosponsored by Congress
members. Topic subjects are grouped according to their policy area, which are
reported on top of the plot (see Table A4 for precise definitions of the policy
content of each PAP code). We find that Congress members have a wide variety
of topic subjects relevant to their political agenda. The most frequently discussed
issues in bills in the 109th-113th Congresses are: macroeconomic policies related
to taxation (PAP code 107), defense policies dealing with military personnel issues
(PAP code 1608), and federal appropriation policies to implement commemorative
acts (PAP code 2006). Other relevant areas include: health care policies for
the regulation of insurances (PAP code 302), foreign trade policies related to
tariffs and imports (PAP code 1807), and government property management,
construction, and regulation (PAP code 2008).
   We also consider the role of demographics and party affiliation in shaping vote

   13 Specifically, we order the interest of a legislator for different topic subjects by ranking first the topic
subject category on which he or she has sponsored or cosponsored the highest number of bills. The topic
subject category corresponding to the highest ranking is considered the most relevant to the legislator's
agenda. When multiple topic subject categories are ranked first, because the legislator sponsored or
cosponsored same number of bills for these categories, we consider all of these categories to be relevant
to the legislator's agenda.
                                                                                                    10


turnout, which, to the best of our knowledge, has not received much attention
in the existing literature (see Volden and Wiseman [2009] for some consider-
ations on this issue). We collect information about each legislators' gender,
race, party affiliation, and seniority from the Center for Effective Lawmaking
(https://thelawmakers.org/data-download).
   Networks in Congress. A growing literature in political science and eco-
nomics has provided causal evidence that the personal social networks of legisla-
tors have a major impact on their legislative activities (see Battaglini and Pat-
acchini [2019] for a review). Following this nascent literature, we assume that a
tie between two Congress members exists if they graduated from the same educa-
tional institution within four years of each other. 14 This social network is obtained
by retriving information on the high schools and higher education institutions
attended for both undergraduate and graduate degrees from the Biographical Di-
rectory of the United States Congress (http://bioguide.Congress.gov/biosearch/
biosearch.asp). A representation of these alumni networks in the considered Con-
gresses is provided in Figure 2, where each dot represents a Congress member, and
its color indicates the member's party. The plots clearly show that alumni connec-
tions create a vast and dense network of relations between Congress members and
bind toghether many Democrats and Republicans. The extent to which alumni
networks span across parties is shown in Figure 3. Here, we calculated the percent-
age of alumni affiliated with the same party and the percentage of alumni affiliated
with a different party. The black bars indicate the average percentage of alumni
affiliated with the same party, and the white bars indicate the average percentage
of alumni affiliated with a different party in each Congress. The figure shows that,
on average, 60% of alumni connections occur between Congress members from the
same party, and the remaining 40% link legislators from different parties. Figure 4
investigates the extent to which these alumni networks represent professional net-
works. For each Congress member, we calculate the percentage of alumni who are
cosponsors and the percentage of alumni who are not cosponsors. Cosponsorship
networks have been used to measure the collaborative network in Congress (Kirk-
land and Gross [2014]) because they connect legislators working on the same topic.
This data is retrieved from the updated version of the cosponsorship networks used
in Fowler [2006a,b] (http://jhfowler.ucsd.edu/cosponsorship.htm). In line with a
literature documenting that personal relationships matter in the cosponsorship
decision of a legislator (Fowler [2006a], Battaglini and Patacchini [2018]), Figure
4 shows that between 20 and 30% of Congress members have a cosponsorship
collaboration with their alumni connections in our sample period. However, the
overlap between the alumni networks and the cosponsorship networks is not large,
suggesting that alumni networks in Congress collect members with a heteroge-

   14 A four-year time window allows for some overlap and post-graduation interactions, because most
universities make signicant efforts to connect alumni graduating in nearby cohorts. The relevance of
alumni connections in shaping politicians' voting behavior, campaign contributions, and legislative ef-
fectiveness has been demonstrated by Cohen and Malloy [2014], Battaglini and Patacchini [2018], and
Battaglini et al. [2020], respectively.
                                                                                                          11


nous policy agenda. Figure 5 reports the distribution of Congress members by
alumni connection in each Congress. About 50% of Congress members in each
considered legislature have at least one alumni connection in Congress. Roughly
45% of the connected legislators have two or more social connections. Using the
alumni network, we construct the dummy variable AlumniP eersijt , which takes
the value one if the majority of legislator's i alumni peers abstained on bill j on
day t, and zero otherwise.

                                   III.    Motivating Evidence

  We start by discussing the frequency of abstention in Congress and presenting
evidence that abstention has the potential to influence roll call outcomes in a non-
trivial number of votes. Table 1 shows the abstention rate and its importance
for the entire universe of votes (column 1), close votes (column 2) and key votes
(column 3). On average, Congress members abstain from 4.2% of votes (column
1). Consistent with expectations, this value drops when the vote is close (column
2), or it is a key vote (column 3). In fact, these are the instances when the
legislator's vote is most valuable to the party and he or she is likely to be highly
pressured to turn out and support co-partisan peers. The second row of the table
records the fraction of roll calls where the number of abstainers exceeded the
margin of the vote. These are cases where it was possible that abstainers could
have changed the outcome of the vote. The table shows that about 4% of all
considered roll call votes were decided by a margin that was smaller than the
number of abstainers. In line with expectations, this percentage is twice as high
for close votes. In contrast, abstention is less relevant for the outcome of key
votes.
  We report the abstention rate of Congress members from different groups in
Table 2. We begin by examining whether abstention behavior differs for legisla-
tors with different demographic characteristics and party affiliation. We find that
the abstention rate of women and ethnic minorities is, on average, at least one
percentage point higher than other legislators. We also find that the abstention
rate of legislators with more extreme ideologies is higher than that of moderate
legislators. This is not surprising because legislators with moderate ideologies
usually care about a higher number of bills under vote, while extremists are usu-
ally indifferent between the status quo and the change promoted in many bills
(Poole and Rosenthal [1997]). When turning to party affiliation, we find no strik-
ing differences among Republicans and Democrats. Consistent with the idea that
legislators might be forced to miss votes in order to meet with their constituency,
we find that legislators who require longer travel in order to reach their elec-
toral district tend to abstain more than their colleagues coming from electoral
districts closer to Washington D.C.15 We also observe that Congress members

  15 In order to define whether a district is near Washington D.C., we record the distance of each district's
centroid from this city. Then, we compute the median distance of the electoral districts from Washington
                                                                                                          12


abstain twice as much on Mondays and Fridays than during midweek days, and
that committee chairs tend to abstain slightly more often than other members,
even if the difference between the two groups is not statistically significant.
  We now examine Congress members exposed to peers who abstain. Roughly
40% of legislators in Congress have at least one peer who abstains in any roll call
in the period considered.16 Figure 6 shows the distribution of Congress members
with at least one peer who abstained by percentage of peers who abstain in the
different Congresses. The pictures shows that while the percentage of connected
peers who abstain on a roll call vote is small (10-20%) for most Congress mem-
bers. However, about 10% of members have the majority of their peers abstain.
Importantly, the picture shows substantial variation among Congress members in
exposure to peers who abstain. In Figure 7, we plot the distribution of Congress
members who abstain by the percentage of peers who abstain in the different
Congresses. While abstention decisions are driven by a variety of factors, it is
remarkable to see that, especially in the more recent Congresses, abstention rates
are higher, on average, when a higher share of peers abstain. In the 112th and
113th Congress, we observe that, on average, more than 50% of legislators abstain
when 80% or more of their peers abstain.

                     IV.     Empirical Strategy and Baseline Results

  To explore whether alumni connections have an impact a legislator's propensity
to abstain, we analyze each Congress member's voting behavior for every roll call
vote as well as that of the legislator's alumni peers during the same vote in five
different legislatures. Specifically, we are interested in the difference between a
legislator's abstention behavior for a given roll call vote if the majority of his or
her alumni ties abstain and that legislator's abstention behavior if the majority
of the alumni ties do not. We focus our analysis on the effects of the majority of
peers because, while there is a positive effect of the share of peers who abstain
on own abstention behavior, this effect is non-linear and acquires importance
only if the share of peers who abstain is greater than 50%.17 We document this
non-linearity in the last column of Table 3. We estimate the following regression
model:



D.C., which is 1,966.374 kms. If a district is located within 1,966.374 kms of Washington D.C., then it
is recorded as being near this city, and distant otherwise.
   16 Specifically, the percentage of legislators who have at least one peer who abstained in any roll call
vote is: 35.3% in the 109th Congress, 35.8% in the 110th Congress, 41.1% in the 111th Congress, 43.6%
in the 112th Congress, and 39.9% in the 113th Congress.
   17 We do not use data on the exact order of the votes in the roll-call, since real time data on the voting
outcome is not even available to the legislators during the roll-call. (On the south wall of the chamber
there is an electronic display board, but it displays only a running tally of the vote, not the individual
choices.) In our analysis, we assume that decisions concerning abstentions are taken before the beginning
of the vote. This is illustrated by the citation from Caro [2013] at the beginning of the paper, making
clear how Lyndon B. Johnson would make arrangements with Harry Byrd before votes were called.
                                                                                                     13


(1) Abstainijtc = 0 + 1 AlumniP eersijtc + 2 Wijtc + 3 Xjtc + i + c +                         ijtc


where the decision to abstain of legislator i during roll call vote j on day t during
Congress c, as measured by the variable Abstainijtc , is a function of the choice of
i 's majority alumni peers to abstain, represented by the variable AlumniP eersijtc ,
of legislator characteristics (in the set Wijtc ), and of roll call vote characteristics
(in the set Xjtc ). The characteristics of a roll call vote include dummies indicat-
ing the policy area discussed in the bill under vote, whether or not the roll call
vote is held during midweek days (Tuesday, Wednesday or Thurday), whether
it is a key vote, and the closeness of vote. The model includes individual leg-
islator and Congress fixed effects ( i and  c , respectively) and a random error
term ijc . The inclusion of individual fixed effects controls for the effects of time-
invariant characteristics of legislators possibly correlated with abstention choices,
such as the distance from their respective districts, and the competing obligations
that they may have because of their role in the party (e.g. party leaders) or in
the House (e.g. committee chairs). Observe that it also captures whether the
Congress member has alumni connections in Congress or not.18 The remaining
time-varying characteristics of the legislator, which are included in the set Wijtc ,
are the difference between the ideological position of the legislator and the "Yeah
Position" and "Nay Position", registered by the variable Ideology distance differ-
ential, and whether the legislator already abstained at least once on the same day
in which the vote was held, recorded by the variable Abstained more than once
that day.
The results are contained in Table 3. In order to ease the comparison of estimated
coefficients, we report standardized estimation results.19
    We start the analysis in column 1 by including in model (1) only the variables
that the existing literature indicates as important determinants of abstention in
Congress (see Section 3). Consistent with these studies, we find that all of the
drivers of abstention detected by previous research matter in shaping the individ-
ual abstention behavior. When legislators' indifference for the outcome of the bill
under vote is high - as measured by the Ideology distance differential - they are
more likely to abstain. The same pattern holds when politicians have competing
obligations. We also find evidence of the Thursday-Tuesday club behavior, which
suggests that the commitment to meet with constituents often conflicts with leg-
islative activities. In contrasts, legislators are more prone to turnout during key
votes and when the margin of a vote decreases, that is when the demand for party
unity by the leadership is the strongest. We also find an expected positive and
significant sign on the estimated effects of the variable Abstained more than once
that day, which controls for the possibility that abstention during a given roll
   18 We will investigate the robustness of our results to the exclusion of Congress members without
alumni connections in Congress in Section 7.
   19 We standardize the estimated effects using the formula sd(x)  , where  is the estimated effect
                                                              sd(y ) x        x
of variable x, while sd(x) and sd(y ) indicate the standard deviation of the variable x and dependent
variable y , respectively.
                                                                                   14


call vote is simply driven by the fact that the legislator is missing from Capitol
Hill that day. In column 2, we test whether there is an additional effect com-
ing from the alumni connections. The estimated effect is statistically significant
and sizable in magnitude given the number of control variables and fixed effects
included in the model. We find that having the majority of alumni connections
who abstain is associated with a 2 percentage point increase in the probability
that a legislator abstains. The effect is about 5% of a standard deviation. To
better understand the importance of this effect, observe that it has magnitude
equal to roughly 70% of the impact of Key vote, a well-know important driver
of vote participation, and is of the opposite sign. That is, the magnitude of the
effect exerted by the alumni network is such that it could almost counterveil the
incentive to turn out stemming from party leadership. In columns 3 and 4, we
test whether the effects are due to two crucial characteristics of the legislators'
peers: their party and their policy agenda. In column 3, we split the variable
AlumniP eersijt into two different dummy variables. The first takes value one
if the majority of legislator i 's alumni connections that are also affiliated with
i 's party abstained on vote j, and zero otherwise. The second takes one if the
majority of legislator i 's alumni connections that are not affiliated with i 's party
abstained on vote j, and zero otherwise. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the results show
that the behavior of friends of the same party is more important than the behavior
of friends of different parties in shaping a legislator's own abstention choice. The
difference between the two effects is statistically significant (Wald 2 test equal
to 7.1, p-value equal to 0.0078). However, the estimated effects of both types of
friends are statistically significant, indicating that alumni connections are rele-
vant for the choice to abstain regardless of their party affiliation. In column 4,
we instead split the variable AlumniP eersijt into two different dummy variables
using legislative cosponsorships. The first takes the value one if the majority of
legislator i 's alumni connections with whom i cosponsored a bill abstained on vote
j, and zero otherwise. The second takes the value one if the majority of legislator
i 's alumni connections who did not cosponsor a bill with i abstained on vote j,
and zero otherwise. Interestingly, we find that the abstention behavior of peers is
relevant irrespective of whether or not they are cosponsors or no. The estimated
effects for the two groups are positive, but not statistically different from each
other (Wald 2 test equal to 0.36, p-value equal to 0.55). This evidence suggests
that our result is not primarily driven by shared interests in law-making.

   In column 5, we consider the possibility that our results are due to a specific
inclination of the legislator and his or her social connections towards the specific
issues contained in the bill under vote (for example because of low interest in
the bill's overall content). Because multiple roll call votes are held on the same
bill, we augment regression model (1) with bill fixed effects. This allow us to
observe the voting behavior of legislators during roll call votes held on the same
bill, holding costant the characteristics of the bill. As a result, if the choice
to abstain is motivated by a specific inclination of the legislator and of his or
                                                                                     15


her social connections toward the characteristics of the bill under vote, network
effects will no longer be a significant predictor of abstention. On the other hand,
if network effects motivate the choice to abstain then we would expect them to
be a significant driver of abstention even when controlling for the characteristics
of the bill under vote. Specifically, model (1) now becomes:

(2) Abstainijtb = 0 + 1 AlumniP eersijtb + 2 Wijtb + 3 Xjtb + i + b +             ijtb




    where the decision to abstain of legislator i during roll call vote j on day t held
on bill b, as measured by the variable Abstainijtb , is a function of the choice of
i 's majority alumni peers to abstain AlumniP eersijtb , the set of control variables
included in regression model 1, the individual fixed effects ( i ) and the bill fixed
effects ( b ). The estimation results (Table 3, column 5) show that the evidence
remains qualitatively unchanged. The effect of social connections remains positive
and statistically significant, although perhaps unsurprisingly it is greatly reduced
in magnitude. These results suggests that the characteristics of the bill under
vote might explain the behavior of connected legislators in some cases, but that
the estimated network effects are not entirely driven by the shared interest of
connected legislators for specific bills.

   Finally, we investigate the extent to which the network effect in abstention varies
with exposure. In our analysis, the influence of peers is modeled in a specific way,
which is looking at the behavior of the majority. This choice is motivated by the
fact that the influence of peers is non-linear in the share of peers who abstain. In
column 6 we investigate how abstention behavior changes with different shares of
peers who abstain. We consider quantiles of this share distribution and replace
the variable Abstainijtb in model (2) with four dummy variables corresponding to
quartiles of the distribution of abstained peer legislators. The first dummy takes
the value one if the percentage of legislator i 's alumni connections who abstain
is less than or equal to 25%, and zero otherwise. The second takes value one if
the percentage legislator i 's alumni connections who abstain is more than 25%
and less than or equal to 50%, and zero otherwise. The third takes value one if
the percentage of legislator i 's alumni connections who abstain is more than 50%
and less than or equal to 75%, and zero otherwise. The fourth takes value one if
more than 75% of legislator i 's alumni connections abstain, and zero otherwise.
The estimates show that while the abstention behavior of peers is unrelated to
a legislator's own behavior when the share of peers who abstain is lower than
50%, it becomes important when higher shares of peers abstain. The effects are
increasing with the shares of peers and statistically different (Wald 2 test equal
to 11, p-value equal to 0.0009), but very similar in magnitude (2% of a standard
deviation vs 2.4% of a standard deviation). This is why in our analysis we pooled
together all shares greater than 50%.
                                                                                     16


                           V.   Abstention and Conflict

    We next consider the situations in which a legislator likely faces conflicting pres-
sures from social connections on one side and party colleagues on the other side.
Specifically, we analyze a legislator's abstention behavior when the legislator's
party opposes a bill sponsored or cosponsored by the legislator's personal con-
nections. Some scholars have expressed concern that legislative cosponsorships
are not very informative because they are a form of "cheap talk" (Kessler and
Krehbiel [1996]; Wilsonand and Young [1997]). However, as stressed by Fowler
[2006a], the number of bills cosponsored by each legislator is only a tiny fraction
of the bills they may have chosen to support, and substantial search costs are
invested in deciding which bills to cosponsor. Consequently, it is reasonable to
expect that legislators care about their cosponsorship activity and thus may lobby
their social connections to vote in favor of the bills they cosponsored. This might
be even more prevalent when the bill is directly sponsored by them.
    As mentioned in the introduction, we expect that the choice to abstain will be
more common when the policy stakes of the legislator are low. According to this
theory, we predict that a legislator will be less likely to abstain when his or her
potential policy influence is maximized, as is the case when a vote is particularly
relevant to the legislator's agenda, or when the outcome of the vote is expected
to be close.
    We construct a dummy variable taking value the one when the majority of
i 's party colleagues vote against the bill sponsored or cosponsored by an alumni
connection on roll call vote j held on day t during congress c, and zero otherwise.
We estimate the regression model

(3) Abstainijtc = 0 + 1 DivergingP eersijtc + 2 Wijtc + 3 Xjtc + i + c +           ijtc


  where DivergingP eersijtc represents the conflict faced by the legislator, and
the other variables are the same as in model (1).
  The estimation results are reported in Table 4. The first column shows the
results for all roll call votes. In columns 2 and 3, we distinguish between roll
call votes on topics that are either relevant or relevant for a legislator's policy
agenda, that is between situations where network mechanisms are likely to be
more or less important. We expect that a legislator may find it hard to abstain
when the topic is related to his or her agenda, whereas if the topic is not relevant
to the politician's interests then the supply of votes that can be influenced by
peers is high (Cohen and Malloy, 2014). When the cost of abstention is low, the
benefit of avoiding a conflict might offset the cost and thus induce the legislator
to abstain. We measure the relevance of the vote to a given politician according
to the definition of bill topic salience presented in Section 3. According to the
expectations, the results show an effect of conflict on a legislator's propensity to
abstain in column 1 that is driven by the roll calls where the vote is not relevant
to the legislator's agenda (column 3). In line with the theory, this evidence shows
                                                                                       17


that when the policy stakes of the vote are low, the legislator is more likely to be
affected by conflict. By abstaining, he or she can mantain both the relationships
with the alumni network on one hand, and the party on the other hand.
   In columns 4 and 5, we vary the cost of abstention by considering roll calls with a
different vote margin. Again, the results are consistent with the idea that personal
connections may create conflictual situations that trigger abstention when the
costs of doing so are low. In fact, the results show that when the cost is high (i.e.,
when the vote is close, column 4), conflict does not exert a statistically significant
effect on the decision of a legislator to abstain. The effect becomes statistically
significant and increasing in magnitude when the margin of vote increases, or in
other words, when the cost of abstention decreases.

                                VI.   Heterogeneity

  In this section we investigate whether the effect of alumni connections is differ-
ent for legislators or roll call votes with differerent characteristics, and in Con-
gresses with different structures. We estimate the augmented version of model
(1):

(4) Abstainijtc = 0 + 1 AlumniP eersijtc + 1 AlumniP eersijtc 
interaction- variable+2 interaction- variable+2 Wijtc +3 Xjtc +i +c +           ijtc


where interaction variable captures the following characteristics: the vote is a key
vote, the vote is close, the legislator is a woman, belongs to an ethnic minority,
is a Democrat, is the chair of a committee, has a marked ideological position, or
travels further between their district and Washington D.C.. We expect that party
demands are larger and the influence of social connections is smaller for key votes
and close votes. We also expect no impact on politicians whose constituency lives
far from Washington D.C. because geography should not interfere with network
effects. The effects of demographic charateristics, institutional positions, party
affiliations, and ideology are a matter of empirical investigation.
   The results contained in columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 confirm that the effect
exerted by the alumni network is mitigated for key votes and close votes. However,
the decrease of the network effect is statistically significant only when considering
key votes. Columns 3-5 of Table 5 present the results of the estimation of model
4 when considering the interaction of network effects with the demographics and
the party affiliation of the legislator. We find that gender does not significantly
interfere with peer effects (column 4), whereas ethnic minorities are more prone to
abstain with their connected peers than the majority of their colleagues (column
5). We also find that Democrats are more likely to abstain with their social
connections with respect to Republicans (column 5). No significant differences in
the effect exerted by the alumni network are observed between committee chairs
and other members of the Congress, between politicians with more or less extreme
                                                                                  18


ideology and those whose electoral district is closer or farther from Washington
D.C.

                            VII.   Robustness checks

  Our analysis on the effect of personal connections on abstention behavior is
performed using infomation on all Congress members regardless of whether or
not they have alumni connections in Congress. This is because our identification
strategy is based on the use of individual fixed effects, or in other words, on the
comparison of abstention behavior of the same Congress member when exposed to
a different share of peers who abstain. However, there are some slight differences
between legislators who have social connections, and those that do not. They
are presented in Appendix Table A2. In order to be sure that unobserved factors
related to those differences do not bias our results, we replicate the analysis pre-
sented previously in Table 3 by considering only the sample of Congress members
who have at least one connected peer. The results of this exercise are presented
in Appendix Table A3. All of the results remain qualitatively unchanged. The
point estimates are only slighly larger in magnitude.

                               VIII.    Conclusions

   This paper investigates the role of social connections on abstention behavior
in the U.S. House of Representatives. Our analysis is conducted by observing
representatives' participation in the universe of roll call votes held on bills from
the 109th through 113th Congress. Specifically, we observe how a legislator's
decision to abstain is affected by the behavior of his or her network over different
roll call votes, holding the network characteristics constant. We show that the
social network of a legislator influences his/her abstention choices, even after
controlling for all other well-known predictors of abstention.
   Specifically, we find evidence that the propensity to abstain increases when the
majority of a legislator's alumni connections choose to abstain. The magnitude of
this effect is such that it could counterveil the incentive to vote that increases as
the margin of a vote narrows. We further show that a possible pathway for this
effect is the presence of a conflictual situation where the demands of friends clash
with those of the legislator's party. This is the case when a legislator must choose
whether to support a bill sponsored or cosponsored by a social connection but not
his or her party. In these situations, a legislator is more prone to abstain, thus
avoiding taking sides. We show however, that this behavior changes according to
the policy stakes faced by the legislator over the vote's outcome. Specifically, we
show that a cross-pressured legislator prefers to abstain over turn out only when
the bill under vote is not relevant to his or her agenda and the margin of vote is
large.
   Additional insights on the role played by social connections are obtained when
looking at their heterogenous role across several dimensions. In particular, we
                                                                                   19


observe that Democrats are more inclined than Republicans to behave in accor-
dance with their alumni peers, and that network mechanisms are less relevant
when the vote is a key vote or the vote margin is close.

                                    References

  Battaglini, Marco (2005), "Sequential Voting with Abstention," Games and
Economic Behavior, 51 (2): 445-463.

Battaglini, Marco, Rebecca Morton, and Thomas Palfrey (2007), "Efficiency,
Equity and Timing in Voting Mechanisms," American Political Science Review,
101(3): 409-424.

Battaglini, Marco, and Eleonora Patacchini (2018), "Influencing connected legis-
lators," Journal of Political Economy 126 (6): 2277-2322.

Battaglini, Marco and Eleonora Patacchini (2019), "Social Networks in Policy
Making," Annual Reviews of Economics, 11: 473-494.

Battaglini, Marco, Valerio Leone Sciabolazza, and Eleonora Patacchini (2020),
"Effectiveness of connected legislator," American Journal of Political Science,
forthcoming.

Brown, Adam R. and Jay Goodliffe (2017), "Why Do Legislators Skip Votes,"
Political Behavior, 39:442­45.

Caro, Robert (2013), The Years of Lyndon Johnson: The Passage of Power,
New York, Knopf.

Carrubba, Clifford, Matthew Gabel, Lacey Murrah, Ryan Clough, Elizabeth
Montgomery, and Rebecca Shambaugh, R. (2006), "Off the record: Unrecorded
legislative votes, selection bias and roll-call vote analysis," British Journal of Po-
litical Science, 36: 691­704

Cohen, Lauren, and Christopher J. Malloy (2014), "Friends in high places," Amer-
ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6 (3): 63-91.

Cohen, Linda R. and Roger G. Noll (1991), "How to Vote, Whether to Vote:
Strategies for Voting and Abstaining on Congressional Roll Calls," Political Be-
havior 13 (2): 97­127.

Cox, Gary W. and Mathew D. McCubbins (1993), Legislative Leviathan: Party
Government in the House. California Series on Social Choice and Political Econ-
omy, University of California Press.
                                                                                 20



Dekel, Eddie. and Michele Piccione (2000), "Sequential Voting Procedures in
Symmetric Binary Elections," Journal of Political Economy, 108: 34-55

Downs, Anthony (1957), An economic theory of democracy, Harper and Row.

Fiorina, Morris P. (1974), Representatives, roll calls, and constituencies. Lex-
ington Books.

Forgette, Richard and Brian R. Sala (1999), "Conditional Party Government and
Member Turnout on Senate Recorded Votes, 1873-1935," The Journal of Politics,
61 (2): 467­84.

Fowler, J. H. (2006a), "Connecting the Congress: A study of cosponsorship net-
works," Political Analysis, 14 (4): 456-487

Fowler, J. H. (2006b), "Legislative cosponsorship networks in the U.S. House
and Senate," Social Networks, 28 (4): 454-465.

Hart, Douglas B. and Michael C. Munger (1989), "Declining electoral compet-
itiveness in the House of Representativs: The differential impact of improved
transportation technology," Public Choice, 61 (3): 217-228.

Hibbing, John R. (1982), "Voluntary Retirement from the U.S. House of Rep-
resentatives: Who Quits?" American Journal of Political Science, 26: 467-484

Jones, David R. (2003), "Position Taking and Position Avoidance in the US Sen-
ate," The Journal of Politics, 65 (3): 851­63.

Kessler, Daniel, and Keih Krehbiel (1996), "Dynamics of cosponsorship", The
American Political Science Review 90 (3): 555­66

Kirkland, Justin H. (2011), "The relational determinants of legislative success:
Strong and weak ties between legislators," Journal of Politics, 73 (3): 887-898.

Kirkland, Justin H. and Justin H. Gross, "Measurement and theory in legislative
networks: The evolving topology of Congressional collaboration," Social Net-
works, 36: 97-109.

Longley, Neil (2003), "Modeling the legislator as an agent for the party: The
effects of strict party discipline on legislator voting behavior," Contemporary Eco-
nomic Policy, 21 (4): 490-499.
                                                                            21


Mayer, Kenneth R. and David T. Canon (1999), The Dysfunctional Congress?:
The Individual Roots of an Institutional Dilemma. Westview Pr.

Mayhew, David R. (1974), Congress: The Electoral Connection. Vol. 26. Yale
University Press.

McCarty, Nolan M., Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal (1997), Income re-
distribution and therealignment of American politics, AEI press.

M¨
 uhlb¨
     ock, M. (2017), Voting Unity of National Parties in Bicameral EU Decision-
Making. Speaking with One Voice?, London: Palgrave Macmillan.

M¨ uhlb¨
       ock, Monika and Nikoleta Yordanova (2017), "When Legislators Choose
Not to Decide: Abstentions in the European Parliament," European Union Poli-
tics, 18 (2): 323­36.

Noury, Abdul G. (2004), "Abstention in Daylight: Strategic Calculus of Vot-
ing in the European Parliament," Public Choice, 121 (1­2): 179­211.

Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal (1997), Congress: A Political-Economic
History of Roll Call Voting. Oxford University Press on Demand.

Riker, William H. and Peter C. Ordeshook (1968), "A Theory of the Calculus
of Voting," American Political Science Review, 62 (1): 25­42.

Rothenberg, Lawrence S. and Mitchell Sanders (1999), "Rational Abstention and
the Congressional Vote Choice," Economics & Politics, 11 (3): 311­40.

Rothenberg, Lawrence S. and Mitchell S. Sanders (2000), "Legislator Turnout and
the Calculus of Voting: The Determinants of Abstention in the US Congress,"
Public Choice, 103 (3­4): 259­70.

Rothenberg, Lawrence S. and Mitchell S. Sanders (2002), "Modeling Legislator
Decision Making: A Historical Perspective," American Politics Research, 30 (3):
235­64.

Scully, Roger M. (1997), "Policy influence and participation in the European
Parliament," Legislative Studies Quarterly, 22 (2): 233-252.

Shull, Steven A. and James M. Vanderleeuw (1987), "What do key votes mea-
sure?," Legislative Studies Quarterly, 12 (4): 573-582.

Volden, Craig, and Alan E. Wiseman (2014), Legislative Effectiveness in the
                                                                            22


United States Congress: The Lawmakers, Cambridge University Press.

                                 ¨
Willumsen, David M. and Patrik Ohberg    (2013), "Strategic abstention in par-
liamentary voting," EPSA 2013 Annual General Conference Paper, available at
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract id=2225149.

Wilson, Rick K. and Cheryl D. Young (1997), "Cosponsorship in the United
States Congress," Legislative Studies Quarterly, 22 (1): 24­43
                                                                                                                                      23




                                                                Table 1
                                                                                                       Close Votes
                                                                                       Total                              Key Votes
                                                                                                  (vote closeness  0.8)
                                                                                        (1)                 (2)              (3)
                                                                                      4.18%               3.22%            3.86%
Average percentage of times a Congress member abstained (stand. dev.)
                                                                                      (4.28)              (4.11)           (4.16)
Percentage of times the number of abstainers was higher than the margin of vote       3.97%               9.46%            2.44%



                                                                Table 2
                                        Abstention rates by Congress member characteristics
                                                                  Percentage of Congress members who abstained         t test
                                                                                 (stand. deviation)                  [p value]
                                                                       Reference Category           Other category
      Sample
                                                                          (Group = 0)                (Group = 1)
                                                                             4.00%                      5.03%          -1.95*
      Gender (1 = Female)
                                                                              (0.04)                    (0.06)         [0.05]
                                                                             3.93%                      5.77%        -4.27***
      Race (1 = No White)
                                                                              (0.04)                    (0.04)         [0.00]
                                                                             4.00%                      4.37%           -1.18
      Party (1 = Democrat)
                                                                              (0.04)                    (0.04)         [0.24]
                                                                             4.16%                      4.64%           -0.86
      Chairmanship (1 = Yes)
                                                                              (0.04)                    (0.05)         [0.39]
                                                                             3.76%                      4.56%         -2.60**
      Electoral district near to Washington D.C. (1 = Yes)
                                                                              (0.04)                    (0.05)         [0.01]
                                                                             3.18%                      3.86%           -1.28
      DW Ideology (0 = bottom 10%, 1 = top 10%)
                                                                              (0.03)                    (0.04)         [0.20]
                                                                             6.72%                      3.64%         4.10***
      Thursday-Tuesday club (1 = Yes)
                                                                              (0.07)                    (0.04)         [0.00]
                                                                                                                                                                                             24

                                                                                          Table 3
                                                                                                      Dependent variable: Congress member i abstained on bill j
                                                                                                                          (1 = Yes, 0 = No)
                                                                                    OLS               OLS            OLS               OLS          OLS                     OLS

                                                                                      1                 2              3                 4                 5                  6
                                                                                                    0.0103***                                         0.0055***
Alumni Peers (1 = Majority Abstained)
                                                                                                     (0.0011)                                          (0.0010)
                                                                                                                   0.0090***
Alumni Peers ­ Same Party (1 = Majority Abstained)
                                                                                                                    (0.0014)
                                                                                                                   0.0041***
Alumni Peers ­ Different Party (1 = Majority Abstained)
                                                                                                                    (0.0007)
                                                                                                                                    0.0082***
Alumni Peers who are cosponsors (1 = Majority Abstained)
                                                                                                                                     (0.0012)
                                                                                                                                    0.0042***
Alumni Peers who are not cosponsors (1 = Majority Abstained)
                                                                                                                                     (0.0010)
                                                                                                                                                                           0.0002
Alumni Peers (1 = Less than 25% Abstained)
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.0009)
                                                                                                                                                                           0.0010
Alumni Peers (1 = Between 25% and 50% Abstained)
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.0008)
                                                                                                                                                                         0.0041***
Alumni Peers (1 = Between 50% and 75% Abstained)
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.0009)
                                                                                                                                                                         0.0047***
Alumni Peers (1 = More than 75% Abstained)
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.0010)
                                                                                 -0.0181***         -0.0180***     -0.0180***       -0.0180***        -0.0045***         -0.0045***
Ideology Distance Differential
                                                                                   (0.0008)           (0.0008)       (0.0008)         (0.0008)          (0.0008)           (0.0008)
                                                                                 -0.0142***         -0.0141***     -0.0141***       -0.0141***        -0.0119***         -0.0119***
Key vote (1 = Yes)
                                                                                   (0.0012)           (0.0012)       (0.0012)         (0.0012)          (0.0013)           (0.0013)
                                                                                 -0.0344***         -0.0341***     -0.0341***       -0.0341***        -0.0040***         -0.0040***
Vote closeness
                                                                                   (0.0012)           (0.0012)       (0.0012)         (0.0012)          (0.0008)           (0.0008)
                                                                                 0.7205***          0.7204***      0.7204***        0.7204***         0.7277***          0.7277***
Abstained more than once that day (1 = Yes)
                                                                                  (0.0084)           (0.0084)       (0.0084)         (0.0084)          (0.0082)           (0.0082)
                                                                                 -0.0258***         -0.0255***     -0.0255***       -0.0255***        -0.0079***         -0.0078***
Thursday-Tuesday club (1 = Yes)
                                                                                   (0.0013)           (0.0013)       (0.0013)         (0.0013)          (0.0018)           (0.0018)
Wald  2 test                                                                                                          7.10**           0.36                              11.00***
[p-value]                                                                                                            [0.0078]       [0.5500]                              [0.0009]
Individual fixed effects                                                           Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes                 Yes
Congress fixed effects                                                             Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes               No                  No
Roll call topic fixed effects                                                      Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes                 Yes
Bill fixed effect                                                                   No                No                No              No              Yes                 Yes
r2                                                                                0.5364            0.5365            0.5365         0.5365            0.5492              0.5492
Num. Obs.                                                                       3,143,453         3,143,453         3,143,453      3,143,453         3,143,453           3,143,453
Note: Results for model (1) of the paper are in columns (1) - (4). Results for model (2) are in columns (5) - (6). Standardized OLS estimated coefficients are reported. Standardization
                                                ()
of coefficients is obtained using the formula         , where  is the point estimate associated to control variable  , while () and () indicate the standard deviation or respectively
                                                ()
control variable  and dependent variable . Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the Congress member-level. A
precise definition of control variables can be found in Table A1 in the appendix. The Wald  2 test in column (3) evaluates the statistical difference of point estimates between variables
`Alumni Peers ­ Same Party (1 = Majority Abstained)' and `Alumni Peers ­ Different Party (1 = Majority Abstained)'. The Wald  2 test in column (4) evaluates the statistical difference
of point estimates between variables `Alumni Peers who are cosponsors (1 = Majority Abstained)' and `Alumni Peers who are not cosponsors (1 = Majority Abstained)'. The Wald  2
test in column (6) evaluates the statistical difference of point estimates between variables `Alumni Peers (1 = Between 50% and 75% Abstained)' and `Alumni Peers (1 = Between 75%
and 100% Abstained)'. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                                                                                                                                                          25




                                                                               Table 4
                                                                            Dependent variable: Congress member i abstained on bill j
                                                                                                   (1 = Yes, 0 = No)
                                                                                                              Roll call votes          Roll call votes
                                                                 Roll call votes     Roll call votes
                                                  All roll call                                              irrelevant to the        irrelevant to the
Sample                                                           relevant to the    irrelevant to the
                                                     votes                                                 Congress member:         Congress member:
                                                                Congress member Congress member
                                                                                                          vote closeness  0.8      vote closeness < 0.8
                                                     OLS              OLS                 OLS                     OLS                            OLS
                                                       1                2                   3                       4                              5
Party voted against the bill
                                                   0.0009*           -0.0058            0.0010**                 -0.0002                      0.0030***
sponsored/cosposored by an alumni connection
                                                   (0.0005)         (0.0043)            (0.0005)                (0.0008)                       (0.0005)
(1 = Yes)
                                                  -0.0181***        -0.0106**          -0.0182***              -0.0030**                      -0.0183***
Ideology Distance Differential
                                                    (0.0008)         (0.0039)            (0.0008)               (0.0010)                        (0.0008)
                                                  -0.0142***       -0.0176***          -0.0142***             -0.0159***                      -0.0141***
Key vote (1 = Yes)
                                                    (0.0012)         (0.0043)            (0.0012)               (0.0016)                        (0.0012)
                                                  -0.0344***       -0.0558***          -0.0342***             -0.0070***                      -0.0352***
Vote closeness
                                                    (0.0012)         (0.0075)            (0.0012)               (0.0009)                        (0.0014)
                                                  0.7205***        0.7334***            0.7204***              0.6901***                      0.7396***
Abstained more than once that day (1 = Yes)
                                                   (0.0084)         (0.0169)             (0.0084)               (0.0103)                       (0.0079)
                                                  -0.0258***       -0.0261***          -0.0258***             -0.0126***                      -0.0331***
Thursday-Tuesday club (1 = Yes)
                                                    (0.0013)         (0.0048)            (0.0013)               (0.0013)                        (0.0015)
Individual fixed effects                              Yes              Yes                 Yes                    Yes                             Yes
Congress fixed effects                                Yes              Yes                 Yes                    Yes                             Yes
Roll call topic fixed effects                         Yes              Yes                 Yes                    Yes                             Yes
r2                                                   0.5364           0.5642              0.5362                 0.4924                          0.5665
Num. Obs.                                          3,143,453          42,464            3,100,989              1,392,987                       1,708,002
                                                                                                                                                                ()
Note: Results for model (3) of the paper. Standardized OLS estimated coefficients are reported. Standardization of coefficients is obtained using the formula         ,
                                                                                                                                                                ()
where  is the point estimate associated to control variable  , while () and () indicate the standard deviation or respectively control variable  and dependent
variable . Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the Congress member-level. A precise definition of
control variables can be found in Table A1 in the appendix. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                                                                                                                                                                                26




                                                                                          Table 5
                                            Key vote      Close vote       Gender             Race                Party          Committee Chair                            Distance from
Interaction variable                                                                                                                                   DW Ideology
                                            (1 = Yes)     (1 = Yes)     (1 = Female)     (1 = Not White)     (1 = Democrat)        (1 = Yes)                               Washington D.C.
                                              OLS            OLS            OLS               OLS                 OLS                  OLS                 OLS                  OLS
                                                1             2               3                 4                   5                    6                   7                    8
                                           0.0194***      0.0110***      0.0107***         0.0087***           0.0056***            0.0105***            0.0094**             0.0083***
Alumni Peers (1 = Majority Abstained)
                                            (0.0020)       (0.0016)       (0.0013)          (0.0010)            (0.0013)             (0.0012)            (0.0028)              (0.0018)
Alumni Peers (1 = Majority Abstained) *    -0.0111***       -0.0009        -0.0009          0.0035**           0.0064***              -0.0009              0.0010               0.0026
interaction_variable                         (0.0017)      (0.0014)       (0.0011)          (0.0017)            (0.0016)             (0.0008)             (0.0029)             (0.0018)
                                                                                                                                     -0.0048*
interaction_variable                            -              -              -                 -                   -                                        -                    -
                                                                                                                                     (0.0026)
                                           -0.0180***    -0.0180***     -0.0180***         -0.0180***          -0.0180***          -0.0180***           -0.0180***           -0.0180***
Ideology Distance Differential
                                             (0.0008)      (0.0008)       (0.0008)           (0.0008)            (0.0008)            (0.0008)             (0.0008)             (0.0008)
                                           -0.0134***    -0.0141***     -0.0141***         -0.0141***          -0.0141***          -0.0140***           -0.0141***           -0.0141***
Key vote (1 = Yes)
                                             (0.0012)      (0.0012)       (0.0012)           (0.0012)            (0.0012)            (0.0012)             (0.0012)             (0.0012)
                                           -0.0341***    -0.0341***     -0.0341***         -0.0341***          -0.0341***          -0.0341***           -0.0341***           -0.0341***
Vote closeness
                                             (0.0012)      (0.0012)       (0.0012)           (0.0012)            (0.0012)            (0.0012)             (0.0012)             (0.0012)
Abstained more than once that day (1 =     0.7203***      0.7204***      0.7204***         0.7203***           0.7204***            0.7203***            0.7204***            0.7204***
Yes)                                        (0.0084)       (0.0084)       (0.0084)          (0.0084)            (0.0084)             (0.0084)             (0.0084)             (0.0084)
                                           -0.0255***    -0.0255***     -0.0255***         -0.0255***          -0.0255***          -0.0255***           -0.0255***           -0.0255***
Thursday-Tuesday club (1 = Yes)
                                             (0.0013)      (0.0013)       (0.0013)           (0.0013)            (0.0013)            (0.0013)             (0.0013)             (0.0013)
Individual fixed effects                       Yes           Yes            Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Congress fixed effects                         Yes           Yes            Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Roll call topic fixed effects                  Yes           Yes            Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
r2                                            0.5364        0.5364         0.5364             0.5364              0.5364              0.5364               0.5364               0.5364
Num. Obs.                                   3,143,453     3,143,453      3,143,453          3,143,453           3,143,453           3,143,453            3,143,453            3,143,453
                                                                                                                                                                 ()
Note: Results for model (4) of the paper. Standardized OLS estimated coefficients are reported. Standardization of coefficients is obtained using the formula          , where  is the point
                                                                                                                                                                 ()
estimate associated to control variable  , while () and () indicate the standard deviation or respectively control variable  and dependent variable . Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the Congress member-level. A precise definition of control variables can be found in Table A1 in the appendix.
*, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     27




                                                                     Fig. 1: Congress members by topic subject of interest




Note: The x-axis reports the PAP Code relative to the topic subject of the bills sponsored or cosponsored by Congress members. Topic subjects are grouped according to their policy area, reported
on top of the plot. The y-axis shows the average number of Congress members who have a particular interest on a topic subject in Congresses 109th - 113th. The PAP topic subjects for which no
Congress member had a specific interest in any considered Congress are not reported. A precise definition of the policy content related to a PAP code is indicated in Table A4.
                                                                                                                                                               28




                                        Fig. 2: Alumni Network in U.S. Congress by Party Affiliation




Note: Each plot represents the largest component of the alumni network of the legislators elected for the House of Representatives in each Congress. The largest
component is the largest set of nodes connected through a path. Each dot represents a Congress member, and its color indicates the party to which a Congress
member is affiliated, black nodes corresponds to democrats and white nodes corresponds to republicans. Two Congress members are connected if they graduated
from the same school within a 4-years window.
                                                                                                                                                                 29




                                                  Fig. 3: Alumni Connections by Party Affiliation




Note: For each Congress member, we calculated the percentage of alumni affiliated to the same party and the percentage of alumni affiliated to a different party.
The black bar indicates the average percentage of alumni affiliated to the same party and the white bar the average percentage of alumni affiliated to a different
party in each Congress.
                                                                                                                                                          30




                                       Fig. 4: Alumni Connections by Co-sponsorship Collaboration




Note: For each Congress member, we calculated the percentage of alumni who are cosponsor and the percentage of alumni who are not cosponsor. The black
bar indicates the average percentage of alumni who are not cosponsor and the white bar the average percentage of alumni who are cosponsor in each Congress.
                                                                                                                                                           31




                                    Fig. 5: Distribution of Congress members by Alumni Connections




Note: Each plot represents the distribution of Congress members by alumni connections in a given Congress, from the 109th to the 113th. The x-axis shows the
number of alumni connections, while the Y-axis indicates the percentage of Congress members with each given number of alumni connections.
                                                                                                                                                              32




                             Fig. 6: Congress members by Percentage of Alumni Connections Who Abstain




Note: For each roll call vote and each Congress member, we computed the percentage of alumni who abstained. The graphs plot the average percentage of
Congress members with at least one alumni peer who abstained in a given vote by percentage of alumni peers who abstained in each Congress. The x-axis
reports the percentage of alumni connections of Congress members with at least one alumni peer who abstained in a given roll call, while the y-axis reports the
average percentage of Congress members with a given percentage of alumni connections who abstained on a roll call vote. The average percentage of Congress
members recorded when no alumni peers abstained is 94.97% for the 109th Congress, 95.66% for the 110th Congress, 94.62% for the 111th Congress, 96.81%
for the 112th Congress, 95.95% for the 113th Congress.
                                                                                                                                                          33




           Fig. 7: Percentage of Congress members Who abstain by Percentage of Alumni Connections Who Abstain




For each roll call vote and each Congress member who abstained, we computed the percentage of alumni who abstained. The graphs plot the average percentage
of Congress members who abstained in a given vote by percentage of alumni peers who abstained in each Congress. The x-axis reports the percentage of alumni
connections of Congress members who abstained in a given roll call, while the y-axis reports the average percentage of Congress members who abstained with
a given percentage of alumni connections who abstained on a roll call vote.
                                                                                                                                                            34


Appendix
                                                    Table A1: Summary Statistics
                                                                          Variable definition                                         Mean       St. Dev.

Congress member i abstained on bill j   Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if Congress member i abstained on roll call
                                                                                                                                       0.04        0.20
(1 = Yes, 0 = No)                       vote j, and zero otherwise.
Alumni Peers                            Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if more than 50% of Congress member i's
                                                                                                                                       0.01        0.10
(1 = Majority Abstained)                alumni peers abstained on roll call vote j, and zero otherwise.
Alumni Peers                            Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if less than 25% of Congress member i's
                                                                                                                                       0.02        0.13
(1 = Less than 25% Abstained)           alumni peers abstained on roll call vote j, and zero otherwise.
Alumni Peers                            Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if between 25% and 50% of Congress
                                                                                                                                       0.01        0.12
(1 = Between 25% and 50% Abstained)     member i's alumni peers abstained on roll call vote j, and zero otherwise.
Alumni Peers                            Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if between 50% and 75% of Congress
                                                                                                                                       0.00        0.02
(1 = Between 50% and 75% Abstained)     member i's alumni peers abstained on roll call vote j, and zero otherwise.
Alumni Peers                            Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if more than 75% of Congress member i's
                                                                                                                                       0.01        0.10
(1 = More than 75% Abstained)           alumni peers abstained on roll call vote j, and zero otherwise.
                                        Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if more than 50% of Congress member i's
Alumni Peers ­ Same Party
                                        alumni peers affiliated to his/her own party abstained on roll call vote j, and zero           0.01        0.09
(1 = Majority Abstained)
                                        otherwise.
                                        Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if more than 50% of Congress member i's
Alumni Peers ­ Different Party
                                        alumni peers affiliated to a different party from his/her own abstained on roll call vote      0.01        0.08
(1 = Majority Abstained)
                                        j, and zero otherwise.
                                        Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if more than 50% of Congress member i's
Alumni Peers who are cosponsors
                                        alumni peers who are his/her cosponsors abstained on roll call vote j, and zero                0.01        0.09
(1 = Majority Abstained)
                                        otherwise.
                                        Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if more than 50% of Congress member i's
Alumni Peers who are not cosponsors
                                        alumni peers who are not his/her cosponsors abstained on roll call vote j, and zero            0.00        0.06
(1 = Majority Abstained)
                                        otherwise.
Party voted against the bill            Dummy variables. It takes the value of one when roll call vote j is held over a bill
sponsored/cosponsored by an alumni      sponsored or cosponsored by Congress member i's alumni peer, and the majority of the
                                                                                                                                       0.01        0.11
connection                              party to which Congress member i is affiliated voted against roll call vote j, and zero
(1 = Yes)                               otherwise.
                                        Relative ideological position of the Yea and Nay alternatives on roll call vote j compared
                                        to the ideological position of Congress member i (Rothenberg and Sanders, 2000). It is
                                        equal to: ||Member Position - Yea Position|-|Member Position - Nay Position||. Where
                                        "Member position" is equal to the absolute value of the first dimension of the DW
Ideology Distance Differential          nominate score created by McCarty et al. (1997) associated to Congress member i. "Yea          0.51        0.29
                                        Position" is equal to the average value of the first dimension of the DW nominate score
                                        associated to the Congress members who voted Yea on roll call vote j. "Nay Position"
                                        is equal to the average value of the first dimension of the DW nominate score associated
                                        to the Congress members who voted Nay on roll call vote j.
Key vote                                Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if Congress member i's party leaders voted
                                                                                                                                       0.74        0.44
(1 = Yes)                               all in the same way (e.g. they all voted yes) on roll call vote j, and zero otherwise.
                                        It is the margin of vote observed by Congress member i on roll call vote j. It is equal to
                                              # - #
Vote closeness                          1-|                |, where # and # are the number of Congress members                         0.55        0.38
                                              # + #
                                        who voted respectively in favor and against of roll call vote j.
Abstained more than once that day       Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if Congress member i abstained more than
                                                                                                                                       0.05        0.22
(1 = Yes)                               once the day in which roll call vote j was held, and zero otherwise.
Thursday-Tuesday club                   Dummy variable. It takes the value of one if Congress member i is required to vote on
                                                                                                                                       0.82        0.39
(1 = Yes)                               roll call vote j during Thursday, Wednesday, or Tuesday, and zero otherwise
                                        Dummy variable. It takes the value of one for Congress member i if roll call vote j that
Divided Government                      were held during Congresses in which the party controlling the executive branch was
                                                                                                                                       0.62        0.49
(1 = Yes)                               different from the party controlling one or both houses of the legislative branch (i.e.
                                        110th, 112th, and 113th Congress), and zero otherwise.
Gender                                  Dummy variable. It takes the value of one when Congress member i on roll call vote j
                                                                                                                                       0.17        0.37
(1 = Female)                            is s a female, and zero otherwise.
Race                                    Dummy variable. It takes the value of one when Congress member i on roll call vote j
                                                                                                                                       0.15        0.36
(1 = Not White)                         is Latino or Afro-American, and zero otherwise.
Party                                   Dummy variable. It takes the value of one when Congress member i on roll call vote j
                                                                                                                                       0.51        0.50
(1 = Democrat)                          is a Democrat, and zero otherwise.
Committee Chair                         Dummy variable. It takes the value of one when Congress member i on roll call vote j
                                                                                                                                       0.05        0.22
(1 = Yes)                               is the chair of at least one committee, and zero otherwise.
                                        For each roll call vote j, it records the distance to the center in terms of ideology of
DW ideology                             Congress member i measured using the absolute value of the first dimension of the DW-          0.04        0.44
                                        nominate score created by McCarty et al. (1997).
                                        For each roll call vote j, it measures the distance in kilometers between Congress
Distance from Washington D.C.                                                                                                        1960.78     1659.21
                                        member i district's centroid and Washington D.C..
N. Obs.                                                                                                                              3,143,453   3,143,453
                                                                                                                    35




                                                                  Table A2
                             Percentage of Congress members            Percentage of Congress members
Sample                                                                                                   t test
                            with at least one alumni connection          without alumni connections
                                                                                                          -0.89
   Gender (1 = Female)                   16.21%                                   17.63%
                                                                                                         [0.3723]
                                                                                                         -2.36**
   Race (1 = No White)                   13.64%                                   17.26%
                                                                                                         [0.0184]
                                                                                                        -6.65***
  Party (1 = Democrat)                   43.14%                                   57.12%
                                                                                                         [0.0000]
                                                                                                          -0.19
 Chairmanship (1 = Yes)                   4.78%                                    4.96%
                                                                                                         [0.8477]
                                                                                                         -3.24**
High DW (>0.75) (1 = Yes)                 0.09%                                    1.19%
                                                                                                         [0.0012]
                                                                                                                                                                             36

                                                                               Table A3
                                                                                    Dependent variable: Congress member i abstained on bill j
                                                                                                        (1 = Yes, 0 = No)
                                                                     OLS             OLS           OLS               OLS          OLS                      OLS

                                                                       1               2                3                4                 5                 6
                                                                                   0.0163***                                          0.0082***
Alumni Peers (1 = Majority Abstained)
                                                                                    (0.0017)                                           (0.0015)
                                                                                                   0.0143***
Alumni Peers ­ Same Party (1 = Majority Abstained)
                                                                                                    (0.0021)
                                                                                                   0.0067***
Alumni Peers ­ Different Party (1 = Majority Abstained)
                                                                                                    (0.0010)
                                                                                                                     0.0131***
Alumni Peers who are cosponsors (1 = Majority Abstained)
                                                                                                                      (0.0018)
                                                                                                                     0.0069***
Alumni Peers who are not cosponsors (1 = Majority Abstained)
                                                                                                                      (0.0015)
                                                                                                                                                           0.0002
Alumni Peers (1 = Between 0% and 25% Abstained)
                                                                                                                                                          (0.0009)
                                                                                                                                                           0.0010
Alumni Peers (1 = Between 25% and 50% Abstained)
                                                                                                                                                          (0.0011)
                                                                                                                                                         0.0057***
Alumni Peers (1 = Between 50% and 75% Abstained)
                                                                                                                                                          (0.0013)
                                                                                                                                                         0.0071***
Alumni Peers (1 = Between 75% and 100% Abstained)
                                                                                                                                                          (0.0015)
                                                                  -0.0089***      -0.0087***       -0.0087***       -0.0087***         0.0021*            0.0022*
Ideology Distance Differential
                                                                    (0.0011)        (0.0011)         (0.0011)         (0.0011)         (0.0012)           (0.0012)
                                                                  -0.0108***      -0.0104***       -0.0104***       -0.0104***        -0.0098***        -0.0098***
Key vote (1 = Yes)
                                                                    (0.0016)        (0.0016)         (0.0016)         (0.0016)          (0.0017)          (0.0017)
                                                                  -0.0267***      -0.0263***       -0.0263***       -0.0263***        -0.0030***        -0.0030***
Vote closeness
                                                                    (0.0015)        (0.0015)         (0.0015)         (0.0015)          (0.0007)          (0.0007)
                                                                  0.7180***        0.7177***       0.7177***         0.7177***        0.7221***          0.7221***
Abstained more than once that day (1 = Yes)
                                                                   (0.0120)         (0.0120)        (0.0120)          (0.0120)         (0.0117)           (0.0117)
                                                                  -0.0272***      -0.0265***       -0.0264***       -0.0265***        -0.0099***        -0.0099***
Thursday-Tuesday club (1 = Yes)
                                                                    (0.0019)        (0.0018)         (0.0018)         (0.0018)          (0.0024)          (0.0024)
Wald  2 test                                                                                          8.20**            0.32                             9.50**
[p-value]                                                                                            [0.0042]         [0.5700]                          [0.0021]
Individual fixed effects                                             Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes                Yes
Congress fixed effects                                               Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes             No                 No
Roll call topic fixed effects                                        Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes            Yes                Yes
Bill fixed effect                                                     No              No                No               No            Yes                Yes
r2                                                                  0.5391          0.5393            0.5393           0.5392         0.5513             0.5513
Num. Obs.                                                         1,551,961       1,551,961         1,551,961        1,551,961      1,551,961          1,551,961
Note: Results for model (1) of the paper are in columns (1) - (4). Results for model (2) are in columns (5) - (6). Standardized OLS estimated coefficients are reported.
                                                              ()
Standardization of coefficients is obtained using the formula     , where  is the point estimate associated to control variable  , while () and () indicate the
                                                             ()
standard deviation or respectively control variable  and dependent variable . Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Robust standard errors are adjusted for
clustering at the Congress member-level. A precise definition of control variables can be found in Table A1 in the appendix. The Wald  2 test in columns (3) evaluates the
statistical difference of point estimates between variables `Alumni Peers ­ Same Party (1 = Majority Abstained)' and `Alumni Peers ­ Different Party (1 = Majority
Abstained)'. . The Wald  2 test in column (4) evaluates the statistical difference of point estimates between variables `Alumni Peers who are cosponsors (1 = Majority
Abstained)' and `Alumni Peers who are not cosponsors (1 = Majority Abstained)'. Results are obtained using the vote records of the Congress members who have at least one
alumni connection. *, **, *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level.
                                                                                                                                                                      37


                                                               Table A4 - PAP Categories
           Major Policy Area                                                                     Topic Subject
PAP Code                Content                  PAP Code          Content                                                Description
                                                   101      Interest Rates         Includes issues related to inflation, cost of living, prices, and interest rates
                                                   103      Unemployment Rate      Includes issues related to the unemployment rate, impact of unemployment
                                                   104      Monetary Policy        Includes issues related to the monetary policy, central bank, and the treasury
           Includes issues related to general      105      National Budget        Issues related to public debt, budgeting, and efforts to reduce deficits
   1
           domestic macroeconomic policy           107      Tax Code               Includes issues related to tax policy, the impact of taxes, and tax enforcement
                                                   108      Industrial Policy      Includes issues related to manufacturing policy, industrial revitalization and growth
                                                   110      Price Control          Includes issues related to wage or price control, emergency price controls
                                                   199      Other                  Includes issues related to other macroeconomics subtopics
                                                            Minority
                                                   201                             Includes issues related to minority, ethnic, and racial group discrimination
                                                            Discrimination
                                                            Gender
                                                   202                             Includes issues related to sex, gender, and sexual orientation discrimination
                                                            Discrimination
                                                                                   Includes issues related to age discrimination, including mandatory retirement age
                                                   204      Age Discrimination
                                                                                   policies
                                                            Handicap
                                                   205                             Includes issues related to handicap and disease discrimination
                                                            Discrimination
           Includes issues related generally                                       Includes issues related to voting rights, expanding or contracting the franchise,
   2                                               206      Voting Rights
           to civil rights and minority rights                                     participation and related issues
                                                                                   Issues related to freedom of speech, religious freedoms, and other types of freedom of
                                                   207      Freedom of Speech
                                                                                   expression
                                                                                   Includes issues related to privacy rights, including privacy of records, access to
                                                   208      Right to Privacy
                                                                                   government information, and abortion rights
                                                                                   Includes issues related to anti-government activity groups, such as the communist
                                                   209      Anti-Government
                                                                                   party and local insurgency groups
                                                   299      Other                  Includes issues related to other civil rights subtopics
                                                   301      Health Care Reform     Includes issues related to broad, comprehensive changes in the health care system
                                                   302      Insurance              Includes issues related to health insurance reform, regulation, availability, and cost
                                                                                   Includes issues related to the regulation and promotion of pharmaceuticals, medical
                                                   321      Drug Industry
                                                                                   devices, and clinical labs
                                                                                   Issues related to facilities construction, regulation and payments, including waitlists
                                                   322      Medical Facilities
                                                                                   and ambulance services
                                                                                   Includes issues related to provider and insurer payments and regulation, including
                                                   323      Insurance Providers
           Includes issues related generally                                       other types of benefits or multiple benefits
           to health care, including                                               Includes issues related to medical liability, malpractice issues, medical fraud and
   3                                               324      Medical Liability
           appropriations for general health                                       abuse, and unfair practices
           care government agencies                                                Issues related to the supply and quantity of labor in the health care industry, training
                                                   325      Manpower
                                                                                   and licensing
                                                                                   Issues related to disease prevention, treatment, and health promotion, including
                                                   331      Disease Prevention
                                                                                   specific diseases not covered in other subtopics
                                                                                   Includes issues related to infants and children, including coverage and quality of care,
                                                   332      Infants and Children
                                                                                   health promotion, and school health programs
                                                   333      Mental                 Includes issues related to mental health care and mental health disease
                                                                                   Includes issues related to long term care, home health care, the terminally ill, and
                                                   334      Long-term Care
                                                                                   rehabilitation services
                                                                                                                                                           38

                                               Drug Coverage and      Includes issues related to prescription drug coverage, programs to pay for prescription
                                         335
                                               Cost                   drugs, and policy to reduce the cost of prescription drugs
                                         341   Tobacco Abuse          Includes issues related to tobacco abuse, treatment, education, and health effects
                                               Drug and Alcohol       Includes issues related to alcohol and illegal drug abuse, treatment, education, and
                                         342
                                               Abuse                  health effects
                                         398   R&D                    Includes issues related to health care research and development
                                         399   Other                  Includes issues related to other health care topics
                                         401   Trade                  Includes issues related to the regulation and impact of agricultural foreign trade
                                                                      Includes issues related to government subsidies to farmers and ranchers, including
                                         402   Subsidies to Farmers
                                                                      agricultural disaster insurance
                                               Food Inspection &      Includes issues related to food inspection and safety, including seafood, and labeling
                                         403
    Includes issues related to general         Safety                 requirements
    agriculture policy, including              Marketing &            Includes issues related to efforts to provide information on agricultural products to
4                                        404
    appropriations for general                 Promotion              consumers and the regulation of agricultural marketing
    agriculture government agencies            Animal and Crop        Includes issues related to animal and crop disease, pest control and pesticide
                                         405
                                               Disease                regulation, and welfare for domesticated animals
                                         408   Fisheries & Fishing    Includes issues related to fishing, commercial fishery regulation and conservation
                                         498   R&D                    Includes issues related to agricultural research and development
                                         499   Other                  Includes issues related to other agricultural subtopics
                                                                      Includes issues related to worker safety and protection and compensation for work-
                                         501   Worker Safety
                                                                      related injury and disease
                                               Employment             Includes issues related to job training for adult workers, workforce development, and
                                         502
                                               Training               efforts to retrain displaced workers
                                                                      Includes issues related to all employee benefits, pensions, and retirement accounts,
    Includes issues generally related    503   Employee Benefits
                                                                      including government-provided unemployment insurance
    to labor, employment, and                                         Includes issues related to labor unions, collective bargaining, and employer-employee
5   pensions, including                  504   Labor Unions
                                                                      relations
    appropriations for government                                     Includes issues related to fair labor standards such as the minimum wage and overtime
    agencies regulating labor policy     505   Fair Labor Standards
                                                                      compensation, and labor law
                                         506   Youth Employment       Includes issues related to youth employment, child labor and job training for youths
                                         529   Migrant and Seasonal   Includes issues related to migrant, guest and seasonal workers
                                         599   Other                  Issues related to other labor policy
                                                                      Includes issues related to higher education, student loans and education finance, and
                                         601   Higher
                                                                      the regulation of colleges and universities
                                               Elementary &           Includes issues related to elementary and primary schools, school reform, safety in
                                         602
                                               Secondary              schools, and efforts to generally improve educational standards and outcomes
                                                                      Includes issues related to education of underprivileged students, including adult
    Includes issues related to general   603   Underprivileged
                                                                      literacy programs, bilingual education needs, and rural education initiatives
    education policy, including
6   appropriations for government        604   Vocational             Includes issues related to vocational education for children and adults and their impact
    agencies regulating education                                     Includes issues related to special education and education for the physically or
                                         606   Special
    policy                                                            mentally handicapped
                                                                      Includes issues related to education excellence, including efforts to increase the quality
                                         607   Excellence
                                                                      of specific areas, such as math, science or foreign language skills
                                         698   R&D                    Includes issues related to research and development in education
                                         699   Other                  Includes issues related to other subtopics in education policy
                                                                      Includes issues related to domestic drinking water safety, supply, pollution,
    Includes issues related to general   701   Drinking Water
                                                                      fluoridation, and conservation
7   environmental policy, including
                                                                      Includes issues related to the disposal and treatment of wastewater, solid waste and
    appropriations for government        703   Waste Disposal
                                                                      runoff.
                                                                                                                                                                  39

     agencies regulating environmental                                  Includes issues related to hazardous waste and toxic chemical regulation, treatment,
                                          704    Hazardous Waste
     policy                                                             and disposal
                                          705    Air Pollution          Includes issues related to air pollution, climate change, and noise pollution
                                          707    Recycling              Includes issues related to recycling, reuse, and resource conservation
                                                                        Includes issues related to indoor environmental hazards, indoor air contamination
                                          708    Indoor Hazards
                                                                        (including on airlines), and indoor hazardous substances such as asbestos
                                                                        Includes issues related to species and forest protection, endangered species, control of
                                          709    Species & Forest       the domestic illicit trade in wildlife products, and regulation of laboratory or
                                                                        performance animals
                                          711    Conservation           Includes issues related to land and water conservation
                                                                        Includes issues related to research and development in environmental technology, not
                                          798    R&D
                                                                        including alternative energy
                                          799    Other                  Includes issues related to other environmental subtopics
                                                                        Includes issues related to nuclear energy, safety and security, and disposal of nuclear
                                          801    Nuclear
                                                                        waste
                                                                        Includes issues related to to general electricity, hydropower, and regulation of
                                          802    Electricity
                                                                        electrical utilities
                                                                        Includes issues related to natural gas and oil, drilling, oil spills and flaring, oil and gas
                                          803    Natural Gas & Oil
     Includes issues generally related                                  prices, shortages and gasoline regulation
     to energy policy, including                                        Includes issues related to coal production, use, trade, and regulation, including coal
8                                         805    Coal
     appropriations for government                                      gasification and clean coal technologies
     agencies regulating energy policy           Alternative &          Includes issues related to alternative and renewable energy, biofuels, hydrogen and
                                          806
                                                 Renewable              geothermal power
                                                                        Includes issues related to energy conservation and energy efficiency, including
                                          807    Conservation
                                                                        vehicles, homes, commercial use and government
                                          898    R&D                    Includes issues related to energy research and development
                                          899    Other                  Includes issues related to other energy subtopics
9    Immigration                          900    General                Includes issues related to immigration, refugees, and citizenship
                                                                        Includes issues related to mass transportation construction, regulation, safety, and
                                          1001   Mass
                                                                        availability
                                          1002   Highways               Includes issues related to public highway construction, maintenance, and safety
                                                                        Includes issues related to air travel, regulation and safety of aviation, airports, air traffic
                                          1003   Air Travel
     Includes issues related generally                                  control, pilot training, and aviation technology
     to transportation, including                                       Includes issues related to railroads, rail travel, rail freight, and the development and
                                          1005   Railroad Travel
10   appropriations for government                                      deployment of new rail technologies
     agencies regulating transportation                                 Includes issues related to maritime transportation, including martime freight and
                                          1007   Maritime
     policy                                                             shipping, safety and security, and inland waterways and channels
                                                                        Includes issues related to infrastructure and public works, including employment
                                          1010   Infrastructure
                                                                        intiatives
                                          1098   R&D                    Includes issues related to transportation research and development
                                          1099   Other                  Includes issues related to other transportation subtopics
                                                                        Includes issues related to all law enforcement agencies, including border, customs, and
                                          1201   Agencies
                                                                        other specialized enforcement agencies and their appropriations
                                                                        Includes issues related to white collar crime, organized crime, counterfeiting and fraud,
                                          1202   White Collar Crime
                                                                        cyber-crime, and money laundering
     Includes issues related to general                                 Issues related to illegal drug crime and enforcement, criminal penalties for drug crimes,
12                                        1203   Illegal Drugs
     law, crime, and family issues                                      including international efforts to combat drug trafficking
                                                                        Includes issues related to court administration, judiciary appropriations, guidelines for
                                          1204   Court Administration
                                                                        bail, pre-release, fines and legal representation
                                          1205   Prisons                Includes issues related to prisons and jails, parole systems, and appropriations
                                                                                                                                                          40

                                                                       Includes issues related to juvenile crime and justice, juvenile prisons and jails, and
                                         1206   Juvenile Crime
                                                                       efforts to reduce juvenile crime and recidivism
                                                                       Includes issues related to child abuse, child pornography, sexual exploitation of
                                         1207   Child Abuse
                                                                       children and parental kidnapping
                                         1208   Family Issues          Includes issues related to family issues, domestic violence, child welfare, family law
                                                Criminal & Civil       Includes issues related to domestic criminal and civil codes, including crimes not
                                         1210
                                                Code                   mentioned in other subtopics
                                         1211   Crime Control          Includes issues related to the control, prevention, and impact of crime
                                                                       Includes issues related to Police and other general domestic security responses to
                                         1227   Police
                                                                       terrorism, such as special police
                                         1299   Other                  Includes issues related to other law, crime, and family subtopics
                                                                       Includes issues related to poverty assistance for low-income families, including food
                                                Low-Income
                                         1302                          assistance programs, programs to assess or alleviate welfare dependency and tax
                                                Assistance
                                                                       credits directed at low income families
                                                                       Includes issues related to elderly issues and elderly assitance, including government
                                         1303   Elderly Assistance
                                                                       pensions
     Includes issues generally related
13                                       1304   Disabled Assistance    Includes issues related to aid for people with physical or mental disabilities
     to social welfare policy
                                                Volunteer              Includes issues related to domestic volunteer associations, charities, and youth
                                         1305
                                                Associations           organizations
                                         1308   Child Care             Includes issues related to parental leave and child care
                                         1399   Other                  Includes issues related to other social welfare policy subtopics
                                                Community              Includes issues related to housing and community development, neighborhood
                                         1401
                                                Development            development, and national housing policy
                                         1403   Urban Development      Includes issues related to urban development and general urban issues
                                         1404   Rural Housing          Includes issues related to rural housing
                                         1405   Rural Development      Includes issues related to non-housing rural economic development
                                                Low-Income             Includes issues related to housing for low-income individuals and families, including
                                         1406
     Includes issues related generally          Assistance             public housing projects and housing affordability programs
14                                                                     Includes issues related to housing for military veterans and their families, including
     to housing and urban affairs        1407   Veterans
                                                                       subsidies for veterans
                                                                       Includes issues related to housing for the elderly, including housing facilities for the
                                         1408   Elderly
                                                                       handicapped elderly
                                         1409   Homeless               Includes issues related to housing for the homeless and efforts to reduce homelessness
                                                                       Includes issues related to housing and community development research and
                                         1498   R&D
                                                                       development
                                         1499   Other                  Other issues related to housing and community development
                                                                       Includes issues related to the regulation of national banking systems and other non-
                                         1501   Banking
                                                                       bank financial institutions
                                                Securities &           Includes issues related to the regulation and facilitation of securities and commodities
                                         1502
                                                Commodities            trading, regulation of investments and related industries, and exchanges
                                                                       Includes issues related to consumer finance, mortgages, credit cards, access to credit
     Includes issues generally related   1504   Consumer Finance
                                                                       records, and consumer credit fraud
     to domestic commerce, including                                   Includes issues related to insurance regulation, fraud and abuse in the insurance
15   appropriations for government       1505   Insurance Regulation   industry, the financial health of the insurance industry, and insurance availability and
     agencies regulating domestic                                      cost
     commerce
                                         1507   Bankruptcy             Includes issues related to personal, commercial, and municipal bankruptcies
                                                Corporate              Includes issues related to corporate mergers, antitrust regulation, corporate accounting
                                         1520
                                                Management             and governance, and corporate management
                                                                       Includes issues related to small businesses, including programs to promote and
                                         1521   Small Businesses
                                                                       subsidize small businesses
                                                                                                                                                            41

                                                 Copyrights and         Includes issues related to copyrights and patents, patent reform, and intellectual
                                          1522
                                                 Patents                property
                                                                        Includes issues related to domestic natual disaster relief, disaster or flood insurance,
                                          1523   Disaster Relief
                                                                        and natural disaster preparedness
                                          1524   Tourism                Decription: Issues related to tourism regulation, promotion, and impact
                                          1525   Consumer Safety        Includes issues related to consumer fraud and safety in domestic commerce
                                                                        Includes issues related to the regulation and promotion of sports, gambling, and
                                          1526   Sports Regulation
                                                                        personal fitness
                                          1598   R&D                    Includes issues related to domestic commerce research and development
                                          1599   Other                  Includes issues related to other domestic commerce policy subtopics
                                                                        Includes issues related to defense alliance and agreement, security assistance, and UN
                                          1602   Alliances
                                                                        peacekeeping activities
                                          1603   Intelligence           Includes issues related to military intelligence, espionage, and covert operations
                                                                        Includes issues related to military readiness, coordination of armed services air support
                                          1604   Readiness
                                                                        and sealift capabilities, and national stockpiles of strategic materials.
                                                                        Includes issues related to nuclear weapons, nuclear proliferation, modernization of
                                          1605   Nuclear Arms
                                                                        nuclear equipment
                                                                        Includes issues related to military aid to other countries and the control of arms sales
                                          1606   Military Aid
                                                                        to other countries
                                                                        Includes issues related to military manpower, military personnel and their defendants,
                                          1608   Personnel Issues
                                                                        military courts, and general veterans' issues
                                                                        Includes issues related to military procurement, conversion of old equipment, and
                                          1610   Procurement
                                                                        weapons systems evaluation
     Includes issues related generally    1611   Installations & Land   Includes issues related to military installations, construction, and land transfers
     to defense policy, and
16                                        1612   Reserve Forces         Issues related to military reserves and reserve affairs
     appropriations for agencies that
     oversee general defense policy                                     Includes issues related to military nuclear and hazardous waste disposal and military
                                          1614   Hazardous Waste
                                                                        environmental compliance
                                                                        Includes issues related to domestic civil defense, national security responses to
                                          1615   Civil
                                                                        terrorism, and other issues related to homeland security
                                                                        Includes issues related to non-contractor civilian personnel, civilian employment in the
                                          1616   Civilian Personnel
                                                                        defense industry, and military base closings
                                                                        Includes issues related to military contractors and contracting, oversight of military
                                          1617   Contractors
                                                                        contractors and fraud by military contractors
                                                                        Includes issues related to direct war-related foreign military operations, prisoners of
                                          1619   Foreign Operations
                                                                        war and collateral damage to civilian populations
                                                 Claims against         Includes issues related to claims against the military, settlements for military
                                          1620
                                                 Military               dependents, and compensation for civilizans injured in military operations
                                          1698   R&D                    Includes issues related to defense research and development
                                          1699   Other                  Includes issues related to other defense policy subtopics
                                                                        Includes issues related to the government use of space and space resource exploitation
                                          1701   Space
                                                                        agreements, government space programs and space exploration, military use of space
                                                                        Includes issues related to the regulation and promotion of commercial use of space,
                                                 Commercial Use of
                                          1704                          commercial satellite technology, and government efforts to encourage commercial
                                                 Space
     Includes issues related to general                                 space development
17   space, science, technology, and                                    Includes issues related to science and technology transfer and international science
                                          1705   Science Transfer
     communications                                                     cooperation
                                                                        Includes issues related to telephone and telecommunication regulation, infrastructure
                                          1706   Telecommunications
                                                                        for high speed internet, and other forms fo telecommunication
                                                                        Includes issues related to the regulation of the newspaper, publishing, radio, and
                                          1707   Broadcast
                                                                        broadcast television industries
                                                                                                                                                              42

                                                                         Includes issues related to weather forecasting, oceanography, geological surveys, and
                                          1708   Weather Forecasting
                                                                         weather forecasting research and technology
                                                                         Includes issues related generally to the computer industry, regulation of the internet,
                                          1709   Computers
                                                                         and computer security
                                                                         Includes issues related to space, science, technology, and communication research and
                                          1798   R&D
                                                                         development not mentioned in other subtopics.
                                                                         Includes issues related to other space, science, technology, and communication
                                          1799   Other
                                                                         research and development
                                                                         Includes issues related to trade negotiations, disputes, and agreements, including tax
                                          1802   Trade Agreements
                                                                         treaties
                                          1803   Exports                 Includes issues related to export regulation, subsidies, promotion, and control
     Includes issues generally related                                   Includes issues related to international private business investment and corporate
                                          1804   Private Investments
     to foreign trade and                                                development
18   appropriations for government                                       Includes issues related to productivity of competitiveness of domestic businsses and
                                          1806   Competitiveness
     agencies generally regulating                                       balance of payments issues
     foreign trade                                                       Includes issues related to tariffs and other barriers to imports, import regulation and
                                          1807   Tariff & Imports
                                                                         impact of imports on domestic industries
                                          1808   Exchange Rates          Includes issues related to exchange rate and related issues
                                          1899   Other                   Includes issues related to other foreign trade policy subtopics
                                                                         Includes issues related to foreign aid not directly targeting at increasing international
                                          1901   Foreign Aid
                                                                         development
                                                 Resources               Includes issues related to international resources exploitation and resources
                                          1902
                                                 Exploitation            agreements, law of the sea and international ocean conservation efforts
                                                 Developing              Includes issues related specifically to developing countries, developing Countries
                                          1905
                                                 Countries               Issues (for Financial Issues see 1906)
                                                                         Includes issues related to international finance and economic development, the World
                                          1906   International Finance   Bank and International Monetary Fund, regional development banks, sovereign debt
                                                                         and implications for international lending institutions
                                          1910   Western Europe          Includes issues related to Western Europe and the European Union
     Includes issues related to general
                                                                         Includes issues related specifically to a foreign country or region not codable using
     international affairs and foreign
                                          1921   Specific Country        other codes, assessment of political issues in other countries, relations between
19   aid, including appropriations for
                                                                         individual countries
     general government foreign
                                                                         Includes issues related to human rights, human rights violations, human rights treaties
     affairs agencies
                                          1925   Human Rights            and conventions, UN reports on human rights, crimes associated with genocide or
                                                                         crimes against humanity
                                                                         International organizations, NGOs, the United Nations, International Red Cross,
                                          1926   Organizations
                                                                         UNESCO, International Olympic Committee, International Criminal Court
                                                                         Includes issues related to international terrorism, hijacking, and acts of piracy in other
                                          1927   Terrorism               countries, efforts to fight international terrorism, international legal mechanisms to
                                                                         combat terrorism
                                                                         Includes issues related to diplomats, diplomacy, embassies, citizens abroad, foreign
                                          1929   Diplomats
                                                                         diplomats in the country, visas and passports
                                          1999   Other                   Includes issues related to other international affairs policy subtopics
                                                 Intergovernmental
                                          2001                           Includes issues related to intergovernmental relations, local government issues
                                                 Relations
                                          2002   Bureaucracy             Includes issues related to general government efficiencies and bureaucratic oversight
     Includes issues related to general
     government operations, including     2003   Postal Service          Includes issues related to postal services, regulation of mail, and post civil service
20
     appropriations for multiple                                         Includes issues related to civil employees not mentioned in other subtopics,
                                          2004   Employees
     government agencies                                                 government pensions and general civil service issues
                                          2005   Appointments            Includes issues related to nominations and appointments not mentioned elsewhere
                                          2006   Currency                Includes issues related the currency, national mints, medals, and commemorative coins
                                                                                                                                                         43

                                                 Procurement &         Includes issues related to government procurement, government contractors,
                                          2007
                                                 Contractors           contractor and procurement fraud, and procurement processes and systems
                                                 Property              Includes issues related to government property management, construction, and
                                          2008
                                                 Management            regulation
                                                                       Includes issues related to tax administration, enforcement, and auditing for both
                                          2009   Tax Administration
                                                                       individuals and corporations
                                          2010   Scandals              Includes issues related to public scandal and impeachment
                                                                       Includes issues related to government branch relations, administrative issues, and
                                          2011   Branch Relations
                                                                       constitutional reforms
                                                                       Includes issues related to the regulation of political campaigns, campaign finance,
                                          2012   Political Campaigns
                                                                       political advertising and voter registration
                                          2013   Census & Statistics   Includes issues related to census and statistics collection by government
                                          2014   Capital City          Includes issues related to the capital city
                                                                       Includes issues related to claims against the government, compensation for the victims
                                          2015   Claims against
                                                                       of terrorist attacks, compensation policies without other substantive provisions
                                          2030   National Holidays     Includes issues related to national holidays and their observation
                                          2099   Other                 Includes issues related to other government operations subtopics
                                                                       Includes issues related to national parks, memorials, historic sites, and recreation,
                                          2101   National Parks
                                                                       including the management and staffing of cultural sites
                                                                       Includes issues related to indigenous affairs, indigenous lands, and assistance to
                                          2102   Indigenous Affairs
                                                                       indigenous people
     Includes issues related to general                                Includes issues related to natural resources, public lands, and forest management,
                                          2103   Public Lands
21   public lands, water management,                                   including forest fires, livestock grazing
     and terrorial issues                                              Includes issues related to water resources, water resource development and civil works,
                                          2104   Water Resources
                                                                       flood control, and research
                                                 Dependencies &
                                          2105                         Includes issues related to territorial and dependency issues and devolution
                                                 Territories
                                          2199   Other                 Includes issues related to other public lands policy subtopics
     Includes issues related to general
23                                        2300   General               Includes issues related to general cultural policy issues
     cultural policy issues
