                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE INTERGENERATIONAL EFFECTS OF THE VIETNAM DRAFT ON RISKY
                             BEHAVIORS

                                        Monica Deza
                                        Alvaro Mezza

                                     Working Paper 27830
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27830


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




This paper does not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Board or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful to Sarena Goodman, Daniel Ringo, Kamila
Sommer, Jason Fletcher and Jeffrey Smith for detailed comments on earlier versions of this
manuscript. We are also grateful to participants of the 2019 Southern Economics Association
conference, 2020 Federal System Micro Conference and Economics department seminar
participants at Tulane University, Temple University, Rutgers University, University of
Connecticut, as well as participants at the Center for Demography of Health and Aging at
University of Wisconsin Madison.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Monica Deza and Alvaro Mezza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Intergenerational Effects of the Vietnam Draft on Risky Behaviors
Monica Deza and Alvaro Mezza
NBER Working Paper No. 27830
September 2020
JEL No. I1,J13

                                           ABSTRACT

We exploit the natural experiment provided by the Vietnam lottery draft to evaluate the
intergenerational effect of fathers' draft eligibility on children's propensity to engage in risky
health behaviors during adolescence using the NLSY97. Draft eligibility increases measures of
substance use, intensity of use, decreases age of initiation--particularly for marijuana--and
increases measures of delinquency. We explore potential mechanisms: Draft eligibility affects
paternal parenting styles and attitudes towards the respondent, environmental aspects, and even
maternal factors. Results are robust to alternative specifications and falsification diagnostics. Our
results indicate that previous analyses underestimate the full negative effects of draft eligibility.


Monica Deza
Department of Economics
Hunter College
City University of New York
New York, NY 10065
and NBER
monica.deza@hunter.cuny.edu

Alvaro Mezza
Research and Statistics
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20551
alvaro.a.mezza@frb.gov
                                                  1. Introduction
         A vast literature documents the important effects of the Vietnam draft on long-term
outcomes of the generation directly affected by it, such as on earnings losses (Angrist, 1990),
crime (Rohlfs, 2009; Lindo and Stoecker, 2014), federal transfer income program participation
(Angrist et al., 2010), education (Angrist and Chen, 2011; Card and Lemieux, 2001),
employment (Autor et al., 2011; Autor et al., 2016; Coile et al., 2015) and disability status
(Angrist et al., 2011). Another strand of influential research highlights the extent to which shocks
and policies that directly alter outcomes of one generation can also have important long-run
effects on succeeding generations.2 Merging these strands of literature, this paper explores the
intergenerational effect of fathers' draft eligibility on their children's propensity to engage in
risky health behaviors, such as substance use, and delinquent acts. Our estimates reveal large
adverse effects of the Vietnam draft on these risky outcomes on the subsequent generation and
suggest that previous estimates of the direct effects of the draft on the generation directly
affected by it understate the full extent to which the Vietnam War affected communities.
         Our empirical strategy exploits the randomized variation that occurred as a result of the
Vietnam draft lottery and compares children of fathers who were eligible for the draft with
children of fathers who were not.3 Given the random nature of the lottery, draft- and non-draft-
eligible fathers were comparable, except that draft-eligible fathers were called to report for
potential induction into the military.4 We exploit this randomized variation and the information
on both respondent (i.e., children) and parents provided in the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth 1997 (NLSY97) to estimate the effect of draft eligibility on children's risky behaviors, as
defined by substance use and delinquent acts. Our findings indicate that paternal draft eligibility


2
  Our study contributes to a literature that focuses on shocks that affects the parental generation without directly
affecting their children's generation. The circumstances analyzed by these studies range from the 1918 flu (Richter
and Robling, 2013, Cook et al., 2019) and nuclear (Black et al., 2019) in utero exposure, to quasi-experimental
variation in parental education (Black et al., 2005; Oreopoulos et al., 2006) and lottery wins (Bleakley and Ferrie,
2016; Cesarini et al., 2016) and estimate the intergenerational effects on outcomes such as educational attainment,
socioeconomic status, and cognitive scores.
3
  The Vietnam draft lottery randomly assigned lottery numbers to each exact date of birth (RSN) for males born
between 1944 and 1952 and called for induction those with low lottery numbers until the number of needed
inductions were met. Treated children are those whose fathers got a low lottery number. See the background section
for more details.
4
  The 1969 lottery--that affected men born between 1944 and 1950--had an implementation issue that potentially
affected the randomization process and, as a result, individuals born later in the year were more likely to be draft-
eligible (Fienberg, 1971). See the background section for more details and the results section for how we approach
this issue.

                                                          2
had the following effects on children's risky behaviors. First, we show that draft eligibility
increased the probability to have consumed marijuana by age 18, decreased the age of marijuana
initiation, and increased measures of marijuana consumption. Second, draft eligibility reduced
the age of cigarette initiation. Third, draft eligibility increased measures of hard drugs
consumption (though these effects are statistically significant only at a 10 percent level). Fourth,
draft eligibility increased the probability of engaging in delinquent behaviors. Results are robust
to a variety of specifications, different subsamples, and falsification diagnostics where we use
maternal exact date of birth to determine draft eligibility instead of paternal exact date of birth.
         There are many potential ways in which fathers' draft eligibility could increase children's
propensity to engage in risky behaviors. Draft eligibility could lead to military service and
military service could affect veterans' negatively by increasing opioids use (Robins et al., 1974;
Cesur and Sabia, 2016), psychiatric conditions such as PTSD (Jordan et al., 1992), propensity to
commit violent crimes and incarceration (Rohlfs, 2009; Lindo and Stoecker, 2014; Wang and
Flores-Lagunes, 2020), domestic violence against the partner and children (Cesur and Sabia,
2016), or by lowering socioeconomic status of the household by precluding soldiers from labor
market experience, which ultimately decreases wages (Angrist, 1990; Imbens and van der
Klaauw, 1995). Draft eligibility could also lead to draft avoidance behaviors. Engaging in
delinquent activity and crime could lead to draft avoidance (Kuziemko, 2010; Wang and Flores-
Lagunes, 2020), as having a criminal record would lead to failing the moral evaluation of the
pre-induction exam required to be passed to be drafted (Suttler, 1970, Shapiro and Striker,
1970).5 Additionally, refusing to serve after receiving a low lottery number could lead to
convictions and prison sentences according to the draft law (Baskir and Strauss, 1978).6 These
direct, negative effects of the draft on eligible fathers could in turn indirectly affect their
children, making them more likely to engage in risky behaviors7.


5
  A pre-induction exam (consisting of a physical health, mental health, and moral evaluation) was required to
determine whether draft-eligible men needed to report for induction (Semi-Annual Report of the Director of
Selective Service 1967, Bitler and Schmidt, 2011).
6
  The draft could also have positive effects on those fathers affected by it, which could, in turn, affect their children
positively. In particular, military service could affect veterans' positively by providing training, imparting discipline,
or allowing former soldiers to benefit from the GI Bill benefits, which ultimate increases education (Angrist and
Chen, 2011). Additionally, enrolling in universities to avoid the draft--also referred as educational deferment--
would increase parental college attendance and college retention among those avoiding serving, thereby positively
affecting the fathers' labor market outcomes and wages (Card and Lemieux, 2001).
7
  Evidence indicates that draft avoidance through exemptions was not prevalent for the group of fathers under our
study. First, draft avoidance through spousal and paternal exemptions were no longer available at the time the

                                                            3
        While we do not have information on many of these potential direct effects of the lottery
draft on the generation of fathers affected by it (such as drug consumption, suffering of PTSD or
incarceration records), we find that parenting styles, attitudes towards the children and the
environment where children were raised differ by fathers' draft eligibility, potentially driving
children of draft-eligible fathers to engage more in risky behaviors. More specifically, we first
find strong evidence that paternal draft eligibility negatively affects potential determinants of
father-children relationship, such as parenting styles and attitudes from the father towards the
child.8 Draft eligibility affects parenting styles of both parents, by increasing the likelihood that
both parents are "unresponsive" and "undemanding.9 Additionally, draft eligibility affects the
attitude fathers have towards their children, as fathers are less likely to help them, and more
likely to cancel plans on them (as reported by the children). Second, we find that children of
draft-eligible fathers grow up in environments more conducive to engaging in risky behavior, as
evidenced by, for example, interviewers being less likely to report feeling safe in the residence or
neighborhood of draft-eligible fathers and children being exposed to school peers that are more
likely to engage in risky health behaviors (e.g., smoking cigarettes, getting drunk, using drugs,
and having sex).10 These findings are consistent with previous literature that indicates that sons
of draft-eligible fathers reside in lower mobility counties and lower income zip codes (Goodman
and Isen, 2020). Third, we find that children's scores on aptitude tests do not differ by fathers'
draft eligibility. Additionally, paternal draft eligibility does not affect pre-determined maternal
characteristics through assortative mating, as measured by the probability that the respondent's
mother was living with her biological parents by age 14. Thus, neither lower school performance
nor differences in mothers' characteristics seem to be behind the higher probability of children



lotteries occurred (Bitler and Schmidt, 2012). Second, avoidance through educational deferments were not prevalent
(Card and Lemieux, 2001) and they would presumably raise human capital of those draft-eligible and generating an
environment less conducive of risky health behaviors which would work against the direction of our results.
8
  Given that the NLSY97 respondents were born between 1980 and 1984, the results cannot be attributed to father's
absence during war and, hence, the potential mechanisms are not driven by paternal war exposure directly, but,
likely, in part, by the long-term consequences of it.
9
  Demandingness refers to the extent to which parents control their children's behavior or demand their maturity,
while responsiveness refers to the degree parents are accepting and sensitive to their children's emotional and
developmental needs. The father is more likely to be "uninvolved" (unresponsive and undemanding) and the mother
less likely to be "authoritative" (responsive and demanding).
10
   The NLSY97 defines peers as kids in the grade of the respondent. Thus, peers reflect the choice of where the
parents decided to live rather than a choice based on friendship of the respondent.

                                                        4
engaging in risky behaviors. Finally, we also present evidence that paternal draft eligibility
affects maternal health negatively.11
         Our study contributes to three bodies of literature. First, we contribute to the literature on
identification of causal intergenerational effects of shocks and policies (e.g., Black et al. 2019,
Oreopoulos et al. 2018, Cesarini et al. 2016).12 In this particular strand, we add to the nascent
literature on the intergenerational effects of the Vietnam draft, which to date has mostly
concentrated on estimating the effects on military service and labor market outcomes (Goodman
and Isen, 2020; Johnson and Dawes, 2016).13 Our study focuses on the effects of draft eligibility
on children's outcomes among cohorts that were born after the Vietnam War was over (1980-
1984), which allows us to estimate the effect of long-term household circumstances isolated from
the potential effects of fathers being absent while serving in the military.14 To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first study to establish that draft eligibility affected the next generation's
propensity to engage in risky behaviors.15
         Second, our study also contributes to the vast literature that explores important long-term
costs of the Vietnam lottery draft and war (e.g., Angrist, 1990; Autor et al, 2011) that should


11
   Data do not allow us to disentangle whether the differential maternal health between draft- and non-draft-eligible
men is driven by selection (e.g., draft-eligible men marry unhealthier women) or by a direct effect of draft eligibility
(e.g. the mental health status of the husband affects the mental and physical health status of the wife). However, the
evidence we find that children's aptitude test do not differ by fathers' draft eligibility and that mothers do not differ
in pre-determined characteristics suggests that a direct effect of draft eligibility is more likely to be the cause of the
differential maternal health.
12
   Identifying causal intergenerational effects of policies that affect parental inputs on children's risky health
behaviors is challenging due to the limited availability of household data that provide information on both parental
inputs and children's risky health behaviors. Chalfin and Deza (2015a,b) exploit variation induced by changes in
compulsory schooling laws in the United States and the household survey nature of the NLSY79 to study the effect
of parental education on risky health behaviors and find that increasing parental education reduces delinquent
behaviors and substance use among children.
13
   More specifically, Goodman and Isen (2020) find that father's draft eligibility negatively affected son's earnings
and labor force participation, and increased the probability of enlisting in the military. Relatedly, Campante and
Yanagizawa-Drott (2015), by pooling information on war service in World War I, World War II, Korean and
Vietnam wars, find that father's war service increased the probability of son's military service in times of war, but
decreased military service outside of wartime. Finally, Johnson and Dawes (2016) find that father's draft eligibility
negatively affected children's political and civic participation.
14
   National level inductions rose from fiscal year 1960 to fiscal year 1968 and then decreased until the draft
suspension in 1973. There were approximately 2.25 million men inducted over this period, but men who enlisted
voluntarily were still the majority of those who served in the armed forces, and were approximately two thirds.
Overall, during the Vietnam Conflict, more than 8 million Americans served in the armed forces (Bitler and
Schmidt, 2012).
15
   An exception is Goodman and Isen (2020), who exploit incarceration data that the IRS receives on the
incarcerated population, and find that children of draft-eligible fathers are more likely to have been in prison as
young adults. Thus, our results that children from draft-eligible fathers are more likely to engage in risky health
behaviors during adolescence might translate into more chances of spending time in prison as young adults.

                                                            5
dictate compensation policies to those affected by the draft. Finally, our study contributes to the
literature on determinants of adolescent substance use and delinquency by highlighting, for
example, the potential role of parental inputs and the extent to which these parental inputs are
affected by draft eligibility. Examining potential determinants of adolescent substance use and
delinquency is crucial for policy in order to prevent long-term substance use, potential escalation
to hard drugs, and potential escalation of these delinquent acts into more serious crimes.16 Given
the medical literature that indicates that the brain is still developing in adolescence (Giedd, 2004;
Meier et al, 2012) and that early consumption can increase substance disorders later in life
(Winters and Arria, 2011; Casey et al, 2008), adolescent substance use is particularly costly to
society relative to adult substance use.17 Moreover, as adolescence coincides with a period where
individuals make several important decisions in life, such as whether or not to go to college and
invest in human capital accordingly, substance use during these crucial ages may have long-term
effects in labor market outcomes and educational attainment (Mezza and Buchinsky,
forthcoming).
        Because of the changes that have occurred over time, it is important to discuss the extent
to which our findings apply to today's environment and military context. Most importantly,
today's military service is based on volunteering. Men who volunteer to serve could be different
in several unobservable ways to men who serve because a lottery pushed them to. Additionally,
the current system based on volunteering eliminates incentives to change behaviors to avoid
serving. Thus, the extrapolation of our results to the current environment of voluntary
enlistments should be done with care. That said, under the current context, it is still relevant to
understand the unintended consequences--whether through draft avoidance or military service--
of a lottery draft system designed to increase the number of individuals available to serve during
times of war, as a lottery system similar to the one applied during the Vietnam War is expected
to be resumed in times of national emergency, as reported by the Selective Service System.18
This highlights the relevance of this study, not only from a historical perspective, but also for




16
   Consuming soft drugs during adolescence is more likely to lead to consuming harder drugs than consuming soft
drugs during adulthood (Lynskey et al, 2006; Deza, 2015; Yu and Williford, 1992).
17
   U.S. students have one of the highest rates of drug use when compared with 36 European countries for which
comparable representative samples exist (Mezza and Buchinsky, forthcoming).
18
   https://www.sss.gov/About/Events-after-Draft.

                                                       6
future reference. In the conclusions section we expand on additional factors that should be
considered when interpreting our results in the current context.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the background.
Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 describes the main regressions specifications, robustness
checks, and falsification diagnostics. Section 5 describes the results for the main findings as well
as the mechanisms. Finally, Section 6 summarizes and concludes.


                                          2. Background
       Due to the shortage of voluntary enlistments over the Vietnam War from 1965 to 1975,
the Selective Service system implemented the Vietnam draft lottery in order to increase the
number of men who could serve in the military. Not everybody qualified to serve in the Armed
Forces. Men were required to register with their local draft board upon turning 18, where they
would be classified as exempted, deferred or available for service based on information provided
in a classification questionnaire. Those who were classified as available for service were required
to report for a pre-induction exam (consisting of a physical health, mental health, and moral
evaluation), which determined whether they would be required to report for induction if they
were draft-eligible according to the Vietnam draft lottery (Bitler and Schmidt, 2011).
       Three national lotteries led to induction. The first lottery, which occurred in 1969, applied
to men born between 1944 and 1950. The second and third lotteries took place in 1970 and 1971,
respectively, but these lotteries only applied to men who turned 18 in the year of the lottery,
hence men born in 1951 and 1952, respectively.
       The Vietnam lottery draft randomly assigned each potential birthday to a Random
Sequence Number (RSN). For instance, those born in September 1 in years 1944-1950 were
assigned a RSN of 1 in the 1969 lottery. The RSN determined the order in which an individual
was asked to report to the local draft board for potential induction, where those with a RSN of 1
were the first group at risk of induction. Additional RSN numbers were called in increasing order
until the military manpower requirements for that lottery were met. The military manpower
requirements were determined by the Secretary of Defense and the Selective Service through
monthly requests at the national level for a particular number of men to be included into the
Armed Forces. The last RSN called for service in the 1969 lottery was 195, which is referred to
as the highest Administrative Processing number (APN). The APN for the second and third

                                                 7
lotteries were 125 and 95, respectively. Men with a RSN below or at the corresponding APN are
referred to as draft-eligible.19 That number (APN) would be divided among states according to a
formula and the local draft boards would deliver the number of registrants to induct (Bitler and
Schmidt, 2011).
         While draft eligibility had a significant effect on military service, it does not perfectly
predict military participation for the following reasons. First, men who were not draft-eligible
could have still served in the military by volunteering. Lindo and Stoecker (2014) present
evidence that for the cohorts affected by the 1969 lottery, military participation of those born
earlier was less likely affected by the national lottery, as they may had already been called to
serve in the military by the local drafts by the time the national lottery occurred. As a result, draft
eligibility is a particularly stronger predictor of military service for men born between 1948 and
1952 (Lindo and Stoecker, 2014). Second, men born in draft-eligible days could fail to classify
as available for service if they failed their pre-induction exam, which resulted in vast
heterogeneity in the extent to which individuals served in the military, conditional on being
draft-eligible across states (Bitler and Schmidt, 2011). Third, draft-eligible men could apply for
exemptions through educational deferments20, marital or paternity reasons.21 However,
educational deferments were not so prevalent (Card and Lemieux, 2001) and educational gains
among those affected by the lottery are most likely a consequence of service rather than
avoidance (Angrist and Chen, 2011). Fourth, draft-eligible men could refuse to serve, becoming
draft offenders (Baskir and Strauss, 1978).22
         According to the Military Training and Service Act of 1951, men who were drafted were
required to serve for two years. However, the duration of obligations for enlisted men varied
depending on the military branch, ranging from two years for the Marine Corps, three years for

19
   For the remaining of the paper, we refer to men with a RSN below or at the corresponding APN as draft-eligible.
20
   Card and Lemieux (2001) present evidence that draft avoidance through educational deferments was not very
prevalent, as the national cohort induction risk only increased college attendance rates for men relative to women by
4 to 6 percentage points in the late 1960s. Educational deferments, which allowed delay or forgo service, were
available for full-time male college students seeking a four-year degree, as long as they remained in good standing
until they turned 24. Also, graduate school deferments were available for college graduates, but were only issued
until 1968, before the lottery was implemented. New educational deferments were not given after 1971, but existing
deferments still grandfathered. Finally, occupational deferments were issued until 1970.
21
   Paternity deferments were available until 1970 due to executive order 11527, which stated that paternity
deferments were not going to be granted for children conceived on or after April 23, 1970. Marital deferments,
meanwhile, ended in the mid-1960s (Bitler and Schmidt, 2012; Davis and Dolbeare, 1969).
22
   Almost half of the 570,000 traceable draft avoiders were accused of draft offenders and about 22,000 of them
were convicted in trial (Peterson, 1998).

                                                          8
the Army, and four years for the Navy and Air Force (Moskos, 1970; Bitler and Schmidt, 2011).
Men drafted were sometimes assigned to a particularly type of training (e.g. infantry, cooking,
and construction, among others) before receiving their permanent assignments (Moskos, 1970).23
The combination of time spent in training and on military duty combined resulted in most drafted
individuals being in service for approximately two years (Moskos, 1975, Bitler and Schmidt,
2011).
         The 1969 lottery had an issue that potentially affected the nature of the randomized
process involved in the lottery and, as a result, individuals born later in the year were more likely
to be draft-eligible (Fienberg, 1971). The process involved coding each potential birthday onto a
capsule, which was added month by month into a drawer and only shuffled after each month was
added. As a result, birthdays corresponding to later months in the year were more easily
reachable and those born in later months were more likely to be draft-eligible.24 The later
lotteries implemented a different process as a response to the potential imperfect random nature
of the first lottery. The process for the 1970 and 1971 lotteries involved coding each potential
birthday onto balls that were drawn from a glass container. Just like before, the RSN was
assigned based on the order in which the balls were drawn.


                                                       3. Data
         The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97) collects longitudinal
information for a nationally representative sample of 8,984 respondents between the ages of 12
and 18 in 1997. More important, the NLSY provides four sets of variables that are crucial for this
study: Self-reported data on risky health behaviors, self-reported measures of delinquent
behaviors, the exact date of birth of the parents, and measures of parenting styles and family
environment. Given that the goal of this study is to identify the causal effect of the Vietnam
lottery on risky behaviors, as well as on potential family circumstances and parenting styles that
might lead to those behaviors, the NLSY97 is a nearly ideal dataset, as it allows us to match the


23
   Draft-eligible men often preferred to enlist prior to being called to report for service, as that could allow them to
enter military service in branches under better circumstances.
24
   We include paternal month of birth fixed effects in all our specifications. In addition, we explore with one
additional specification where we control for year-by-month of birth fixed effects to overcome the potential omitted
variable bias that would occur if people born in later months are differentially likely to have children who are more
likely to engage in risky behaviors (Angrist and Chen, 2011; Angrist, Chen and Frandsen, 2010; Conley and
Heerwig, 2009; Eisenberg and Rowe, 2009).

                                                           9
father's exact date of birth to a lottery number to indicate whether the father was draft-eligible or
not. That said, a drawback is the relatively small sample size.
         The first set of variables is the self-reported measures of risky health behaviors. This is,
alcohol, marijuana, cigarettes, and hard drug consumption at the intensive and extensive margins,
as well as the age of initiation into the use of these substances. In particular, the NLSY97 asked
each respondent whether they had ever consumed each of these drugs at the initial wave (and if
missing at the initial wave, the NLSY97 asked them this question in early, subsequent rounds).
Additionally, every year after the initial wave, respondents were asked whether they had
consumed each of these drugs in between interviews. Using this information, we compute two
time-invariant measures of drug use: Ever used each of these substances by age 18 and the age of
initiation.25 We also estimate the effect of draft eligibility on two time-varying measures: An
indicator for whether the respondent consumed each of these drugs in the past year (i.e., since the
last interview) and the natural logarithm of the number of days in which the substance was used
in the month prior to the interview.26 An exception is for hard drug consumption, where we only
have information about whether the drug was consumed in the last year and the number of times
(not days) in which the respondent consumed it in the past year.
         The second set of variables is the self-reported measures of delinquent activities. There
are tradeoffs to measuring criminal activity using self-reported data as opposed to administrative
or arrest data. Given that we are focusing on juvenile delinquency, self-reported data of
delinquent activity is particularly relevant as the delinquent acts we are focusing on (attacking
somebody, stealing, selling drugs, or belonging to a gang27) are very unlikely to end up in an
arrest among minors (Levitt and Lochner 2001).28 We create an indicator for whether the
respondent committed any of these delinquent acts by age 18. Additionally, we use a
delinquency index created by the NLSY97.


25
   We focus on substance use early in life due to the vast literature that highlights the particularly detrimental role of
early initiation in substance use on cognitive abilities (Giedd, 2004; Meier et al, 2012; Winters and Arria, 2011;
Casey et al, 2008; Bossong et al., 2012a, 2012b)) and the particular increase in the probability of transitioning into
harder drugs among those who start alcohol and marijuana consumption at early ages (Deza, 2015).
26
   Our measure is the natural logarithm of days of consumption in the past month plus one.
27
   The NLSY97 also provides indicators for whether the respondent ever owned a gun, destroyed property, runaway
or committed other property-related delinquent acts. Since these behaviors are vaguely defined and are ambiguously
considered a delinquent behavior, we focus on the previously mentioned set of delinquent acts (i.e., attacking
somebody, stealing, selling drugs, or belonging to a gang), which are unambiguously defined as criminal behaviors.
28
   While minor delinquent acts among teenagers may be largely missed if we rely on arrest data, crime self-reports
are usually highly correlated with official arrest data (Farrington, 1973).

                                                           10
         The third set of variables is the exact date of birth of the parents, which allows us to link
the date of birth with an exact lottery number for those born between 1944 and 1952.29 The
NLSY97 collected the exact date of birth of parents only in the first wave. Additionally, the
exact day of birth is only reported for parents who lived with the respondent in the first wave,
independently of whether the parent was the biological parent or a "parent figure" (such as a
step-parent or adoptive parent).30 For the biological parents who did not live with the respondent
in 1997, the most we observe is the year of birth, which is not sufficient to link the parent to a
lottery number. Thus, we can only estimate the effect of having a draft-eligible biological father
(or father figure) on children who are living with their biological father (or father figure) in 1997.
As the NLSY97 is a small sample (and only a relatively small share of fathers were born
between 1944 and 1952)31, our main analysis focuses on estimating the effect of draft eligibility
for every children whose father figure (whether biological or not) was affected by the Vietnam
lottery, with the intention to maximize statistical power. That said, we present estimates in the
online appendix that indicate the results are similar when we constraint the sample to biological
fathers. For the reminder of the paper, we refer to the father figure (mother figure) simply as
father (mother).32
         The fourth set of variables contains measures of parenting styles and family environment.
The psychology literature has classified two dimensions of parenting styles
(responsive/unresponsive and demanding/undemanding) into four types using the Baumrid
typology (Baumrid, 1968; Maccoby and Martin, 1983; Doepke and Zilibotti, 2017): authoritative
(responding and demanding), authoritarian (unresponsive and demanding), permissive
(responsive and undemanding), and uninvolved (unresponsive and undemanding). Authoritative
parenting style is expected to maximize cultural intergenerational transmission, as it is defined
by parents trying to shape their children's behaviors to their own preferences. Previous literature


29
   Following the literature, we use the crosswalk relating birthdates to the numbers that determine draft eligibility
from Angrist (1990), available in: https://economics.mit.edu/faculty/angrist/data1/data/angrist90.
30
   Out of the 8,984 children in the NLSY97, 7,862 reported a valid year of birth for their biological mother, 8,233
for their mother figure, 4,853 for their biological father and 5,958 for their father figure.
31
   Father figures of the NLY97 (whether biological or not) were born between 1920 and 1973, with 34 percent of
them born between 1944 and 1952. Figure 1 presents the histogram for paternal year of birth.
32
   While the lottery number was only attached to the father's date of birth, we also use the mother's date of birth as a
falsification test. 22 percent of the mothers were born between 1944 and 1952. Figure 2 presents the histogram for
maternal year of birth.


                                                          11
indicates that authoritative parenting is more likely among military parents than among civilian
parents (Speck and Riggs, 2013). In addition to parenting styles, the NLSY97 reports aptitude
test results for the respondent and measures of environment, such as the share of peers that
smoke, get drunk, use drugs or have sex. The NLSY97 also reports variables about the
household, such as whether the respondent lives in a residential neighborhood, whether the
interviewer was concerned for his or her safety in the respondent's neighborhood, the household
income, and wealth. Moreover, the NLSY97 reports separately labor market outcomes of the
father and the mother, such as education, average hours of work, and self-reported health.
Finally, it also reports attitudes from the parents towards the respondent, such as whether they
praise, criticize, help or blame the respondent, or whether they cancel plans on the respondent or
know information about the respondent as well as the respondent's friends.
        Besides the small sample size, there are three other potential data limitations. First, the
longitudinal nature of the NLSY97 means that we only observe individuals who are not lost due
to attrition and who answered questions related to their risky behaviors. We address this issue of
self-selection by estimating the effect of paternal draft eligibility on the probability the
respondent was not lost due to attrition until age 18 and present the null results in Table A2. We
find draft eligibility has no effect on the probability of attrition.
        Second, even conditional on not being lost due to attrition, respondents with a draft-
eligible father could be differentially likely to respond questions related to drug consumption and
delinquent behaviors. However, this is not the case, as over 99 percent of respondents who were
not lost due to attrition in 1998 have a valid response to the substance use related questions.33
        A third concern is the self-reported nature of the data. There are two reasons why we
believe this is not an issue: (i) NLSY97 collects answers to sensitive questions, such as about
substance use and delinquent behaviors, using computer-assisted self-interviews (ACASI), which
reduces underreporting of risky behaviors compared to other interview methods (Brener et al,
2003); (ii) the reported rates of use presented in the NLSY97 are consistent with two non-




33
  Questions regarding hard drugs were first answered in 1998, while questions regarding alcohol, marijuana, and
cigarettes were asked starting in 1997.

                                                       12
longitudinal major datasets on drug use (i.e., the National Study of Drug Use and Health,
NSDUH, and Monitoring the Future, MTF).34
         From the entire sample of 8,984 adolescents, 5,958 respondents had a non-missing
paternal date of birth, and only 2,029 of these fathers were born between 1944 and 1952. Among
those, 1,759 respondents had a father with non-missing place of birth and 1,464 of them were
born in the United States. We limit our sample to the 1,464 respondents whose fathers were born
in the U.S. between 1944 and 1952 to ensure fathers were affected by the lottery (as the NLSY97
does not contain information on fathers' citizenship status). Table 1 presents summary statistics
for the overall sample of 8,984 respondents in the first column. The second column presents
summary statistics for the subsample of interest that is composed of 1,464 respondents whose
father is born in the U.S. between 1944 and 1952 and hence were subject to the lottery.35 The
third and fourth columns are composed of the subsample of respondents whose fathers' draft-
eligibility status was determined by the lottery (non-draft-eligible for column 3 and draft-eligible
for column 4).
         The descriptive statistics presented in Table 1 regarding the full sample (column 1)
relative to the subsample of interest (column 2) can be summarized as follows. First, the share of
mothers born in the U.S in our subsample of interest is 96 percent, relative to 84 percent in the
full sample. The difference reflects that the subsample of interest is restricted to U.S. born
fathers. Second, respondents in the subsample of interest are less likely to be black (15 percent
relative to 26 percent) or Hispanic (10 percent relative to 21 percent). Regarding risky health
behaviors, the share of respondents who had consumed the different substances in the subsample
of interest and the full sample is, in most cases, very similar. For example, 43.7 percent and 44.2
percent consumed marijuana, 60.3 percent and 60.2 percent consumed cigarettes, and 13.3
percent and 13.5 percent consumed hard drugs in the subsample of interest and the full sample,
respectively. Similarly, the starting ages are very similar between the subsample of interest and
the full sample. Overall, the subsample of interest and the full sample are very similar in


34
   See Table A1, that corresponds to Table A3 in Deza (2015), which compares the rates of past year drug use, past
month drug use, lifetime drug use, and starting age of drug consumption in the NLSY97, NSDUH, and MTF. For a
more detailed discussion about comparisons among these datasets, see Deza (2015), Online Appendix B.
35
   Fathers who were not subject to the lottery (excluded from the subsample of interest) are those born outside the
U.S., born before 1944, or born after 1952. Those excluded had a lower share of mothers born in the U.S. (81
percent relative to 84 percent in the overall sample) and were more likely to be minorities (28 percent black and 23
percent Hispanic relative to 26 percent and 21 percent in the overall sample).

                                                         13
characteristics and outcomes other than the percent who consumed alcohol, the time-varying
measures of substance consumption36, parenting styles and attitudes towards their children37, and
age of the father and age of the respondent.
         Within the subsample of interest, the last two columns present summary statistics for the
subsample of respondents whose father was non-draft-eligible (column 3) and whose father was
draft-eligible (column 4), respectively, which provide the following salient stylized facts that
motivate the paper. First, the starting age of marijuana, cigarette, and hard drug consumption are
lower among respondents with a draft-eligible father. Second, the probability of having ever
consumed marijuana, cigarettes, and hard drugs by age 18 are higher among respondents with a
draft-eligible father. Similarly, the time-varying consumption of marijuana, alcohol, and hard
drugs are also higher among respondents with a draft-eligible father. Third, the probability of
reporting engaging in delinquent behaviors by age 18 is also higher among respondents with a
draft-eligible father. Fourth, respondents with a draft-eligible father are more likely to have a
father that is uninvolved, critical, less helpful, more likely to cancel plans on them and more
likely to know very little about the respondent, friends of the respondent or parents of the
respondent's friends.38 Finally, respondents with a draft-eligible father have school peers with
higher prevalence of using substances (alcohol, tobacco and dugs) and reside in neighborhoods
that are less residential and perceived as less safe by the interviewer. Overall, raw summary
statistics indicate that respondents with draft-eligible fathers have higher rates of participation in
risky behaviors and measures of parental inputs and environment that are more conducive to
engaging in risky behaviors than respondents with draft-ineligible fathers.


                                                    4. Methods


36
   The fact that respondents in the subsample of interest have higher measures of time-varying substance
consumption can be reconciled with the fact that the respondents are older, on average, in the subsample of interest.
37
   The fact that parents are more permissive and less uninvolved in the subsample of interest could be reconciled
with the fact that parents in the subsample of interest are born in the U.S. and hence the differences could be
attributed, in part, to cultural characteristics in parenting across countries. Additionally, the subsample of interest
excludes households where the father was not living with the respondent in the first wave, which could also be
behind the differences in parenting styles.
38
   The potential answers for attitudes from the father towards the respondent (praises, criticizes, helps, blames, and
cancels plans) are: never, rarely, sometimes, usually, and always. We group them into different bins due to small cell
sizes in some of the choices. The potential answers for how much the father knows about the respondent (knows the
respondent's friends, the parents of the respondent's friends, and what the respondent is usually doing) are: nothing,
just a little, some things, most things, and everything. Similarly, we group them into different bins as some cells
have very few observations. The grouping is described in detail in the results section.

                                                         14
       The goal of this study is to estimate the effect of the Vietnam draft lottery on the next
generation's risky behaviors exploiting the exogeneity of the draft lottery (Angrist, 1990).
Following Goodman and Isen's (2020) main strategy, in this study we estimate the full effect of
fathers' draft-eligibility on the next generation's risky behaviors, independently of whether it is
driven by military service or draft avoidance.
       The main outcomes of interest are measures of alcohol, cigarette, marijuana, and hard
drugs use as well as criminal participation by age 18. We focus on substance use during
adolescence due to the particularly significant and negative long-term effects on human capital
accumulation and labor market outcomes (Mezza and Buchinsky, forthcoming), brain
development and substance misuse (Giedd, 2004; Winters and Arria, 2011; Casey et al., 2008;
Bossong et al. 2012a, 2012b), and stepping-stone effects towards harder drugs, relative to adult
consumption (Deza, 2015). Similarly, we also focus on criminal participation by age 18 due to
the evidence that indicates that entering the criminal justice system at early ages increases the
chances of a criminal career later in life (Aizer and Doyle, 2015).
                                            A. Main Analysis
       In particular, we estimate the following difference in differences regression for time-
invariant measures of risky health behaviors on the sample of respondents whose father was born
between 1944 and 1952.


                                           $    $
             (1)!,#,$ = % + & !$ + ! + # + $( + $) + !,#,$


       !,#,$ is an indicator for time-invariant dependent variables that measure risky behaviors,
such as whether respondent i, born in year c, whose father was born on exact date of birth p, ever
consumed alcohol, cigarettes, marijuana or hard drugs by age 18 or committed delinquent acts by
age 18. The exact date of birth p includes the day, month, and year. The variable !$ is an
indicator for whether the father's exact date of birth p corresponded to a lottery number at or
below the threshold in the relevant year.
       The coefficient of interest, & , compares children of fathers who were at or below the
threshold in a given year (and, hence, who were at risk of conscription) with children of fathers
who were above the threshold (and, hence, who were not at risk of conscription). In other words,


                                                 15
& measures the causal effect of having a father who was eligible to be drafted, regardless of
whether the father actually served in the military or avoided being drafted.
         The vector of covariates ! includes indicators for whether the respondent is male, black
or Hispanic. The vector # corresponds to the respondent's year of birth fixed effect, which
addresses--among other things--that children born in different years might have faced different
environments that could make them more or less prone to engage in risky behaviors. Finally, the
       $                                                                        $
vector $( corresponds to the father's year of birth fixed effect and the vector $) to the father's
month of birth fixed effect.39 Following Goodman and Isen (2020), we cluster standard errors at
the father's exact date of birth p, but we also cluster standard errors at the paternal state of birth
level in some specifications.40
          B. Robustness Checks, Alternative Specifications, and Falsification Diagnostics
         Following Lindo and Stoecker (2014), we first consider a robustness check where we
restrict the sample to fathers born between 1948 and 1952, those more likely to be drafted based
on the lottery results. The probability of induction upon draft eligibility was higher for the 1948-
1952 cohorts for two main reasons: (i) Men born earlier who were able to serve in the military
had probably already been called to serve by the time the 1969 lottery took place (Lindo and
Stoecker, 2014) and (ii) Access to exemptions through educational deferments, marital or
paternity reasons were more limited among the younger cohorts (Bitler and Schmidt, 2011,
Goodman and Isen, 2020). While draft avoidance due to other factors is still a possibility for this
cohort (Baskir and Strauss, 1978; Kuziemko, 2010; Wang and Flores-Lagunes, 2020), sizable
and significant results for this subsample might indicate that at least part of the estimated effects
are driven by military service.
         We also explore with a specifications where we incorporate year-by-month of paternal
birth fixed effects to account for the fact that different months of birth may have been
disproportionately more likely to have lower lottery numbers in the first lottery (Lindo and
Stoecker, 2014; Conley and Heerwing, 2009; Eisenberg and Rowe, 2009; Angrist, Chen and
Frandsen, 2010; Angrist and Chen, 2011).


39
   As previous literature, we also explore with an additional specification where we substitute the father's year of
                      !                                                !
birth fixed effect, !" , and the father's month of birth fixed effect, !# , with a father's year-by-month of birth fixed
effect to adjust for the potential imperfection in the randomization of the 1969 lottery, where men born in certain
months had a disproportionately higher likelihood of being draft-eligible (Fienberg, 1971; Angrist and Chen, 2011).
40
   We also include a year fixed effect when estimating time-varying dependent variables.

                                                           16
        Additionally, while there were Federal policies regarding draft eligibility, there was
heterogeneity in the way local draft boards interpreted them (Davis and Dolbeare, 1968;
Malamud and Wosniak, 2010), which resulted in considerable variation in induction risk
between states.41 As such, we consider a specification where we incorporate father's state of
birth fixed effects to account for heterogeneity across states that is invariant across time.
        Moreover, we present several alternative specifications such as clustering standard errors
at the paternal state of birth, population-weighted regressions, and restricted to biological fathers.
Results remain robust.
        Finally, we also estimate a falsification diagnostic which consists of determining draft-
eligibility using the exact date of birth of the mother, even though women were not eligible to be
drafted. Regressions using these fake lottery numbers should speak to whether results are driven
by draft eligibility or something unrelated that correlates with the exact date of birth of parents.
                                                   5. Results
A. Measures of Substance Use
        The first and second columns of Table 2 present the effect of paternal draft eligibility on
two time-invariant measures: The probability of having ever consumed alcohol, marijuana,
cigarettes, and hard drugs by age 18 and the age of initiation into consumption, respectively. The
last two columns of the table focus on two time-varying measures of substance use, which is why
the number of observations increases from being one per respondent in the time-invariant
outcomes (columns 1 and 2) to one per respondent-year in the time-varying outcomes (columns 3
and 4).42 The outcome of interest in column 3 is an indicator of whether the respondent used a
certain drug in the year prior to the interview, while the one in column 4 is the natural logarithm
of the number of days in which a substance was consumed in the past month plus one, to avoid
dropping the observations with zero days of consumption.
        Panel A focuses on measures of alcohol consumption and indicates that paternal draft
eligibility does not affect any measure of alcohol consumption. In particular, having a draft-




41
   Some of these idiosyncrasies were exerted during the pre-induction examinations performed at local draft boards,
where draft-eligible men were subjected to a medical and mental health exams and a moral examination (Semi-
Annual Report of the Director of Selective Service, 1967; Bitler and Schmidt 2011). Bitler and Schmidt (2011)
exploit this resulting heterogeneity in induction, deferment or exemption rates.
42
   Regressions with a time-varying outcome include year fixed effects.

                                                        17
eligible father does not affect the probability that an adolescent will consume alcohol by age 18,
age of alcohol initiation or intensity of use.
         In contrast, as Panel B indicates, paternal draft eligibility affects all measures of
marijuana consumption and all these effects are statistically significant at least at a 5 percent
level. In particular, children of draft-eligible fathers are 6.9 percentage points more likely to have
consumed marijuana by age 18, relative to a base of 44 percent of respondents who report to
having ever consumed marijuana by that age. Similarly, age of marijuana initiation decreases by
one year relative to the mean of 17 years old. Regarding time-varying measures of marijuana
consumption, there is an increase in the probability of using marijuana in the past year of 4.6
percentage points, relative to 25 percent, as indicated by column 3, and in the number of days of
usage in the past month by 9.4 percent. In a nutshell, Panel B can be summarized as father's draft
eligibility increases every measure of marijuana consumption, as measured by higher probability
of ever use, younger marijuana starting age, use in the past year, and more days of consumption
in the month prior to the interview.
         Panel C indicates that father's draft eligibility lowers age of initiation into cigarette
consumption (0.56 years, relative to a mean of 15 years) and this effect is statistically significant
at a 5 percent level. Finally, Panel D presents some evidence of an increase in hard drug
consumption, but the effects are only statistically significant at a 10 percent level. The
probability of ever using hard drugs by age 18 increases by 3.7 percentage points, from a
baseline of 13 percent. The probability of using hard drugs in the past year increases by 1.7
percentage points (relative to a 6.5 percent mean) and the number of times hard drugs were used
in the past month increases by 6.7 percent. Overall, Table 2 indicates that paternal draft
eligibility increases the respondent's propensity to consume substances.43


B. Measures of Criminal Activity
         The NLSY97 asks respondents to report whether they committed certain delinquent or
criminal acts (attacking somebody, stealing, selling drugs, belonging to a gang) in addition to
other acts that are associated with delinquent acts (owning a gun, destroying property, running



43
  We also examine the effects separately by gender of the respondent and find that the effects are in line with the
ones already discussed and are statistically significant at the conventional level for male respondents (Table A7). On
the other hand, the effects for female respondents are imprecise and smaller in magnitude (Table A8).

                                                         18
away, and other property-destruction related acts). We focus on the delinquent or criminal acts
and create a time-invariant indicator for whether the respondent ever committed any of them
while being under age 18. Panel E of Table 2 presents evidence that having a draft-eligible father
increases the probability of committing a criminal act by approximately 6.7 percentage points,
relative to a mean of 54 percent (column 1).44
        The NLSY97 also reports risk index measures calculated based on the raw data reported
by respondents. In particular, we look at whether having a draft-eligible father has an effect on
the delinquency risk index.45 A higher delinquency risk score means a higher risk. Consistent
with the findings on delinquent behaviors, the second column of Panel E Table 2 presents
evidence that having a draft-eligible father increases the delinquency risk index of the respondent
and this increase is statistically significant at a 1 percent level.46


C. Robustness Checks, Alternative Specifications, and Falsification Diagnostics




Earlier Cohorts Service and Draft Avoidance Through Exemptions
        While fathers born between 1944 and 1952 were subjected to the Vietnam lottery draft,
previous literature (Angrist and Chen, 2010; Lindo and Stoecker, 2014) indicates that draft
eligibility had the strongest effect on service for the later cohorts, those born between 1948 and
1952 (i.e., those who were closer to 19 years of age when affected by the lottery) for two reasons.
First, "capable men" in the earlier cohorts affected by the 1969 lottery could have either
volunteered or been called by local drafts prior to the implementation of the lottery and, hence,
their service was less responsive to the national lottery. Second, access to educational deferments
and marital or paternity exemptions were limited among the younger cohorts (Bitler and Schmidt,
2011, Goodman and Isen, 2020).




44
   While 54 percent seems high, some of these delinquent behaviors have a vague definition. For example, the
category "attack somebody" could be aggravated assault or could be simply being in a fight.
45
   More information on the delinquency risk index can be found here:
https://www.nlsinfo.org/site/nlsy97/nlsdocs/nlsy97/codesup/mapp9.html.
46
   While the effect of paternal draft eligibility on measures of delinquency seem unusually large, these large
differences are consistent even in the raw summary statistics presented in Table 1, where 58 (51) percent of
respondents with a draft eligible (draft ineligible) father engaged in delinquency by age 18.

                                                        19
       While we lose several observations and, hence, lose precision by restricting the sample to
respondents with fathers born between 1948 and 1952, Table 3 presents evidence that the sign
and magnitude of the effects remain in line with those in Table 2. In particular, Table 3 indicates
that paternal draft eligibility decreased the age of marijuana initiation by 1 year relative to an
average of 17 and this decrease is statistically significant at a 5 percent level. Similarly, Panel E
of Table 3 shows that the sign and magnitude of the effect on criminal activity and the risk index
remain in line with the main effects after restricting the analysis to the 1948-1952 cohort and
remain significant.
       In a nutshell, the effects on substance use and criminal activity are robust to restricting
the analysis to a group that was more likely to have served in the military as a result of the
Vietnam lottery and was less likely to have access to service exemptions. However, statistical
significance is somewhat compromised as the samples become significantly smaller.


Random Assignment of Month of Birth
       The 1969 lottery suffered from an imperfection in the randomization that led to a higher
likelihood of draft eligibility among men subjected to that lottery who were born in later months
(Fienberg, 1971). If father's month of birth is correlated with children's risky behaviors, this
imperfection in the randomization would lead to an omitted variable bias. To deal with this issue,
and following previous literature (Lindo and Stoecker, 2014; Conley and Heerwing, 2009;
Eisenberg and Rowe, 2009; Angrist, Chen and Frandsen, 2010; Angrist and Chen, 2011), we
extend our main analysis by incorporating year-by-month of paternal birth fixed effects. Table 4
indicates that controlling for father's year-by-month of birth does not change the main findings.


Alternative Specifications
       Finally, we also explore alternative specifications in the online appendix. Table A3
presents estimates corresponding to an alternative specification where we include father's state
of birth fixed effects to account for potential heterogeneity across states that is invariant across
time. Table A4 presents the results clustering the standard errors at the paternal state of birth
level. Table A5 presents the results where each observation is weighted by the weights assigned




                                                  20
to each respondent provided by the NLSY97. Table A6 restricts the analysis to biological fathers
instead of father figures.47 Results are robust to these alternative specifications.


Falsification Diagnostics
         We consider a falsification diagnostic that exploits the fact that women were not eligible
for the draft to test whether results are driven by father's draft eligibility or something specific to
the exact date of birth of the parents. If the lottery was truly random and the effects on children's
substance use were driven by fathers' draft eligibility, we would expect that draft eligibility
based on mothers' date of birth should not be relevant. Otherwise, mothers' draft eligibility could
be significant in determining children's risky behaviors. In Table 5 we present estimates when
we define draft eligibility based on the mother's exact date of birth. Results indicate that the
effects are not driven by the date of birth, but instead by the fact that fathers born in those dates
were draft-eligible.


D. Potential Mechanisms
         Our main results indicate that paternal draft eligibility increases substance use, decreases
age of substance use initiation, and increases delinquent acts among their children. A remaining
question is to explore potential mechanisms through which paternal draft eligibility could affect
risky behaviors of the next generation. While we do not observe whether draft eligibility had a
direct effect on determinants of an environment conducive of their children engaging in risky
behaviors (e.g. opioid use, PTSD, drug consumption, or incarceration records among others), we
observe a rich set of information about several factors that could have been influenced by
military service and draft avoidance that can act as mechanisms for children to engage in risky
behaviors. We divide these factors into the three following mechanisms: (1) Parenting Styles, (2)
Attitudes from father towards the respondent, and (3) Environment.


Parenting Styles




47
   The NLSY97 only contains the exact date of birth for resident fathers whether they are biological fathers or father
figures. It only provides year of birth (but not the exact date of birth) for nonresident biological fathers. Therefore,
this analysis uses the smaller subsample of biological resident fathers.

                                                          21
        There are many potential mechanisms through which being draft-eligible could have
affected parenting styles. The psychology literature classifies two dimensions of parenting
(responsive/unresponsive and demanding/undemanding) into four parenting styles: authoritative
(responding and demanding), authoritarian (unresponsive and demanding), permissive
(responsive and undemanding), and uninvolved (unresponsive and undemanding) (Baumrid,
1968; Maccoby and Martin, 1983; Doepke and Zilibotti, 2017). According to the literature, the
authoritative parenting, defined as responsive and demanding, is more prevalent among military
parents than among civilian parents (Speck and Riggs, 2013) and is expected to maximize
intergenerational transmissions as it involves parents strictly shaping their children to their
preferences.
        We estimate equation 1 using as the dependent variable an indicator for whether having a
draft-eligible father affects the parenting style of the father, as well as the parenting style of the
mother. For instance, if being draft-eligible makes the father "aware that life is too short" and,
hence, makes him be more concerned about having a strong relationship with his children and
being lenient with them, the father may be less likely to be demanding and hence his parenting
styles will be more likely to be permissive (responsive and undemanding) or uninvolved
(unresponsive and undemanding). Alternatively, if being draft-eligible makes the father feel "life
is tough" and children should be prepared for potential future adverse conditions such as war, the
father may be more demanding and, hence, his parenting style may be more likely to be
authoritarian (unresponsive and demanding) or authoritative (responsive and demanding).
        While the mother was not exposed to draft eligibility, having a child with a draft-eligible
man could have changed her parenting style as well. For instance, the mother may decide to
offset the father's permissive or uninvolved (authoritarian or authoritative) style by being more
authoritarian or authoritative (permissive or uninvolved). Alternatively, the mother may
complement the father's parenting style and reinforce the effects of being permissive/uninvolved
or authoritarian/authoritative.
        We evaluate the effect of paternal draft eligibility on the parenting style of each parent
individually and then also on an indicator of whether either parent has any given parenting style.
Panel A of Table 6 presents evidence that being draft-eligible makes the father significantly more
likely to have an "uninvolved" (unresponsive and undemanding) parenting style by 4.3
percentage points, relative to a mean of 12 percent, with no effect on the father being permissive,

                                                  22
authoritarian or authoritative. Interestingly, having a draft-eligible father also affects the
mother's parenting style. Panel B shows that mothers of children living with draft-eligible
fathers are less likely to be authoritative (responsive and demanding) by 6.5 percentage points,
relative to a 44 percent mean, and this decrease is statistically significant at a 5 percent level.
There is some evidence that these mothers are also more likely to be authoritarian (increasing the
probability by 2.8 percentage points, relative to an 11 percent mean), but this effect is
statistically significant only at a 10 percent level.48
         Finally, when we focus on the indicator for the parenting style of either parent, Panel C
indicates that having a draft-eligible father increases the probability that either parent would be
more uninvolved (unresponsive and undemanding) and less authoritative (responsive and
demanding), with no effect on being permissive or authoritarian. This evidence suggests that the
maternal parenting style follows the paternal parenting style on the dimensions of being
unresponsive and undemanding.
         Overall, paternal draft eligibility switches the parenting of the household to be less
responsive and less demanding, and this could affect the propensity to engage in risky
outcomes.49


Attitude from Father Towards the Child
         We also examine whether paternal draft eligibility affects attitudes from the father to the
child, such as whether the father praises, criticizes, helps, blames or cancels plans on the child, as
well as whether the father knows about the respondent's friends, friends' parents or overall
things about the respondent's life.
         The NLSY97 asks respondents to report whether their father praises, criticizes, helps,
blames or cancels plans on them and the answer is reported as never, rarely, sometimes, usually,
or always. Some attitudes are very prominent in paternal attitudes such that there are only few
children who report that the behavior never happens. For example, only 3.6 percent of
respondents reported that the father never praises them and only 4 percent reported that the father

48
   While the estimated effects are particularly large, it is in line with the large differences in the raw summary
statistics presented in Table 1, where 15 percent of non-draft-eligible parents are reported to be uninvolved as
opposed to 20 percent of draft-eligible fathers.
49
   While authoritative parenting is more prevalent among military parents than among civilian parents under the
usual system where men self-select into the military (Speck and Riggs, 2013), draft eligible parents are less likely to
be authoritative.

                                                          23
never helps them. Alternatively, 38 percent of respondents reported that the father never
criticizes them, 73 percent reported that the father never blames them, and 67 percent reported
that the father never cancels plans on them. We focus on indicators for whether the father never
has those given attitudes towards the respondent, except in the cases where never is a rare
occasion, in which we group never/rarely/sometimes together. Column 3 of Table 7 presents
evidence that paternal draft eligibility increases the probability that the father is rarely helpful
and this effect is statistically significant at a 5 percent level. Column 5 presents some evidence
that the father is less likely to never cancel plans with the respondent, but this effect is only
statistically significant at a 10 percent level.
         Panel B examines whether paternal draft eligibility affects the extent to which the father
knows the respondent. The NLSY97 asks the respondent how much the father knows about his
or her friends, friends' parents, and overall about what the respondent is doing. The answers are
recorded in the following five categories: knows nothing, just a little, some things, most things,
and knows everything. Consistent with the previous behaviors, we focus on an indicator of
whether the father knows nothing, unless having a father that knows nothing is unlikely, in
which case we group knows nothing/just a little/some things together.50 None of these effects are
significant at conventional levels, indicating that draft-eligible fathers do not differ on how much
they know about their children acquaintances and activities from non-draft-eligible fathers.
         Overall, Table 7 presents evidence that draft eligibility is associated with having a father
that cancels plans frequently and helps the respondent infrequently.51


Measures of Environment
         Having a draft-eligible father could have also affected household circumstances, as well
as potentially exposing the respondent to a different environment and different peers. We
examine a variety of measures of environment which could potentially be mechanisms through
which paternal draft eligibility affects children's propensity to engage in risky behaviors, which


50
   While 22 percent of respondents report that their father knows nothing about their friends' parents, only 14
percent and 10 percent report that their father knows nothing about their friends or how they are doing, respectively.
Therefore, we group knows nothing/just a little/some things together for knowledge about the respondent's friends
and for how the respondent is doing.
51
   While the estimated significant effects are large in magnitude, the differences are in line with unconditional
differences presented in Table 1. In particular, 35 percent of draft-eligible fathers help the respondent only
unfrequently (never/rarely/sometimes), compared to 27 percent of non-draft eligible fathers.

                                                         24
we divide in five categories: peers, residential, labor market outcomes of the father, labor market
outcomes of the mother, and health/biological measures.
        First, we evaluate whether having a draft-eligible father exposes respondents to a
different subset of peers that may have differential propensities to engage in risky health
behaviors such as smoking, getting drunk, using drugs or having sex. The NLSY97 defines peers
as kids in the grade of the respondent. Thus, peers reflect the choice of where the parents decided
to live rather than a choice based on friendship of the respondent. We use the NLSY97 indicator
for whether almost none of the respondent's peers engaged in a particular risky health
behavior--define as less than 10 percent.52 Panel A of Table 8 presents evidence that
respondents whose fathers were draft-eligible are less likely to report that almost none of their
peers smoke or have sex. In particular, having a draft-eligible father decreases the probability of
having almost none of their peers smoke by 6.9 percentage points, relative to a 25 percent mean,
and decreases the probability of having almost none of their peers have sex by 6.5 percentage
points, relative to a 22 percent mean. While not statistically significant at conventional levels,
having a draft-eligible father also decreases the probability of having almost none of their peers
get drunk or use drugs. Thus, overall, paternal draft eligibility increases the share of peers who
engage in risky health behaviors.
        Panel B of Table 8 reports the interviewer's remarks about the respondent's home and
neighborhood. The first column reports an estimate of draft eligibility on an indicator of whether
the interviewer would describe the area where the respondent lived as residential (rural and
residential, suburban and residential or urban and residential). Non-residential categories include:
rural-agricultural, suburban-commerce, urban-commerce, urban-wholesale, buildings for
churches or vacant buildings or lots. The estimate indicates that having a draft-eligible father
decreases the probability of living in a residential neighborhood according to the interviewer's
reports, and the effect is significant at a 10 percent level. The second column reports an estimate


52
   The NLSY97 reports categorical indicators for whether less than 10 percent, about 25 percent, about 50 percent,
about 75 percent, and almost all or above 90 percent of the peers engage in the given behaviors. These variables
reflect the behavior of current school peers at the moment of the interview or the behavior of the last set of peers
before the respondent stopped attending school. Values for these variables are rarely missing, as these questions
were asked during the first wave, before attrition can happen. For instance, 8,871 respondents reported percent of
peers who smoke, 8,799 reported percent of peers who get drunk at least once a month, and 8,752 reported percent
of peers who have ever used marijuana, inhalants or other drugs. That said, only 3,965 reported percent of peers who
have had sex out of the entire sample of 8,984 respondents, as this question was only asked to those of age 16 or
older.

                                                        25
of draft eligibility on an indicator for whether the interviewer felt concerned for his or her safety
when he or she went to the respondent's neighborhood/home. Having a draft-eligible father
increases the probability of the interviewer reporting feeling unsafe at the neighborhood or home
during the interview. Unfortunately, we cannot distinguish whether this feeling of unsafety is
from the home or the neighborhood.53 The last two columns of Panel B indicate that paternal
draft eligibility does not affect the household income or net worth of the household in the
NLSY97 sample.
         Similarly, Panel C shows that paternal draft eligibility does not affect the probability that
the father has at most 12 years of education, but there is some evidence that paternal draft
eligibility decreases the probability that the father works at least 40 hours per week, but this
effect is statistically significant only at a 10 percent level.
         Panel D shows that draft-eligible men were not differentially likely to marry less
educated women than non-draft-eligible men. However, paternal draft eligibility lowers the
average number of hours the mother works.
         Finally, panel E provides evidence that paternal draft eligibility has no effect on
children's aptitude test-math scores, suggesting that lower school performance is not driving
children of draft-eligible fathers to engage in risky behaviors. Additionally, paternal draft
eligibility does not affect pre-determined maternal characteristics through assortative mating, as
measured by the probability that the respondent's mother was living with her biological parents
by age 14. Panel E also provides evidence that paternal draft eligibility results in women being
less likely to report that they are in very good or excellent health (by 8.4 percentage points,
relative to a mean of 68 percent), without affecting the probability that the draft-eligible father
himself would report being in very good or excellent health. The health of the mother could
either be the product of draft-eligible men being more likely to marry unhealthy women than
non-draft-eligible men or the product of living with draft-eligible men affecting women's health
negatively even if draft- and non-draft-eligible men married women with similar initial health
conditions. This could be the case particularly for mental health. While we cannot determine
whether draft-eligible men get involved in relationships with women more prone to have bad



53
  The effect of paternal draft eligibility on whether the neighborhood is residential and whether the interviewer feels
safe (columns 1 and 2 of Panel B) are robust to the inclusion of household wealth as a control. Results available
upon request.

                                                          26
health or the bad health is an outcome of being in a relationship with a draft-eligible man, based
on the evidence in Panel E, which indicates that maternal family composition while growing up
is unaffected by paternal draft eligibility, the latter is more likely to be the case. Thus, our results
on risky behaviors by fathers' draft eligibility seem to be consistent with evidence in Goodman
and Isen (2020) that innate conditions do not seem to explain differences in children's education
and labor market outcomes in young adulthood.
         Overall, Table 8 indicates that paternal draft eligibility exposes respondents to peers that
are more likely to engage in risky health behaviors, to an environment less likely to be perceived
as safe, and to unhealthier mothers. Exposure to those environments are more conducive to the
respondents engaging in risky behaviors.


                                         6. Summary and Conclusions
         This study contributes to the literature on identification of causal intergenerational effects
of shocks and policies and, more specifically, to the nascent literature on intergenerational
effects of the Vietnam lottery draft. Additionally, it contributes to the literature on the role of
household circumstances on adolescents' risky behaviors. To the best of our knowledge, it is the
first study to establish causal evidence of the intergenerational effects of fathers' draft eligibility
on children's risky behaviors.
         Our results indicate that while there may have been positive effects of draft eligibility
(e.g., access to GI Bill benefits, learning discipline or receiving training during military service,
or increased college attendance in order to avoid being drafted), any of the potential positive
effects were not large enough to offset the large negative effects of being draft-eligible on risky
behaviors among their children. More specifically, we first find that paternal draft eligibility
increased the propensity to consume marijuana during adolescence by 6.9 percentage points,
relative to a mean of 44 percent. Second, it reduced marijuana initiation age by 1 year, relative to
a mean of 17. Third, it increased time-varying measures of marijuana consumption (last year use
and number of days it was consumed in the month prior to the interview). Fourth, it decreased
age of cigarette initiation by approximately half a year, relative to a mean of 15 years old.54 Fifth,
it increased the probability of engaging in delinquent behaviors by 6.7 percentage points, relative


54
  There is some evidence that paternal draft eligibility increased the propensity to consume hard drugs during
adolescence and their consumption, although these effects are only statistically significant at a 10 percent level.

                                                          27
to a mean of 54 percent. Finally, these results are robust to a variety of specifications, different
subsamples, and falsification diagnostics where we use the maternal exact date of birth to
determine draft eligibility.
          We further explore potential mechanisms through which the children of draft-eligible
men could be more likely to engage in risky health behaviors. In particular, we explore three sets
of mechanisms: parenting styles, attitudes from the father towards the respondent, and household
environment. The results can be summarized as follows. First, parenting styles are more likely to
be "uninvolved" (unresponsive and undemanding) and less likely to be "authoritative"
(responsive and demanding). While previous literature indicates that military parents are more
likely to have an "authoritative" parenting style, our results are not driven by fathers who
volunteered, but by fathers who were pushed to serve in the military or engaged in avoidance
strategies because of the lottery, which helps reconcile our results with previous findings.
Second, attitudes from draft-eligible fathers are less conducive to a strong father-children
relationship, as draft-eligible fathers are less likely to help and more likely to cancel plans on the
respondent than their non-draft-eligible counterparts. Third, paternal draft eligibility promoted
environmental factors that are more conducive to risky behaviors. In particular, children's peers
are more likely to engage in risky health behaviors (smoke and have sex) and their residence or
neighborhood of residence is less likely to be perceived as safe by the interviewer. Additionally,
differences in the probability of engaging in risky behaviors among children of draft- and non-
draft-eligible fathers cannot be attributed to differences in pre-determined characteristics of the
mothers--at least among the characteristics that we observe--nor on differences in aptitude test
scores.
          To conclude, because this study is based on the effects of draft eligibility during the
Vietnam draft period, it is important to discuss the extent to which our results speak to the
current U.S. context. Military service nowadays is only based on volunteering. Men who
volunteer to serve could be different in several unobservable ways to men who serve because a
lottery pushed them to. Additionally, incentives to change behaviors to avoid serving
disappeared, eliminating potential negative effects on fathers that could arise from some
avoidance strategies. Thus, the extrapolation of our results to the current environment of
voluntary enlistments should be done with care. That said, our results can be informative for
several countries where military drafts are still in place, such as in Russia, China, Brazil,

                                                   28
Denmark, and Egypt (Goodman and Isen, 2020). Additionally, while not currently in place, a
lottery system similar to the one applied during the Vietnam War is expected to resume in times
of national emergency, as reported by the Selective Service System.55 In this context, knowing
the unintended consequences of its application (whether through draft avoidance or military
service) is extremely valuable for performing cost-benefits analyses.
         Other aspects of military service, albeit more minor, deserve consideration. Among the
aspects that remain unchanged since the Vietnam draft, two of them require special mention.
First, as a response to the documented low firing rates for U.S. soldiers who served in WWII, the
military transitioned into more realistic training simulations where bulls-eye targets were
replaced with silhouettes. This desensitization processed prepared soldiers for faster reactions
when exposed to the enemy in the late 1960s (Grossman, 2009; Slone and Friedman, 2008). The
realism of this training has escalated over time and recently, the military used Iraqi nationals as
role-players in order to add realism to the training.56 Second, the rate of mental health issues
among Vietnam veterans and veterans from more recent wars are similar (Kulka et al, 1990;
Tanielian and Jaycox, 2008), with rates between 18 percent and 20 percent for Vietnam veterans
and between 14 percent and 25 percent for those of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars.57 Finally,
among the aspects that differ significantly from today's military practices (aside from enrollment
based on voluntarism), one require a special mention. Today's military better acknowledges the
difficulties to transition into civilian life and provides programs to help with this transition.
These programs are particularly helpful for soldiers without severe mental health issues (Adler et
al, 2009; Castro et al, 2006; Stahl, 2009). Today's military also provides courts that focus on
veteran cases and are more likely to provide rehabilitation and treatment instead of
incarceration.58



55
   https://www.sss.gov/About/Events-after-Draft.
56
   This desensitization that was required in order to increase firing rates in split seconds may contribute to
difficulties adjusting back to civilian life, which could ultimately affect parenting and create an environment
conducive to risky health behaviors for their children. Lindo and Stoecker (2014) provide more details about the
transition to this more realistic training and the source is as follows:
https://www.army.mil/article/40960/iraqi_role_players_add_realism_to_cadet_training
57
   Source: testimony by Thomas R. Insel before the Committee of Oversign and Government Reform in 2007.
58
   There are limitations to the use of these courts. While there have been attempts to extent them nationally, they
exclude violent offenders. Previous literature suggests that these are the offenses more likely to respond to military
service. Details on these courts can be found at the Vietnam Treatment Court Clearinghouse, which is hosted by the
National Association of Drug Court Professionals.

                                                          29
       All in all, the large, negative results we find on children's risky behaviors call for
additional research that can separately identified the effect of the current military system based
on volunteering and the negative unintended consequences that a system based on a lottery to
draft individuals can have by potentially inducing some negative draft avoidance behaviors. Our
study suggests that the potential negative consequences of serving in the military in times of war
and of implementing once again a lottery draft on future generations could be large and should
not be overlooked.




                                                 30
                                          References


Adler, A., P. Bliese, D. McGurk, C. Hoge, and C. Castro (2009) Battlemind Debriefing and
Battlemind Training as Early Interventions with Soldiers Returning from Iraq: Randomization by
Platoon. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 77(5), 928-940


Aizer, A. and J. J. Doyle, Jr (2015). Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Future Crime:
Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2), 759-
803.


Angrist, J. (1990). Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence from Social
Security Administrative Records. American Economic Review, 80(3): 313-336.


Angrist, J. and S. Chen (2011). Schooling and the Vietnam Era GI Bill: Evidence from the draft
Lottery. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2): 96-118.


Angrist, J., S. Chen and B. Frandsen (2010). Did Vietnam Veterans Get Sicker in the 1990s? The
Complicated Effects of Military Service on Self-Reported Health. Journal of Public Economics,
94: 824-37.


Angrist, J., S. Chen, and J. Song (2011). Long-Term Consequences of Vietnam-Era
Conscription: New Estimates Using Social Security Data. American Economic Review: Papers
& Proceedings, 101(3): 334-38.


Angrist, J., and A. Krueger (1992). The Effect of Age at School Entry on Educational
Attainment: An Application of Instrumental Variables with Moments from Two Samples.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 87: 328­36


Autor, D., M. Duggan, and D. Lyle (2011). Battle Scars? The Puzzling Decline in Employment
ad Rise in Disability Receipt among Vietnam Era Veterans. American Economic Review: Papers
& Proceedings, 101(3): 339-44.

                                               31
Autor, D, M. Duggan, K. Greenberg, and D. Lyle (2016). The Impact of Disability Benefits on
Labor Supply: Evidence from the VA's Disability Compensation Program. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 8(3): 31-68.


Baskir, Lawrence and William Strauss (1978). Chance and Circumstance: the Draft, the War,
and the Vietnam Generation. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.


Baumrid, Diana (1968). Authoritarian vs Authoritative Parental Control. Adolescence, 3: 255-
272.


Bitler, Marianne and Lucie Schmidt (2011). Marriage Markets and Family Formation: The Role
of the Vietnam Draft. Working Paper.


Bitler, Marianne and Lucie Schmidt (2012). Birth Rates and the Vietnam Draft. American
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 102(3): 566-69.


Black, S., A. Bütikofer, P. Devereux, and K. Salvanes (2019). This is Only a Test? Long-Run
and Intergenerational Impacts of Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout. Review of Economics
and Statistics, 101(3): 531-546.


Black, S., P. Devereux, and K. Salvanes (2005). Why the Apple Doesn't Fall Far: Understanding
Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital. America Economic Review, 95(1): 437-449.


Bleakley, H., and J. Ferrie (2016). Shocking Behavior: Random Wealth in Antebellum Georgia
and Human Capital across Generations. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(3):1455-1495.


Bossong, M.G., J.M. Jansma and H.H. van Hell (2012a). Effects of  9-tetrahydrocannabinol on
Human Working Memory Function. Biological Psychiatry, 71, 693-699.




                                              32
Bossong, M.G., J.M. Jansma and H.H. van Hell (2012b). Default Mode Network in the Effects of
D9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) on Human Executive Function. PLoS One, 8, e70074.


Brener, N., J. Billy and W. Grady (2003). Assessment of Factors Affecting the Validity of Self-
Reported Health-Risk Behavior Among Adolescents: Evidence from the Scientific Literature.
Journal of Health Adolescent Health, 33, 436-457.


Campante, F. and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2015). The Intergenerational Transmission of War.
NBER Working Paper, July: 21371.


Card, D. and T. Lemieux (2001). Going to College To Avoid the Draft: The Unintended Legacy
of the Vietnam War. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 91(2):97-102.


Casey, B.J., R.M. Jones and T.A. Hare (2008). The Adolescent Brain. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1124:111-126.


Castro, C., C. Hoge, C. Milliken, D. McGurk, A. Adler, A. Cox and P. Bliese (2006) Battlemind
Training: Transitioning Home from Combat. Working Paper


Cesarini, D. E. Lindqvist, R. Östling, and B. Wallace (2016) Wealth, Health, and Child
Development: Evidence from Administrative Data on Swedish Lottery Players. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 131(2): 687-738.


Cesur, Resul and Joseph Sabia (2016). When War Comes Home: The Effect of Combat Service
on Domestic Violence. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(1): 209-225.


Chalfin, Aaron and Monica Deza (2019) The Intergenerational Effects of Education on
Delinquency. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 159: 553-571


Chalfin, Aaron and Monica Deza (2018) The Effect of Parental Education on Children's Drug
and Alcohol Use. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 108: 373-378

                                               33
Coile, C, M. Duggan, and A. Guo (2015). Veterans' Labor Force Participation: What Role Does
the VA's Disability Compensation Program Play? American Economic Review: Papers &
Proceedings, 105(5): 141-47.


Conley, D. and J. Heerwig, (2009) The Long-Term Effects of Military Conscription on
Mortality: Estimates from the Vietnam-Era Draft Lottery. National Bureau of Economic
Research NBER WP 15105


Cook, Justin, Jason Fletcher, and Angela Forgues (2019). Multigenerational Effects of Early-lIfe
Health Shocks. Demography.


Davis, James W. Jr. and Kenneth M. Dolbeare (1968). Little Groups of Neighbors: The Selective
Service System. Westport, CT. Greenwood Press.


Deza, Monica (2015). Is There a Stepping Stone Effect in Drug Use? Separating State
Dependence from Unobserved Heterogeneity Within and Across Illicit Drugs. Journal of
Econometrics, 184(1): 193-207.


Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2017). Parenting With Style: Altruism and Paternalism
in the Intergenerational Preference Transmission. Econometrica, 85(5), 2017, 1331-71.


Eisenberg, D. and B. Rowe (2009) Effects of Smoking in Young Adulthood on Smoking Later in
Life: Evidence from the Vietnam Era Lottery. Forum for Health Economics and Policy 12(2)


Farrington, D.P. (1973). Self-reports and Deviant Behavior: Predictive and Stable? Journal of
Criminal Law and Criminology, 64, 99-110.


Fienberg, S. (1971). Randomization and Social Affairs: The 1970 Draft Lottery. Science, 22(1):
255-261.



                                               34
Giedd, J.N. (2004). Structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Adolescent Brain. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1021.1: 77-85.


Goodman, S. and A. Isen (2020). Un-Fortunate Sons: Effects of the Vietnam Draft Lottery on the
Next Generation's Labor Market. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.


Grossman, D. (2009) On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society
(Revised Edition). Back Bay Books


Imbens, Guido and Wlbert van der Klaauw (1995). Evaluating the Cost of Conscription in The
Netherlands. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 13(2): 207-215.


Johnson, T. and C. Dawes (2016). Do Parents' Life Experiences Affect the Political and Civic
Participation of their Children? The Case of Draft-Induced Military Service. Political Behavior,
38(4): 793-816.


Jordan, Kathleen, Charles Marmar, John Fairbank, William Schlenger, Richard Kulka, Richard
Hough and Daniel Weiss (1992). Problems in Families of Male Vietnam Veterans with
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60(6): 916-926.


Kulka, R., W. Schlenger, J. Fairbanks, R. Hough, B. Jordan, C. Marmar, D. Weiss, D. Grady, and
S. Cranston (1990). Trauma and the Vietnam War Generation: Report of Findings from the
National Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study. New York: Brunner/Mazel.


Kuziemko, Ilyana (2010). Did the Vietnam Draft Increase Human Capital Dispaersion? Draft-
Avoidance Behavior by Race and Class. Working Paper


Levitt, Steven and Lance Lochner (2001). The Determinants of Crime. Risky Behavior Among
Youths: An Economic Analysis. Jonathan Gruber, editor. University of Chicago.




                                              35
Lindo, Jason and Charles Stoecker (2014). Drawn Into Violence: Evidence on `What Makes a
Criminal' From the Vietnam Draft Lotteries. Economic Inquiry, 52(1): 239-258.


Lynskey, M., (2006) Substance Use and Educational Attainment. Addiction 101(12): 1684-1685


Maccoby, Eleanor and John Martin (1983). Socialization in the Context of the Family: Parent-
Child Interaction. In E. Hetherington (ed.) Handbook of Child Psychology, vol. 4, Wiley, pp 1-
103.


Malamud, Ofer and Abigail Wozniak (2010). The Impact of College Education on Geographic
Mobility: Identifying Education Using Multiple Components of Vietnam Draft Risk. NBER
Working Paper 16463.


Mezza, Alvaro and Moshe Buchinsky (forthcoming). Illegal Drugs, Education, and Labor Market
Outcomes. Journal of Econometrics.


Moskos, Charles (1970). The American Enlisted Man: The Rank and File in Today's Military.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.


Oreopoulos, P., M. Page, and A. Stevens (008) The Intergenerational Effects of Worker
Displacement. Journal of Labor Economics, 26(3): 455-483.


Peterson, Carl (1998). Avoidance and Evasion of Military Service: An American History, 1626-
1973. San Francisco: International Scholars publications.


Robins, Lee, Darlene Davis and Donald Goodwin (1974). Drug Use by U.S. Army Enlisted Men
in Vietnam: A Follow-Up on Their Return Home. American Journal of Epidemiology, 99(4): 235-
249.




                                               36
Richter, Andre and Per-Olof Robling (2913). Multigenerational Effects of the 1918-19 Influenza
Pandemic in Sweden. Working Paper Series 5/2013, Stockholm University, Swedish Institute for
Social Research.


Rohlfs, Chris (2009). Does Combat Exposure Make You a More Violent or Criminal Person?
Evidence from the Vietnam Draft. The Journal of Human Resources, 45:2: 271-300.


Shapiro, A. and J. Striker (1970) Mastering the Draft; A Comprehensive Guide for Solving Draft
Problems. Boston, MA: Little, Brown and Company.


Segal, David and Mady Segal (2004). America's Military Population. Population Bulleting, 59(4):
3-40.


Slone, L.B. and M.J. Friedman (2008) After the War Zone: A Practical Guide for Returning Troops
and Their Families. Da Capo Press.


Speck, Kimberly and David Riggs (2013). Differences in the Parenting Styles of Military and
Civilian Mothers. Third MFRI International Research Symposium on Military and Veteran
Families.


Stahl, S.M. (2009) Crisis in Army Psychopharmacology and Mental Health Care at Fort Hood.
CNS Spectrums, 14(12): 677-684


Suttler, D. (197) IV-F; A Guide to Medical, Psychiatric, and Moral Unfitness Standards for
Military Induction. New York, NY: Grove Press.


Tanielian, T. and L. Jaycox (2008). Invisible Wounds of War: Psychological and Cognitive
Injuries, Their Consequences, and Services to Assist Recovery. Santa Monica, CA: RAND
Corporation.




                                              37
Wang, Xintong and Alfonso Flores-Lagunes (2020). Conscription and Military Service: Do They
Result in Future Violent and Non-Violent Incarcerations and Recidivism? Working Paper.


Winters, Ken C. and Amelia Arria (2011). Adolescent Brain Development and Drugs. The
Prevention Researcher, 18:2: 21-24.


Yu, J. and W.R.Williford (1992) The age of alcohol onset and alcohol, cigarette, and marijuana
use patterns: An Analysis of Drug Use Progression of Young Adults in New York State.
International Journal of Addictions 27: 1313-1




                                                 38
                     Figure 1: Histogram of Father's Year of Birth
      400
      300
  Frequency
   200100
      0




              1930         1940          1950              1960              1970
                                      Year of Birth

Source: Author's calculations
Notes: Displayed is the histogram for the resident father (whether biological, adoptive, or step-
father) year of birth for the whole sample with a non-missing value for year of birth.
                     Figure 2: Histogram of Mother's Year of Birth
      800
      600
  Frequency
    400
      200
      0




              1940              1950                   1960                1970
                                       Year of Birth

Source: Author's calculations
Notes: Displayed is the histogram for the resident mother (whether biological, adoptive, or
step-mother) year of birth for the whole sample with a non-missing value for year of birth.
                                             Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                            All                       Subsample
                                                                                Non-Draft-Eligible   Draft-Eligible
Panel A: Paternal Characteristics
Father's Year of Birth                                   1953.39      1948.91        1949.50            1948.27
Father Draft-Eligible                                    16.62%        48.29%         0.00%             100.00%
Father U.S. Born                                         83.35%       100.00%        100.00%            100.00%
Panel B: Maternal Characteristics
Mother's Year of Birth                                   1956.27      1952.47         1952.99           1951.90
Mother-"Draft Eligible"                                  10.53%       24.35%          21.70%            27.20%
Mother U.S. Born                                         84.44%       95.58%          95.52%            95.65%
Panel C: Respondent's Demographics
Year of Birth                                            1982.01      1981.86         1981.89           1981.83
Male                                                     51.19%       53.35%          52.44%            54.31%
Black                                                    25.99%       15.16%          14.00%            16.41%
Hispanic                                                 21.16%        9.70%           9.38%            10.04%
Panel D: Risky Health Behaviors-Time Invariant
Ever Alcohol by 18                                       76.76%        79.51%         80.05%            78.93%
Starting Alcohol Age                                      15.13         15.17          15.17             15.17
Ever Marijuana by 18                                     44.20%        43.65%         41.35%            46.11%
Starting Marijuana Age                                    16.78         16.93          17.28             16.55
Ever Cigarette by 18                                     60.23%        60.31%         59.97%            60.68%
Starting Cigarette Age                                    14.73         15.00          15.21             14.78
Ever Hard Drugs by 18                                    13.48%        13.28%         11.58%            15.10%
Starting Hard Drugs Age                                   17.97         17.93          18.08             17.79
Ever Delinquent Behavior                                 56.76%        54.37%         51.12%            57.85%
Observations                                              8984          1464            757               707
                                       (Continued) Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                       All                          Subsample
                                                                           Non-Draft-Eligible   Draft-Eligible
Panel E: Substance Use -Time Varying
Alcohol, Past Year                                  52.08%       58.30%          57.91%              58.73%
Alcohol, Days Last Month                              1.54         1.81            1.73                1.89
Marijuana, Past Year                                23.20%       24.73%          22.41%              27.29%
Marijuana, Days Last Month                            1.28         1.43            1.12                1.76
Cigarette, Past Year                                36.16%       38.32%          38.42%              38.20%
Cigarette, Days Last Month                            4.34         4.45            4.16                4.77
Hard Drugs, Past Year                                5.94%        6.48%           5.46%               7.60%
Hard Drugs, Times Past Year                           3.38         3.59            2.37                4.95
Observations                                        24900         3885            2041                1844
Panel F: Parenting Styles
Father Uninvolved                                   16.47%       12.10%          10.60%              13.71%
Father Permissive                                   28.23%       32.75%          32.89%              32.61%
Father Authoritarian                                21.13%       17.66%          17.58%              17.75%
Father Authoritative                                37.84%       39.36%          40.94%              37.66%
Mother Uninvolved                                   11.45%        8.53%           7.20%               9.94%
Mother Permissive                                   35.42%       37.62%          36.55%              38.76%
Mother Authoritarian                                12.68%       11.12%          10.46%              11.82%
Mother Authoritative                                42.58%       43.64%          46.47%              40.63%
Either Parent Uninvolved                            21.21%       17.55%          15.67%              19.55%
Either Parent Permissive                            43.06%       48.39%          48.87%              47.88%
Either Parent Authoritarian                         25.15%       23.51%          23.11%              23.94%
Either Parent Authoritative                         51.65%       53.46%          56.71%              50.00%
Observations                                         8903         1459             753                 706
                                            (Continued) Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                                        All                       Subsample
                                                                                            Non-Draft-Eligible   Draft-Eligible
 Table G: Attitudes Towards Children
 Father praises respondent (Never/Rarely/Sometimes)                    31.45%      27.80%         27.94%             27.65%
 Father critics respondent (Never)                                     38.59%      37.74%         40.44%             34.88%
 Father helps respondent (Never/Rarely/Sometimes)                      34.33%      31.19%         27.45%             35.14%
 Father blames respondent (Never)                                      74.09%      73.58%         74.51%             72.61%
 Father cancels plans on respondent (Never)                            63.51%      67.30%         70.83%             63.57%
 Father knows respondent's friends (Nothing/A little/Some things)      66.80%      62.01%         60.78%             63.31%
 Father knows respondent's friends' parents (Nothing)                  22.05%      17.11%         15.20%             19.12%
 Father knows respondent (Nothing/A little/Some things)                45.84%      45.15%         44.09%             46.25%
 Observations                                                           3956         795            408                387
 Panel H: Respondent's Environment
 Less than 10% peers smoke                                             26.18%      25.00%         27.47%             22.36%
 Less than 10% peers get drunk                                         43.71%      42.30%         44.52%             39.91%
 Less than 10% peers use drugs                                         38.00%      40.42%         43.13%             37.52%
 Less than 10% peers had sex                                           17.55%      22.04%         23.84%             20.22%
Notes: Displayed are summary statistics for the whole sample with non-missing values (column 1), and for the subsample of resident
fathers (whether biological, adoptive, or step-fathers) born between 1944 and 1952 (column 2), separated into non-draft-eligible
(column 3) and draft-eligible (column 4) fathers.
              Table 2: Measures of Substance Use and Criminal Activity
                               Ever Used       Age of       Used        Ln (Days Used
                               by Age 18     Initiation   Past Year    Past Month +1)
 Panel A: Alcohol
 Father Lottery                  -0.016        -0.008       0.008           0.025
                                 (0.025)       (0.213)     (0.025)         (0.031)
 Observations                     1,464         1,330       3,885           5,476
 Mean                             0.795         15.17       0.583           0.547
 % Effect Size                  -2.013%       -0.053%      1.372%
 Panel B: Marijuana
 Father Lottery                  0.069*      -1.031**      0.046*          0.091*
                                 (0.030)      (0.350)      (0.022)         (0.038)
 Observations                     1,464         827         3,878           5,562
 Mean                             0.436        16.93        0.247           0.266
 % Effect Size                  15.826%      -6.090%      18.623%
 Panel C: Cigarette
 Father Lottery                   0.013       -0.561*       0.005           0.070
                                 (0.026)       (0.253)     (0.022)         (0.051)
 Observations                     1,464         1,043       3,886           5,494
 Mean                             0.603          15         0.383           0.637
 % Effect Size                   2.156%       -3.740%      1.305%
 Panel D: Hard Drugs
 Father Lottery                    0.037+         0.063      0.017+            0.065+
                                   (0.020)       (0.435)     (0.010)           (0.035)
 Observations                       1,416          335        3,981             3,935
 Mean                               0.133         17.93      0.0648             0.168
 % Effect Size                      27.820%        0.351%    26.235%
 Panel E: Criminal Activity       Indicator Risk Index
 Father Lottery                    0.067*       0.328**
                                   (0.031)       (0.119)
 Observations                        1464         1464
 Mean                               0.544         1.681
 % Effect Size                      12.316%      19.512%
 FE Year of Birth (YOB)                Y            Y           Y                 Y
 FE Father Fig YOB                     Y            Y           Y                 Y
 FE Father Fig Birth Month             Y            Y           Y                 Y
 FE Year                              N             N           Y                 Y
 Father YOB 1944-1952                  Y            Y           Y                 Y
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates of the effect of father's draft eligibility (whether the
father is biological, adoptive, or step-fathers) on the probability that children consumed alcohol
(panel A), marijuana (panel B), cigarettes (panel c), and hard drugs (panel D) or committed a
crime (panel E) by age 18 (column 1), on the age of initiation into the consumption of those
substances (column 2), on whether children consumed those substances in the year prior to the
interview (column 3), and on the log of days children used those substances in the month prior
to the interview (column 4). Regressions include children's and fathers' year of birth fixed
effects, and fathers' month of birth fixed effects. Columns 3 and 4 also include year of interview
fixed effects. Sample is restricted to fathers born between 1944 and 1952. Standard errors
clustered at the father's exact date of birth. **, *, + denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.
Table 3: Measures of Substance Use and Criminal Activity, Alternative Set of Years 1948-1952
                             Ever Used     Age of       Used            Ln (Days Used
                             by Age 18   Initiation   Past Year        Past Month +1)
Panel A: Alcohol
Father Lottery                -0.011        0.051       0.012               0.028
                              (0.030)      (0.243)     (0.028)             (0.037)
Observations                   1,042         943        2,805               3,934
Mean                           0.784        15.28       0.567               0.524
% Effect Size                 -1.40%        0.33%       2.12%
Panel B: Marijuana
Father Lottery                 0.061      -0.957*       0.035               0.081
                              (0.037)     (0.408)      (0.027)             (0.049)
Observations                   1,042        577         2,799               3,997
Mean                           0.425       16.94        0.228               0.233
% Effect Size                 14.35%      -5.65%       15.35%
Panel C: Cigarette
Father Lottery                 0.012       -0.476       0.005               0.061
                              (0.030)      (0.301)     (0.026)             (0.061)
Observations                   1,042         718        2,804               3,949
Mean                           0.585        15.02       0.378               0.613
% Effect Size                  2.05%       -3.17%       1.32%
Panel D: Hard Drugs
Father Lottery                 0.026        0.133       0.010               0.058
                              (0.025)      (0.546)     (0.012)             (0.044)
Observations                   1,007         220        2,869               2,834
Mean                           0.126        17.92      0.0582               0.149
% Effect Size                 20.63%        0.74%      17.18%
Panel E: Criminal Activity   Indicator   Risk Index
Father Lottery                0.070+       0.299*
                              (0.037)      (0.149)
Observations                   1,042        1,042
Mean                           0.540        1.603
% Effect Size                12.963%      18.653%
FE Year of Birth (YOB)           Y            Y          Y                    Y
FE Father YOB                    Y            Y          Y                    Y
FE Father Birth Month            Y            Y          Y                    Y
FE Year                          N            N          Y                    Y
Father YOB 1948-1952             Y            Y          Y                    Y
Notes: This table replicates Table 2, limiting the sample to fathers born between 1948 and
1952. Standard errors clustered at the father's exact date of birth. **, *, + denote significance
at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
          Table 4: Alternative Specification, Controlling for Father's Year-Month
                                 Ever Used       Age of       Used        Ln (Days Used
                                 by Age 18     Initiation   Past Year    Past Month +1)
Panel A: Alcohol
Father Lottery                     -0.017       -0.068       -0.008            0.005
                                   (0.028)      (0.245)      (0.027)          (0.034)
Observations                        1,464        1,330        3,885            5,476
Mean                                0.795        15.17        0.583            0.547
% Effect Size                      -2.14%       -0.45%       -1.37%
Panel B: Marijuana
Father Lottery                     0.058+       -0.950*       0.035           0.084+
                                   (0.033)      (0.409)      (0.023)          (0.043)
Observations                        1,464         827         3,878            5,562
Mean                                0.436        16.93        0.247            0.266
% Effect Size                      13.30%       -5.61%       14.17%
Panel C: Cigarette
Father Lottery                      0.005       -0.607*      -0.015            0.054
                                   (0.029)      (0.286)      (0.024)          (0.057)
Observations                        1,464        1,043        3,886            5,494
Mean                                0.603          15         0.383            0.637
% Effect Size                       0.83%       -4.05%       -3.92%
Panel D: Hard Drugs
Father Lottery                       0.025       0.096        0.015           0.070+
                                   (0.023)      (0.680)      (0.011)          (0.040)
Observations                         1,416        335         3,981            3,935
Mean                                 0.133       17.93       0.0648            0.168
% Effect Size                      18.80%        0.54%       23.15%
Panel E: Criminal Activity        Indicator    Risk Index
Father Lottery                      -0.320       0.057
                                   (0.333)      (0.035)
Observations                         1,464       1,464
Mean                                 14.40       0.544
% Effect Size                      -2.22%       10.48%
FE Year of Birth (YOB)                 Y            Y           Y                   Y
FE Father YOB                          Y            Y           Y                   Y
FE Father Birth Month                  Y            Y           Y                   Y
FE Year                                N           N            Y                   Y
Father YOB 1944-1952                   Y            Y           Y                   Y
Notes: This table replicates Table 2, but includes father's year-by-month fixed effects and
father's state of birth fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the father's exact date of birth.
**, *, + denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
          Table 5: Falsification Diagnostics, Using Maternal Exact Date of Birth
                                 Ever Used      Age of        Used         Ln (Days Used
                                 by Age 18    Initiation    Past Year     Past Month + 1)
 Panel A: Alcohol
 Mother Lottery                   -0.013         0.060       -0.007            0.013
                                  (0.025)       (0.225)      (0.028)          (0.033)
 Observations                      1,391         1,254        2,650            3,768
 Mean                              0.789         15.18        0.570            0.523
 % Effect Size                    -1.65%         0.40%       -1.23%
 Panel B: Marijuana
 Mother Lottery                   -0.031        -0.130       -0.020            0.005
                                  (0.026)       (0.310)      (0.024)          (0.040)
 Observations                      1,391          785         2,645            3,842
 Mean                              0.433           17         0.249            0.274
 % Effect Size                    -7.16%        -0.76%       -8.03%
 Panel C: Cigarette
 Mother Lottery                    0.001       -0.511+       -0.009           -0.037
                                  (0.031)      (0.272)       (0.028)          (0.065)
 Observations                      1,391         975          2,655            3,791
 Mean                              0.604        14.97         0.367            0.608
 % Effect Size                     0.17%       -3.41%        -2.45%
 Panel D: Hard Drugs
 Mother Lottery                     -0.028       0.704         -0.012          -0.023
                                    (0.022)     (0.437)        (0.013)         (0.041)
 Observations                        1,351        315           2,717           2,705
 Mean                                0.129       18.15         0.0664           0.181
 % Effect Size                     -21.71%       3.88%        -18.07%
 Panel E: Criminal Activity       Indicator Risk Index
 Mother Lottery                     -0.001      -0.060
                                    (0.030)     (0.114)
 Observations                        1,391       1,391
 Mean                                0.555       1.680
 % Effect Size                      -0.18%      -3.57%
 FE Year of Birth (YOB)                Y           Y               Y              Y
 FE Mother YOB                         Y           Y               Y              Y
 FE Mother Birth Month                 Y           Y               Y              Y
 FE Year                               N           N               Y              Y
 Father YOB 1944-1952                  Y           Y               Y              Y
Notes: This table replicates Table 2, but defines draft eligibility based on mother's exact date of
birth (whether the mother is biological, adoptive, or step-mother). Standard errors clustered at
the mother's exact date of birth. **, *, + denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
                     Table 6: Parenting Styles at the Initial Wave
                              Uninvolved Permissive Authoritarian Authoritative
 Panel A: Parenting Styles of the
 Father
 Father Lottery                  0.043*          0.005         -0.008           -0.041
                                 (0.020)        (0.026)        (0.022)          (0.031)
 Observations                     1,438          1,438          1,438            1,438
 Mean                             0.121          0.328          0.177            0.394
 % Effect Size                  35.537%        13.110%        24.294%          10.914%
 Panel B: Parenting Styles of the
 Mother
 Father Lottery                   0.024          0.020         0.028+          -0.065*
                                 (0.018)        (0.031)        (0.016)          (0.030)
 Observations                     1,430          1,430          1,430            1,430
 Mean                            0.0853          0.376          0.111            0.436
 % Effect Size                  28.136%         5.319%        25.225%         -14.908%
 Panel C: Parenting Styles of Either Parent
 Father Lottery                  0.048+         -0.003          0.015         -0.074**
                                 (0.025)        (0.032)        (0.024)          (0.028)
 Observations                     1,459          1,459          1,459            1,459
 Mean                             0.175          0.484          0.235            0.535
 % Effect Size                  27.429%        -0.620%         6.383%         -13.832%
 FE Year of Birth (YOB)             Y              Y              Y                Y
 FE Father YOB                      Y              Y              Y                Y
 FE Father Birth Month              Y              Y              Y                Y
 Father YOB 1944-1952               Y              Y              Y                Y
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates of the effect of father's draft eligibility (whether the
father is biological, adoptive, or step-fathers) on the probability that the father's (panel A), the
mother's (panel B) or either parent's (panel C) parenting style is uninvolved (column 1),
permissive (column 2), authoritarian (column 3), or authoritative (column 4). Regressions
include children's and fathers' year of birth fixed effects, and fathers' month of birth fixed
effects. Sample is restricted to fathers born between 1944 and 1952. Standard errors clustered
at the father's exact date of birth. **, *, + denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
                             Table 7: Attitude from Father Towards Child, At the Initial Wave
 Panel A: Frequency of Behaviors from the Father Towards the Respondent
                                    Praise              Criticizes               Helps            Blames        Cancel plans
                               Never/Rarely/                               Never/Rarely/
                                 Sometimes                 Never             Sometimes              Never           Never
 Father Lottery                     0.004                 -0.058                0.086*             -0.035          -0.080+
                                   (0.035)                (0.041)               (0.039)            (0.039)         (0.042)
 Observations                        795                    795                   795                795             795
 Mean                               0.278                  0.377                 0.312              0.736           0.673
 % Effect Size                     1.439%               -15.385%               27.564%            -4.755%         -11.887%
 Panel B: Father Knows Aspects of Respondent's Life
                             Knows Nothing/         Knows Nothing           Knows Nothing/
                            Little/Some Things           Friends'          Little/Some Things
                                   Friends               Parents              Resp is Doing
 Father Lottery                     0.017                  0.038                   0.020
                                   (0.041)                (0.031)                 (0.041)
 Observations                        795                    795                     793
 Mean                               0.620                  0.171                   0.451
 % Effect Size                     2.742%                22.222%                  4.435%
 FE Year of Birth (YOB)               Y                      Y                       Y                     Y              Y
 FE Father YOB                        Y                      Y                       Y                     Y              Y
 FE Father Birth Month                Y                      Y                       Y                     Y              Y
 Father YOB 1944-1952                 Y                      Y                       Y                     Y              Y
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates of the effect of father's draft eligibility (whether the father is biological, adoptive, or step-
fathers) on the probability the father rarely praises (column 1), never criticizes (column 2), rarely helps (column 3), never blames
(column 4), and never cancels plans (column 5) in panel A and on the probability the father knows little about children's friends
(column 1), knows nothing about the parents of the friends (column 2), and knows little about what the children do (column 3).
Regressions include children's and fathers' year of birth fixed effects, and fathers' month of birth fixed effects. Sample is restricted
to fathers born between 1944 and 1952. Standard errors clustered at the father's exact date of birth. **, *, + denote significance at
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                            Table 8: Measures of Environment
Panel A: Less than 10% of Peers Engage in the Following Risky Behaviors
                           Smoke            Get Drunk           Use Drugs     Have Sex
Father Lottery            -0.069**            -0.037              -0.041       -0.065*
                           (0.023)           (0.024)              (0.029)      (0.028)
Observations                1,452              1,442               1,435         726
Mean                        0.250              0.423               0.404        0.220
% Effect Size             -27.60%             -8.75%             -10.15%      -29.55%
Panel B: Residential Characteristics
                                           Interviewer         Ln Gross HH    Ln Net
                        Residential      Concern Safety       Income 1996    Worth 1997
Father Lottery             -0.053+            0.033*              -0.014       -0.106
                           (0.027)           (0.016)              (0.095)     (0.108)
Observations                1,454              1,458               1,182        1,076
Mean                        0.843             0.0446               10.87        11.51
% Effect Size              -6.29%            73.99%               -0.13%      -0.92%
Panel C: Education and Labor Market Outcomes of the Father
                            Father            Father              Father       Father
                         <=12 Years         Hours>=40           Hours>=30     Ln Hours
Father Lottery              0.053            -0.022+              -0.010       -0.011
                           (0.035)           (0.013)              (0.008)      (0.019)
Observations                1,425              1,339               1,339        1,339
Mean                        0.368              0.959               0.981        3.778
% Effect Size              14.40%             -2.29%              -1.02%       -0.29%
Panel D: Education and Labor Market Outcomes of the Mother
                           Mother            Mother              Mother        Mother
                         <=12 Years         Hours>=40           Hours>=30     Ln Hours
Father Lottery              0.042             -0.054             -0.063*       -0.052+
                           (0.034)           (0.047)              (0.032)      (0.030)
Observations                1,365              1,102               1,102        1,102
Mean                        0.402              0.638               0.820        3.550
% Effect Size              10.45%             -8.46%              -7.68%       -1.46%
FE Year of Birth (YOB)        Y                  Y                   Y            Y
FE Father YOB                 Y                  Y                   Y            Y
FE Father Birth Month         Y                  Y                   Y            Y
Father YOB 1944-1952          Y                  Y                   Y            Y
                            (Continued) Table 8: Measures of Environment
 Panel E: Health and Aptitude Test Core Variables
                                        Lived Bio Mother                 Father               Mother
                                                                   Vgood/Excellent        Vgood/Excellent
                            Math Score           Mother                  Health                Health
 Father Lottery                -0.785             -0.021                 -0.034               -0.084*
                               (1.002)            (0.028)                (0.035)               (0.034)
 Observations                    930               1,377                  1,461                 1,382
 Mean                           97.90              0.826                  0.643                 0.681
 % Effect Size                 -0.80%             -2.54%                 -5.29%               -12.33%
 FE Year of Birth (YOB)           Y                  Y                      Y                     Y
 FE Father YOB                    Y                  Y                      Y                     Y
 FE Father Birth Month            Y                  Y                      Y                     Y
 Father YOB 1944-1952             Y                  Y                      Y                     Y
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates of the effect of father's draft eligibility (whether the
father is biological, adoptive, or step-fathers) on the probability that less than 10 percent of
children's peers smoke (column 1), get drunk (column 2), use drugs (column 3), and have sex
(column 4) in panel A; on the probability that the children lived in a residential area in 1997
(column 1) and that the interviewer had concerns over her/his safety during the 1997 interview
(column 2), as well as on the log of the 1996 gross household income (column 3) and the log of
the 1997 net worth (column 4) in panel B; on the probability the father (mother) had less than
12 years of education (column 1), worked more than 40 hours (column 2) and worked more
than 30 hours (column 3) in 1996 and on the log of hours the father (mother) worked in 1996
(column 4) in panel C (panel D); and on the children's aptitude math score (column 1), on the
probability the mother lived with her biological parents by age 14 (column 2), that the father
and the mother had at least very good health (columns 3 and 4, respectively) in panel E.
Regressions include children's and fathers' year of birth fixed effects, and fathers' month of
birth fixed effects. Sample is restricted to fathers born between 1944 and 1952. Standard errors
clustered at the father's exact date of birth. **, *, + denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.
           Table A1: Comparing the NLSY97 with Other Sources of
                 Data Among Young Adults (18-25) in 2002
                                    NLSY97(a)      NSDUH (b)       MTF(c )
 Min Age in 2002                       18              18            19
 Max Age in 2002                       23              25            24
 Lifetime Drug Use
 Lifetime Alcohol                     86.23            86.70         88.40
 Lifetime Marijuana                   52.52            53.80         56.10
 Lifetime Cocaine (*)                 18.67            15.40         12.90
 Past Year Drug Use
 Alcohol                              67.65            77.90         83.90
 Marijuana                            24.51            29.80         34.20
 Cocaine (*)                           6.03             6.70          6.50
 Past Month Drug Use
 Alcohol                              56.98            60.50         67.70
 Marijuana                            18.57            17.30         19.80
 Cocaine (*)                            -               2.00          2.50

 N                                     7896
Notes: This table compares the rates of past year drug use, past month drug use, lifetime drug
use, and starting age of drug consumption in the NLSY97 (column a), NSDUH (column b), and
MTF (column c). For a more detailed discussion about comparisons among these datasets, see
Deza (2015).
 Table A2: Effect of Paternal Draft Eligibility on Attrition While Being a Minor
 Father Lottery                                    -0.005           -0.011         -0.009
                                                  (0.023)           (0.023)        (0.027)
 Observations                                       1,464            1,461          1,461
 Mean                                               0.880            0.880          0.880
 % Effect Size                                    -0.57%            -1.25%         -1.02%
 FE Year of Birth (YOB)                               Y                Y              Y
 FE Father YOB                                        Y                Y              N
 FE Father Birth Month                                Y                Y              N
 Father YOB 1944-1952                                 Y                Y              Y
 FE Father YMOB                                       N                N              Y
 State of Father's Birth                              N                Y              Y
Notes: This tables reports OLS estimates of the effect of father's draft eligibility (whether the
father is biological, adoptive, or step-fathers) on the probability of children leaving the sample
before or at age 18. Column 1 includes children's and fathers' year of birth fixed effects, and
fathers' month of birth fixed effects. Column 2 includes fathers' state of birth fixed effects as
well. Column 3 includes children's year of birth and father's year-by-month fixed effects, as well
as fathers' state of birth fixed effects. Sample is restricted to fathers born between 1944 and
1952. Standard errors clustered at the father's exact date of birth. **, *, + denote significance
at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
Table A3: Measures of Substance Use and Criminal Activity, Controlling for Father's State of Birth
                              Ever Used       Age of       Used             Ln (Days Used
                              by Age 18     Initiation   Past Year         Past Month +1)
Panel A: Alcohol
Father Lottery                  -0.018       -0.007        0.018                0.033
                                (0.024)      (0.217)      (0.023)              (0.031)
Observations                     1,461        1,327        3,878                5,466
Mean                             0.795        15.17        0.583                0.547
% Effect Size                   -2.26%       -0.05%        3.09%
Panel B: Marijuana
Father Lottery                  0.075*      -1.062**     0.059**               0.099*
                                (0.029)      (0.353)     (0.021)               (0.039)
Observations                     1,461         826        3,871                 5,552
Mean                             0.436        16.93       0.247                 0.266
% Effect Size                   17.20%       -6.27%      23.89%
Panel C: Cigarette
Father Lottery                   0.011       -0.600*       0.011                0.071
                                (0.027)      (0.266)      (0.023)              (0.054)
Observations                     1,461        1,041        3,879                5,484
Mean                             0.603          15         0.383                0.637
% Effect Size                    1.82%       -4.00%          2.87%
Panel D: Hard Drugs
Father Lottery                  0.041*       -0.260        0.016               0.063+
                                (0.020)      (0.464)      (0.010)              (0.036)
Observations                     1,413         334         3,974                3,930
Mean                             0.133        17.93       0.0648                0.168
% Effect Size                   30.83%       -1.45%       24.69%
Panel E: Criminal Activity     Indicator   Risk Index
Father Lottery                  0.066*      0.338**
                                (0.031)      (0.126)
Observations                     1,461        1,461
Mean                             0.544        1.681
% Effect Size                  12.132%      20.107%
Year of Birth (YOB)                Y            Y           Y                     Y
Father YOB                         Y            Y           Y                     Y
Father Birth Month                 Y            Y           Y                     Y
Year                               N            N           Y                     Y
Father YOB 1944-1952               Y            Y           Y                     Y
State of Father's Birth            Y            Y           Y                     Y
Notes: This table replicates Table 2 in the main text, including fathers' state of birth fixed
effects. Sample is restricted to fathers born between 1944 and 1952. Standard errors clustered
at the father's exact date of birth. **, *, + denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
Table A4: Measures of Substance Use and Criminal Activity with Standard Errors Clustered
                               at Father's State of Birth
                               Ever Used      Age of     Used in the     Ln (Days Used
                               by Age 18    Initiation    Past Year     Past Month +1)
Panel A: Alcohol
Father Lottery                  -0.016       -0.011         0.007            0.028
                                (0.025)      (0.197)       (0.025)          (0.037)
Observations                     1,461        1,327         3,878            5,009
Mean                             0.795        15.17         0.583            0.598
% Effect Size                   -2.01%       -0.07%         1.20%
Panel B: Marijuana
Father Lottery                  0.068*      -1.018***      0.045+           0.103**
                                (0.031)       (0.278)      (0.025)          (0.037)
Observations                     1,461          826         3,871            5,138
Mean                             0.436         16.93        0.247            0.266
% Effect Size                   15.60%        -6.01%       18.22%
Panel C: Cigarette
Father Lottery                   0.011       -0.560+        0.004            0.092
                                (0.029)      (0.291)       (0.027)          (0.065)
Observations                     1,461        1,041         3,879            4,935
Mean                             0.603          15          0.383            0.708
% Effect Size                    1.82%       -3.73%         1.04%
Panel D: Hard Drugs
Father Lottery                   0.036        0.078         0.015            0.064
                                (0.025)      (0.539)       (0.014)          (0.042)
Observations                     1,413         334          4,099            3,930
Mean                             0.133        17.93        0.0614            0.168
% Effect Size                   27.07%        0.44%        24.43%
Panel E: Criminal Activity     Indicator    Risk Index
Father Lottery                  0.067*       0.318**
                                (0.032)      (0.114)
Observations                     1,461        1,461
Mean                             0.544        1.681
% Effect Size                   12.32%       18.92%
FE Year of Birth (YOB)             Y             Y            Y                Y
FE Father YOB                      Y             Y            Y                Y
FE Father Birth Month              Y             Y            Y                Y
FE Year                            N            N             Y                Y
Father YOB 1944-1952               Y             Y            Y                Y
Notes: This table replicates Table 2 in the main text, but clusters standard errors at the fathers'
state of birth. Sample is restricted to fathers born between 1944 and 1952. **, *, + denote
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
         Table A5: Measures of Substance Use and Criminal Activity, Weighted
                              Ever Used       Age of     Used in the    Ln (Days Used
                              by Age 18     Initiation    Past Year    Past Month +1)
 Panel A: Alcohol
 Father Lottery                -0.022         0.040         0.008           0.017
                               (0.027)       (0.233)       (0.027)         (0.040)
 Observations                   1,464         1,330         3,885           5,017
 Mean                           0.808         15.07         0.604           0.626
 % Effect Size                 -2.72%         0.27%         1.32%
 Panel B: Marijuana
 Father Lottery                0.061+        -0.816*       0.049*          0.100*
                               (0.031)       (0.349)       (0.021)         (0.043)
 Observations                   1,464          827          3,878           5,146
 Mean                           0.448         16.86         0.256           0.299
 % Effect Size                 13.62%        -4.84%        19.14%
 Panel C: Cigarette
 Father Lottery                 0.002        -0.479+        0.012          0.102+
                               (0.027)       (0.261)       (0.024)         (0.060)
 Observations                   1,464         1,043         3,886           4,943
 Mean                           0.626         14.91         0.401           0.754
 % Effect Size                  0.32%        -3.21%         2.99%
 Panel D: Hard Drugs
 Father Lottery                   0.038+         0.226          0.016          0.067+
                                 (0.022)        (0.456)        (0.011)         (0.040)
 Observations                     1,416           335           4,106           3,935
 Mean                             0.139          17.94         0.0658           0.182
 % Effect Size                   27.34%          1.26%        24.32%
 Panel E: Criminal Activity     Indicator     Risk Index
 Father Lottery                   0.064*        0.313**
                                 (0.031)        (0.119)
 Observations                     1,464          1,464
 Mean                             0.544          1.680
 % Effect Size                   11.76%         18.63%
 FE Year of Birth (YOB)              Y             Y              Y               Y
 FE Father YOB                       Y             Y              Y               Y
 FE Father Birth Month               Y             Y              Y               Y
 FE Year                             N             N              Y               Y
 Father YOB 1944-1952                Y             Y              Y               Y
Notes: This table replicates Table 2 in the main text, but weights each children by the
corresponding weight assigned to them by the NLSY97. Sample is restricted to fathers born
between 1944 and 1952. Standard errors clustered at the father's exact date of birth. **, *, +
denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
  Table A6: Measures of Substance Use and Criminal Activity for Those Living with
                                Biological Father
                             Ever Used      Age of     Used in the   Ln (Days Used
                             by Age 18    Initiation    Past Year    Past Month+1)
Panel A: Alcohol
Father Lottery                -0.021        0.094        -0.011         -0.009
                              (0.027)      (0.227)       (0.027)        (0.041)
Observations                   1,255        1,142         3,343          4,317
Mean                           0.796        15.20         0.589          0.602
% Effect Size                 -2.64%        0.62%        -1.87%
Panel B: Marijuana
Father Lottery                0.061+      -1.126**       0.040+         0.081+
                              (0.033)      (0.364)       (0.023)        (0.044)
Observations                   1,255         698          3,338          4,424
Mean                           0.426        17.04         0.243          0.279
% Effect Size                 14.32%       -6.61%        16.46%
Panel C: Cigarette
Father Lottery                 0.014       -0.687*       -0.002          0.075
                              (0.029)      (0.264)       (0.024)        (0.063)
Observations                   1,255         885          3,345          4,248
Mean                           0.595        15.13         0.375          0.673
% Effect Size                  2.35%       -4.54%        -0.53%
Panel C: Hard Drugs
Father Lottery                0.041+       0.049          0.013          0.061
                              (0.022)     (0.425)        (0.010)        (0.037)
Observations                   1,218        284           3,520          3,383
Mean                           0.131       18.07         0.0591          0.162
% Effect Size                 31.30%       0.23%         69.37%
Panel D: Criminal Activity   Indicator   Risk Index
Father Lottery                 0.055       0.285*
                              (0.036)     (0.130)
Observations                   1,255       1,255
Mean                           0.521       1.555
% Effect Size                 10.56%      18.33%
Year of Birth (YOB)              Y            Y            Y              Y
Father YOB                       Y            Y            Y              Y
Father Birth Month               Y            Y            Y              Y
Year                             N            N            Y              Y
Father YOB 1944-1952             Y            Y            Y              Y
Notes: This table replicates Table 2 in the main text, but limits the sample to children living with
biological father in the first interview. Sample is restricted to biological fathers born between
1944 and 1952. Standard errors clustered at the biological father's exact date of birth. **, *, +
denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
       Table A7: Measures of Substance Use and Criminal Activity for Males
                             Ever Used      Age of       Used         Ln (Days
                             by Age 18    Initiation   Past Year   Past Month+1)
Panel A: Alcohol
Father Lottery                  0.010      -0.327        0.025        0.093+
                               (0.031)     (0.305)      (0.032)       (0.050)
Observations                     781         709         2,084         2,673
Mean                            0.799       15.04        0.574         0.632
% Effect Size                   1.25%      -2.17%        4.36%
Panel B: Marijuana
Father Lottery                 0.084*     -1.267**     0.071**        0.156**
                               (0.042)     (0.454)     (0.027)        (0.060)
Observations                     781         451        2,080          2,743
Mean                            0.462       16.68       0.265          0.337
% Effect Size                  18.18%      -7.60%      26.79%
Panel C: Cigarette
Father Lottery                  0.037      -0.710*       0.014         0.119
                               (0.037)     (0.331)      (0.033)       (0.081)
Observations                     781         569         2,085         2,637
Mean                            0.607       14.96        0.376         0.709
% Effect Size                   6.10%      -4.75%        3.72%
Panel D: Hard Drugs
Father Lottery                  0.040       -0.042      0.022+        0.089+
                               (0.030)     (0.622)      (0.013)       (0.049)
Observations                     756          191        2,210         2,111
Mean                            0.142        17.92      0.0624         0.169
% Effect Size                  28.17%       -0.23%      35.26%
Panel E: Criminal Activity    Indicator   Risk Index
Father Lottery                 0.071+       0.365*
                               (0.040)     (0.162)
Observations                     781          781
Mean                            0.621        2.109
% Effect Size                  11.43%      17.31%
Year of Birth (YOB)               Y            Y          Y             Y
Father YOB                        Y            Y          Y             Y
Father Birth Month                Y            Y          Y             Y
Year                              N            N          Y             Y
Father YOB 1944-1952              Y            Y          Y             Y
Notes: This table replicates Table 2 in the main text, but limits the sample to male children.
Sample is restricted to fathers born between 1944 and 1952. Standard errors clustered at the
father's exact date of birth. **, *, + denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
     Table A8: Measures of Substance Use and Criminal Activity for Females
                             Ever Used     Age of       Used       Ln (Days
                             by Age 18   Initiation   Past Year Past Month+1)
Panel A: Alcohol
Father Lottery                -0.043       0.357       -0.005       -0.044
                              (0.036)     (0.347)      (0.038)      (0.053)
Observations                    683         621         1,801        2,344
Mean                           0.791       15.32        0.593        0.559
% Effect Size                 -5.44%       2.33%       -0.84%
Panel B: Marijuana
Father Lottery                 0.055      -0.850+      0.026         0.042
                              (0.046)     (0.464)     (0.033)       (0.051)
Observations                    683         376        1,798         2,403
Mean                           0.407       17.23       0.227         0.230
% Effect Size                 13.51%      -4.93%      11.45%
Panel C: Cigarette
Father Lottery                -0.013      -0.350        0.001        0.054
                              (0.047)     (0.425)      (0.041)      (0.092)
Observations                    683         474         1,801        2,306
Mean                           0.599       15.05        0.391        0.708
% Effect Size                 -2.17%      -2.33%        0.26%
Panel D: Hard Drugs
Father Lottery                 0.035       0.197       0.012         0.048
                              (0.029)     (0.717)     (0.015)       (0.051)
Observations                    660         144        1,896         1,824
Mean                           0.123       17.94      0.0601         0.167
% Effect Size                 28.46%       1.10%      19.97%
Panel E: Criminal Activity   Indicator   Risk Index
Father Lottery                 0.057       0.280+
                              (0.041)     (0.154)
Observations                    683         683
Mean                           0.455       1.192
% Effect Size                 12.53%      23.49%
Year of Birth (YOB)              Y            Y          Y             Y
Father YOB                       Y            Y          Y             Y
Father Birth Month               Y            Y          Y             Y
Year                             N            N          Y             Y
Father YOB 1944-1952             Y            Y          Y             Y
Notes: This table replicates Table 2 in the main text, but limits the sample to female children.
Sample is restricted to fathers born between 1944 and 1952. Standard errors clustered at the
father's exact date of birth. **, *, + denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
