                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


          MARGINAL EFFECTS OF MERIT AID FOR LOW-INCOME STUDENTS

                                           Joshua Angrist
                                            David Autor
                                           Amanda Pallais

                                        Working Paper 27834
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27834

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2020


This study was carried out under data-use agreements between MIT and the Susan Thompson
Buffett Foundation and between MIT and Nebraska's public colleges and universities. We are
grateful to Sally Hudson for her contributions to this project. Nick Gebbia, Raymond Han, Kenya
Heard, Anran Li, and Julia Turner provided outstanding research assistance. Enrico Cantoni,
Sydnee Caldwell, Brandon Enriquez, Tyler Hoppenfeld, Sookyo Jeong, Olivia Kim, Brendan
Malone, Kemi Oyewole, Karen Scott, and Carolyn Stein were instrumental in the project's early
stages. Our thanks also go to Eryn Heying and Anna Vallee for invaluable administrative support,
and to the staff of the Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation for their expert assistance in
implementing the evaluation. We thank the Provost's Office at the University of Nebraska, the
Nebraska State College System, and Nebraska's community colleges for their support for this effort
and for sharing their data. Raj Chetty, Amy Finkelstein, Nathan Hendren, Lisa Kahn, Lawrence Katz,
Danielle Li and seminar participants at AASLE, Amazon, Brookings, Boston University, Carleton
College, Dartmouth, Harvard, IIES, JPAL, MIT, NBER Summer Institute, Northwestern, Princeton,
UC Berkeley, University of Chicago, University of Melbourne, University of Michigan, and Yale
made many helpful comments and suggestions. We acknowledge financial support from the Susan
Thompson Buffett Foundation and the MIT SEII seed fund. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the
views of institutional study partners.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27834.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joshua Angrist, David Autor, and Amanda Pallais. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Marginal Effects of Merit Aid for Low-Income Students
Joshua Angrist, David Autor, and Amanda Pallais
NBER Working Paper No. 27834
September 2020
JEL No. H52,I22,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

Financial aid from the Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation (STBF) provides exceptionally
generous support to a college population similar to that served by a host of state aid programs. In
conjunction with STBF, we randomly assigned aid awards to thousands of Nebraska high school
graduates from low-income, minority, and first-generation college households. Randomly-
assigned STBF awards boost bachelor's (BA) degree completion for students targeting four-year
schools by about 8 points. Degree gains are concentrated among four-year applicants who would
otherwise have been unlikely to pursue a four-year program. Degree effects are mediated by
award-induced increases in credits earned towards a BA in the first year of college. The extent of
initial four-year college engagement explains heterogeneous effects by target campus and across
covariate subgroups. Most program spending is a transfer, reducing student debt without affecting
degree attainment. Award-induced marginal spending is modest. The projected lifetime earnings
impact of awards exceeds marginal educational spending for all of the subgroups examined in the
study. Projected earnings gains exceed funder costs for low-income, non-white, urban, and first-
generation students, and for students with relatively weak academic preparation.

Joshua Angrist                                   Amanda Pallais
Department of Economics, E52-436                 Department of Economics
MIT                                              Harvard University
50 Memorial Drive                                Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02142                              Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                         and NBER
angrist@mit.edu                                  apallais@fas.harvard.edu

David Autor
Department of Economics, E52-438
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
dautor@mit.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/125/history/4037
1        Introduction

        American governments and private organizations spent $187 billion on financial aid to U.S. un-

dergraduates in 2018. Government grant aid amounted to about $3,700 per full-time undergraduate,

while private and institutional grants came to almost $6,000 per student.1 It is unclear whether

this vast expenditure increases college enrollment and completion. Evidence on aid effects is scarce

for at least two reasons. First, aid decisions are confounded with student characteristics like family

background and ability. Second, naturally-occurring variation in aid rules typically changes aid

packages by only a few hundred dollars. It's hard to say whether the response to such modest

changes predict those of withdrawing or adding major aid programs.

        This paper assesses the effects of grant aid on degree completion in the context of a randomized

field experiment that allocated exceptionally generous scholarships to 3,700 high school seniors

graduating between 2012 and 2016. This experiment was conducted in partnership with the Susan

Thompson Buffett Foundation (STBF), which funds about eleven percent of Nebraska high school

seniors who go on to attend a Nebraska public college.2 Characterized by modest merit cutoffs, a

focus on applicants to public colleges, and strict family income eligibility caps, the STBF program

targets an economically-disadvantaged population judged capable of college-level work. Three-

quarters of those in the experimental sample are eligible for need-based federal Pell grant aid,

one-third are nonwhite, and fewer than a third have a parent with a bachelor's degree. STBF

awards are unusually generous and comprehensive, paying college costs for up to five years at any

Nebraska public four-year college and up to three years at any Nebraska two-year college. Because

STBF grant aid can be applied to any part of a student's total cost of attendance--tuition, fees,

books, room and board, personal expenses, and transportation--STBF awards are offset little by

clawbacks or caps that affect other sorts of aid.

        For whom and by how much does STBF aid boost degree completion? Random assignment of

STBF awards shows that aid boosts six-year BA completion rates for students targeting four-year

schools by about 8 points (on a base of 63 percent). Degree gains are concentrated in groups of
    1
     These statistics are from https://research.collegeboard.org/trends/student-aid/figures-tables. The
federal government also loaned an average of $4,410 per undergraduate in 2018.
   2
     Authors' calculations from data obtained from STBF and Coordinating Commission for Postsecondary Education
(2013).




                                                      1
four-year applicants who are unlikely to have otherwise enrolled in four-year programs and who

have low predicted four-year completion rates. This inverse relationship between baseline expected

completion rates and the causal effect of aid on BAs is not a simple ceiling effect: even in applicant

groups with the highest predicted completion rates, degree attainment is far from certain. Aid to

applicants targeting two-year schools does not increase associate degrees but may increase BAs.

The latter effect is positive but small, and not significantly different from zero.

       Our analysis explains degree gains for four-year targeting applicants with the aid of a simple

causal model. Specifically, we show that degree effects appear to be explained by the effect of awards

on credit units earned towards a BA in the first year of study. In other words, aid is effective when

it promotes early and deep engagement with a four-year college program. This "early engagement"

mediator accounts for heterogeneous effects by target campus (e.g., whether a student targets a

University of Nebraska campus in Omaha or Lincoln) and across covariate subgroups defined by

characteristics like race and ACT scores. Outside of the early engagement channel, aid is unrelated

to completion. In the language of instrumental variables (IV), endogenous early engagement appears

to satisfy an exclusion restriction for models that use randomized award offers to identify causal

effects. We find little support for other channels through which awards might affect completion. We

also find that aid accompanied by academic support services (delivered through a program called

Learning Communities) appears to generate no more degrees than do financial awards alone. Our

results comparing recipients of academic support services with other award recipients should be

seen as preliminary, however, since this relies on data for a single cohort.3

       We conclude with an economic analysis of program costs for STBF applicants targeting four-year

schools. This analysis highlights the gap between the private and social costs of marginal degrees.

On average, scholarship awards to students targeting bachelor's degrees cost the funder $34.3K ,

while raising direct costs of attendance (tuition plus books and supplies) by only $5.6K . Viewed

through this lens, most funder spending is a transfer. At the same time, the estimated lifetime

earnings gains generated by scholarship awards appear likely to exceed the sum of incremental

educational costs and foregone earnings for each of the subgroups examined here (defined by race,

gender, academic preparation, and Pell eligibility). The comparison of expected gains with funder
   3
   Larger samples, expected to be available in years to come, should generate more precise estimates of the causal
impact of Learning Community services.




                                                        2
costs is more mixed, but gains are large enough to outweigh costs for award recipients whose degree

attainment is strongly affected by scholarship awards. This includes the group of Pell-eligible

applicants, nonwhite and urban applicants, applicants who have weaker academic preparation, and

those without college-educated parents. From a funder's point of view, aid targeting increases

program efficiency markedly.



2    Background

    Our study builds on decades of empirical work examining causal effects of government-provided

post-secondary financial aid. Since the pioneering investigation by Fuller, Manski and Wise (1983),

economists have explored the hypothesis that post-secondary aid is largely inframarginal, leaving

many recipients' college outcomes unchanged. The question of whether aid really boosts schooling

is challenging because aid and educational attainment are correlated for reasons unrelated to the

impact of aid itself. The risk of selection bias motivates sophisticated econometric identification

strategies that exploit administrative or rule-based variation, such as income cutoffs and program

timing. Marx and Turner (2018), for example, use discontinuities in the Pell Grant formula to

evaluate aid effects on City University of New York (CUNY) students. Regression discontinuity

(RD) estimates suggest Pell aid reduces CUNY students' borrowing without affecting their college

enrollment. Another RD study, Cohodes and Goodman (2014), finds that a Massachusetts award

program known as the Adams Scholarship reduces college completion by diverting recipients away

from higher-quality private options. Other work, reviewed in Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2008)

and Deming and Dynarski (2010) yields a wide range of estimated aid effects.

    Programs like the pathbreaking Georgia HOPE scholarship, the Massachusetts Adams Scholar-

ship, and similar schemes in many other states, are of special interest to middle class and lower-

income students who favor relatively inexpensive public colleges and universities. Dynarski (2004)

reviews econometric studies of state merit aid programs modeled on Georgia HOPE. Most of this

research exploits state-by-cohort variation in access to government aid. Programs that have since

emulated the original HOPE model appear to have large effects on college attendance, though

HOPE specifically seems to be among the most effective.




                                                3
      Our study is closely related to the Anderson et al. (2019) randomized evaluation of privately-

funded grant aid for low-income public college students in Wisconsin allocated through a program

known as the Wisconsin Scholars Grant (WSG). The WSG offered $3,500 per year to Pell-eligible

Wisconsin residents enrolled as full-time freshmen at four-year schools and up to $1,800 per year to

Pell-eligible two-year students. WSG awards seem to have engendered modest gains in sophomore

enrollment for four-year students, with no evidence of award-induced enrollment effects among two-

year students. Longer-term results suggest the WSG did not change degree completion. The WSG

research design benefits from random assignment, but it bears emphasizing that STBF awards are

more than twice as large as the Wisconsin Scholars Grant. Most critically, STBF awards target

college-considering high school students, while WSG awards are made to already-enrolled first-year

college students. This difference in timing features in our explanation of STBF-induced completion

gains: we argue that these gains are driven by applicants who aspire to attend four-year programs

but would not do so without aid.


2.1      The STBF Scholarship Program

      STBF is the largest private provider of post-secondary grant aid in Nebraska, and almost cer-

tainly one of the largest in the country. STBF has been funding Nebraskan college students since

1965, and now supports nearly 4,000 students each year. More than half of Pell-eligible Nebraska

seniors who apply for federal aid also apply for an STBF scholarship.4

      Nebraska-resident high school seniors and Nebraska high school graduates who have not yet

attended college are eligible for STBF awards. STBF financial support is awarded in view of

financial need as summarized by the FAFSA expected family contribution (EFC), as well as on

the basis of merit. EFC cutoffs for STBF awards were $15,000 in 2012 and $10,000 thereafter.

For comparison, the 2013 Pell threshold was $5,081. STBF applications are due February 1 of the

calendar year when students aim to enroll (applicants may submit FAFSAs later), and scholarship

decisions are announced in mid-April. Applicants are asked to identify a first-choice target school

in the event they are funded (such as the University of Nebraska at Omaha, Chadron State College,

or Mid-Plains Community College.) However, if awarded a scholarship, students can use it at any

Nebraska public college.
  4
      Authors' calculations from data obtained by request from the Federal Student Aid office.


                                                          4
    STBF aid can be applied toward any federally-recognized cost of attendance (COA) at any

public two-year or four-year college in Nebraska. Conditional on good academic standing (award

recipients are expected to maintain at least a 2.0 GPA), STBF awards for four-year students are

renewable for up to five years and awards for two-year students are renewable for up to three years.

Award amounts are campus-specific, and calibrated to the relevant cost of tuition and fees plus a

$500 book allotment. For example, 2013 awards provided $8,500 per academic year for full-time

students at the University of Nebraska's Lincoln campus, where tuition and fees amounted to $8,060.

    STBF aid has much in common with major public programs. Like the federal government's Pell

program, STBF awards are based in part on financial need. Like many state aid programs, STBF

considers a variety of applicant features including financial need, indicators of college readiness, and

information about individual experience found in essays and letters of recommendation. Readiness

criteria for STBF funding is based on high school GPA (recipients must have a high school GPA

above 2.5). STBF awards are more generous than Pell grants and available to many applicants with

an EFC above the Pell cutoff. On the other hand, some state programs approach STBF levels of

generosity. (Deming and Dynarski 2010 compare award levels and treatment effects for a wide array

of post-secondary support programs.) Generous state benchmarks include the CalGrant program

examined by Kane (2003) and Bettinger et al. (2019), and the Texas Longhorn Opportunity Schol-

arship and Century Scholars programs evaluated by Andrews, Imberman and Lovenheim (2020).

Combined with Pell, the Texas programs cover all tuition and fees at The University of Texas and

Texas A&M. Like STBF awards, the Texas programs target low-income college-bound high school

students and provide a range of academic support services to recipients who enroll at a covered

campus.

    Many recipients of STBF awards (known as Buffett Scholars) attend the University of Nebraska,

known locally as "NU." Scholarship winners who attend one of NU's three main campuses-- Lincoln

(UNL), Omaha (UNO), or Kearney (UNK)--are required to participate in STBF-funded Learning

Community (LC) programs during their first and second years of college.5 These programs, detailed

in Kezar and Kitchen (2020), incorporate a mix of college classes for STBF-funded students, social
   5
     STBF introduced Learning Communities in 2008. From 2008 to 2013, all awardees participated in Learning Com-
munities. After 2013, some scholarship recipients did not have to participate in LC programming. More information
on these scholars follows.




                                                       5
activities, peer mentoring, and academic advising. Many LC participants at UNK and UNL live in

dedicated dorm space.6


2.2     Research Design and Sample Construction

      Among scholarship applicants aiming to enroll in the fall of 2012 through the fall of 2016, a

subset of STBF awards were allocated by random assignment. Applicants in these experimental

cohorts were first scored according to college-readiness, need criteria, and other factors important

to the Foundation. The highest-scoring applicants (roughly 15 percent of the applicant pool) were

guaranteed awards, while the lowest-scoring applicants (roughly 10 percent) were removed from

consideration. The rest were subject to random assignment, with award rates determined by a

variety of constraints on award counts at the target schools in each cohort. Because award rates

differ, our regression estimates discussed below control for a full set of target-school by application-

year dummies to reflect differing award rates. We refer to these controls as "strata dummies."

      In the 2013­16 cohorts, treated applicants targeting NU campuses received one of two types of

scholarships. The first, described to recipients as "Susan T. Buffett Scholarships" combined financial

aid with an obligation to participate in LCs. The second, "College Opportunity Scholarships"

(COS), consisted of aid only. This was designed to reveal any incremental treatment effects due to

LC participation. In practice, awards with and without an LC component generate similar effects

on college enrollment and degree completion. Our ability to distinguish effects of the two types of

awards is limited, however, by the size of the COS treatment sample. Most of the analysis below

therefore pools the two treatment groups.

      The five cohorts involved in the randomized study include 3,699 treated applicants (applicants

offered aid) and 4,491 controls. Of these, 6,845 indicated a four-year college as their target school

were they to be funded; the rest indicated that they would prefer a two-year school. A breakdown

of the number of applicants in the treatment and control groups by application year and target

campus appears in Appendix Table A1. Of the 6,845 applicants targeting a four-year campus, 2,197

were offered STBF scholarships and 862 were offered COS awards (where only STBF awards include

mandated LC participation for NU students). Of the 1,345 applicants targeting two-year schools,
  6
   Impact evaluations of LC programs and LC-type services include Bloom and Sommo (2015), Angrist, Lang and
Oreopoulos (2009), Weiss et al. (2015) and Bettinger and Baker (2014).




                                                    6
640 were offered scholarships. The discussion below distinguishes effects by target school program

length, referring to applicants targeting NU and other four-year colleges as in the "four-year strata,"

and those targeting community colleges as in the "two-year strata."


2.3     Data and Descriptive Statistics

      Data for this project come from the STBF online application, linked with administrative records

from Nebraska's public colleges and from the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), which covers

most American post-secondary schools. Scholarship application records cover a rich set of base-

line characteristics, including high school transcripts, ACT scores, and demographic and financial

information from the FAFSA.7 Over 90 percent of STBF applicants who ultimately enrolled in

college attended a Nebraska public post-secondary school. These colleges and universities provided

information on their students' enrollment, aid packages, and academic outcomes. To capture enroll-

ment at private and out-of-state colleges, we supplemented school-provided data on post-secondary

outcomes with information from the NSC. Appendix A provides additional information about data

sources and data processing.

      The first two columns of Table 1 compare eligible scholarship applicants with a statewide sample

of high school seniors.8 STBF applicants are from households with an average income equal only

to about half the average for the broader population of Nebraska high school seniors. Compared to

the average Nebraska high school senior, STBF applicants are disproportionately more likely to be

female and less likely to have a parent who attended college. ACT scores among STBF applicants

are similar to those of other Nebraska ACT test-takers, though applicants are more likely to have

taken the ACT.

      Consistent with the criteria used to evaluate applications, STBF's top-scoring applicants (guar-

anteed awards) have academic credentials well above the smaller group of applicants that did not

qualify for random assignment. Columns 3 and 4 in Table 1 compare the top- and lowest-scoring

applicants. Statistics for the experimental sample (the group subject to random assignment, de-

scribed in column 5) show that applicants guaranteed STBF awards without random assignment
  7
    Data on the race of 2012 and 2013 applicants comes from the state department of motor vehicles.
  8
    Information on Nebraska public high school students was obtained from the Nebraska Department of Education
online database, Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Realties Program (SEER), and ACT National Reports (ACT
2012).




                                                      7
had lower family incomes and less-educated parents than applicants in the experimental group. This

group also includes a higher proportion of Hispanic applicants. At the other end of the distribution,

applicants disqualified before random assignment have lower high school grades and ACT scores

than those subject to random assignment.

        Finally, the last column of Table 1, which reports strata-adjusted differences in treatment and

control characteristics, shows random assignment balanced the characteristics of treatment and

control students. Appendix Table A2 reports similar balance statistics within target-school strata.



3        Gauging Award Impact

        STBF paid $8,200 on average towards the first year of study for treated students targeting a

four-year program. Panel A of Figure 1 shows that these awards boosted applicants' first-year

financial aid packages from $13,300 to $17,500. Importantly, however, Panel B shows that while a

dollar awarded raised total aid by only 52 cents, the gap between funder cost and amount received is

due almost entirely to a reduction in loans. In fact, for every dollar awarded, grant aid rose 96 cents,

with concomitant declines of 33 cents in loans and 5 cents in earnings through work-study programs.

Appendix Figure A1 reports award effects on aid for applicants in two-year strata. Consistent with

the much lower cost of two-year programs, Figure A1 shows average first-year award amounts of

around $3,900. Here too, STBF awards increased grant aid substantially, in this case by one extra

dollar for each dollar awarded.9


3.1        Effects on Enrollment and Degrees

        The reduced-form analysis discussed in this section ignores considerations of initial award take-

up. As 93 percent of applicants who receive an award accept it, this is innocuous. The more

structured analysis outlined in the next section uses randomized award offers to construct two-stage

least squares (2SLS) estimates of the effect of mediating post-secondary choices, like the type of

college attended in the first year enrolled, on degree completion.
    9
        Award effects on loans in the two-year strata are small because two-year students borrow relatively little.




                                                              8
    Reduced-form treatment effects on post-secondary outcomes, Yi , are regression estimates of

coefficient  in the equation

                                               Yi = Xi  + Ai + i ,                                                 (1)

where Ai indicates a scholarship was offered to applicant i. The covariate vector Xi includes

saturated controls for application year and target institution, the strata variables that determine

experimental award rates. Equation (1) was estimated using the 8,190 randomized applicants who

applied between 2012­2016.

    All but 4 percent of control-group applicants in four-year strata enrolled in college in the fall

semester following their award application. Even so, as can be seen at the top of column 2 in Table

2, STBF awards boosted any-college enrollment rates among four-year applicants by a statistically

significant 2.6 percentage points. Moreover, while award offers had only modest effects on any-

college enrollment in the four-year strata, they appear to have increased enrollment in four-year

programs by almost 11 points (on a base of 83 percent). Much of this gain is attributable to a 6.7

point decline in enrollment at two-year schools.

    Like many state-funded financial aid schemes, the STBF program is meant to encourage in-state

public college enrollment. The estimates in panel B of Table 2 show that STBF awards increased

Nebraska public college enrollment among four-year applicants by almost 7 points, a gain driven

by an even larger effect on NU enrollment. Paralleling the award-induced decline in any two-year

enrollment, awards induced a marked decline in Nebraska community college enrollment. The

estimates in Panel B also show a modest award-induced drop in out-of-state and private college

enrollment.10

    Columns 3 and 4 in Table 2 report estimates of the impact of regular awards (with LCs) and

COS awards (without LCs) for applicants targeting an NU campus in the 2013-2016 cohorts. (Only

students in these cohorts were eligible for COS awards.) Estimates of the regular award's impact

is similar in this sample (column 3) and the full sample of four-year applicants (column 2). Within

this sample, our estimates of the impacts of COS and regular awards are similar.
   10
      Most STBF applicants who enrolled outside of Nebraska's public colleges and universities attended private schools
in the Midwest. The top five schools outside Nebraska's public system were Nebraska Wesleyan University, Creighton
University, Hastings College, Concordia University, and Midland University, all religiously-affiliated private institu-
tions in Nebraska.




                                                          9
   The initial enrollment gains generated by award offers in four-year strata led to a persistent

increase in college enrollment. This is apparent in Figure 2, which plots treatment and control

enrollment rates each semester after random assignment. The sample used to compute each point

omits applicants who had completed a college degree by the time the enrollment outcome was

recorded. Conditional on not having earned a degree, college enrollment in the treated group is

sharply higher than college enrollment in the control group 2-5 years after random assignment. The

figure therefore suggests that awards reduced college dropout rates (by keeping students in school

early on) while also lengthening time to completion for some.

   STBF award offers boosted college enrollment rates more for applicants in two-year strata than

for applicants in four-year strata. In particular, the estimate at the top of column 6 in Table 2 shows

a gain of 5.8 points in any-college enrollment for the two-year group (compared with a control mean

of 90 percent, reported in column 5). Four-year enrollment gains are much smaller, however, for

applicants in two-year strata: awards increase the probability a two-year targeting applicant enrolls

in a four-year program by only 3.8 points. The estimates in panel B also show awards generated a

marked gain in Nebraska public college enrollment for applicants in two-year strata, due mostly to

a shift towards NU. Perhaps surprisingly, increased enrollment at NU appears to be mostly a net

gain in college enrollment rather than a move away from two-year schools.

   Our working paper presents additional estimates of award effects on college enrollment and

persistence (Angrist et al. 2016).


Degree Completion

   STBF awards boosted six-year BA completion rates by 8.4 percentage points for applicants in

four-year strata, a substantial gain relative to the control mean of 63 percent. Estimated degree

completion effects, currently available for the 2012-13 cohorts, appear in column 2 of Table 3. Even

with data on only two cohorts, the overall estimated completion effect is reasonably precise, with

a standard error of 0.02. A comparison of columns 2 and 3 shows that estimated regular award

effects are similar when computed for all four-year targeters and 2013 applicants targeting NU. The

estimated COS effect (column 4) is also close to the regular-award effect column 3) for this sample,

though the COS estimates are somewhat less precise.




                                                  10
      The increase in BAs is partly accounted for by a shift from two-year to four-year programs.

STBF awards reduced associate degree completion by 3 points for applicants in four-year strata,

with similar drops seen for the 2013-only NU sample and among COS award winners. Most of

the 8.4 point gain in BA completion, however, is due to a 5.8 point decline in the likelihood that

applicants earn no degree.11

      As can be seen in column 6 of Table 3, awards do not appear to have increased associate degrees

among applicants in two-year strata. Estimates in this column show a modest positive impact on

BAs in two-year strata, but this estimate is not significantly different from zero. It seems especially

noteworthy that awards made to applicants in two-year strata, who indicated a desire to attend

two-year programs, have generated no discernible rise in two-year degree completion.

      Figure 3 plots award effects on BA completion rates in years four through six, estimated sepa-

rately by target campus for applicants in four-year strata. As suggested by Figure 2, STBF awards

appear to have increased time to completion for some. This delay is visible in statistically signifi-

cant declines in completion rates four years out for applicants targeting UNL and UNK of roughly

5 points. However, completion rates rise five years after random assignment. Award offers boost

completion rates most clearly for applicants targeting UNO, by 8 points five years out and a re-

markable 15 points six years out (both statistically significant). Estimated effects for applicants

targeting other NU campuses are much smaller and close to the margin of statistical significance.

Estimated five- and six-year completion effects for applicants targeting state colleges are positive,

but considerably less precise than the corresponding estimates for applicants targeting NU.

      The large degree gains seen for UNO applicants play a leading role in our account of the mech-

anism by which awards increase completion. UNO serves a mostly low-income, disproportionately

nonwhite population. In comparison to applicants targeting other campuses, UNO-targeting award

winners are less likely to enroll in a four-year college in the absence of STBF support. It's also

worth noting that a year-by-year analysis of treatment effects in four-year strata shows similar de-

gree gains for award winners with and without mandatory participation in LCs. This can be seen

in Appendix Figure A2, which plots the two types of award effects estimated four to six years after
 11
      Degree outcomes in Table 3 are not mutually exclusive.




                                                         11
random assignment. The analysis below therefore pools the LC and non-LC treatment groups in

the four-year strata analyses.12


3.2      Degree Effects by Subgroup

       Consistent with large award-induced degree gains for applicants targeting UNO, award effects

are especially impressive for Omaha residents. This is documented at the top of Figure 4, which

shows a 16 point effect on Omaha residents by year six, with only a (marginally significant) 5 point

gain for other four-year strata applicants. The rest of the figure contrasts award effects in other

demographic breakdowns of interest. In particular, we see degree gains of 12 points for treated

nonwhite applicants, with a corresponding gain of only seven points for whites. This aligns with

large effects for Omaha residents and applicants targeting UNO since nonwhite Nebraskans are

concentrated in Omaha.13 At the same time, Figure 4 shows little difference in impact by gender.

Finally, the figure shows award effects that are larger for Pell-eligible applicants than for applicants

with family incomes above the Pell threshold. This too aligns with differences in impact by race

and Omaha residence since Pell-eligible applicants are over-represented in Omaha.

       Figure 5 reports completion rates and estimated degree gains in subgroups defined by variables

that predict college readiness. Here, we see larger gains for the less-prepared. Among applicants

with ACT scores below the Nebraska median, awards appear to boost six-year completion rates by

14 points, with a gain of only 5 points in the complementary subgroup. This difference is made even

more impressive by the low completion rate in the low-ACT control group (43%). Estimates by

high-school GPA show a similar pattern. Figure 5 also shows an estimated effect for first-generation

applicants that's twice as large as the estimate for applicants from more-educated families. The

estimated award effect among four-year applicants who indicated they considered attending a two-

year program is slightly higher than the estimate for the complementary subgroup.
  12
     These estimates may change as degree data are added to the COS-eligible sample. Currently, differences in COS
award effects by target campus are not statistically significant.
  13
     Nearly 60 percent of Omaha-resident applicants are nonwhite. Other statistics for Omaha residents appear in
Appendix Table A3.




                                                       12
4     Explaining Award Effects

    The widely-differing subgroup effects plotted in Figures 3 through 5 are explained here by a

causal mediation story that hinges on the type of campus at which applicants first enroll. Specifi-

cally, we argue that an award-induced shift towards early and strong engagement with a four-year

college is the primary channel by which STBF aid generates additional bachelor's degrees. Variation

in the strength of award-induced shifts toward four-year programs by applicants' target campus,

demographic group, and college-readiness provides a coherent account of reduced form treatment

effects across all of these groups.


4.1   College Targets and Destinies

    Most award recipients in four-year strata started their college careers on a four-year campus.

But many applicants not selected for an award also embarked on a four-year program, especially

those with a four-year target. How did awards change the likelihood of four-year college enrollment?

We describe the nature and extent of award-induced changes in initial college enrollment using the

notion of potential enrollment.

    Let categorical variable Wi contain the name of the first college at which applicant i enrolls and

define potential school enrollment variables W0i and W1i indexed by award offers, Ai . Potential

enrollment variable W1i names the school where applicant i would enroll when offered an award,

while W0i names the school where i enrolls otherwise. Observed enrollment can be written as

                                      Wi = W0i (1 - Ai ) + W1i Ai .                               (2)

Similarly, it's useful to define an indicator of potential target-school attendance,

                                      Tki = 1{Wki = i }; k = 0, 1,

where i is the name of applicant i's target campus. Potential target attendance variable T1i

indicates applicants who enroll at their target school when offered an award, while T0i indicates

those enrolling in the target without an STBF award. Observed target enrollment, Ti , is determined

by potential target enrollment following a equation similar to (2).




                                                   13
       Invoking a monotonicity condition analogous to that introduced by Imbens and Angrist (1994),

we assume STBF awards never inhibit target college enrollment. The effects of an award on Ti for

applicants with Xi = x then determine the target compliance share for this group. Formally, we

have

       E [Ti |Ai = 1, Xi = x] - E [Ti |Ai = 0, Xi = x] = E [T1i - T0i |Xi = x] = P [T1i > T0i |Xi = x],   (3)

as long as the conditioning vector Xi includes controls for random assignment strata. The first

equality in equation (3) is a consequence of the conditional random assignment of Ai , while the

second reflects monotonicity, which means that T1i  T0i . In a model with additive control for

covariates, target compliance is identified by the coefficient on Ai in a regression of Ti on Ai and

Xi .

       The effects of STBF awards on Ti mostly mirror the award effects on degrees. We document

this similarity in Panel A of Figure 6, which plots the effects of Ai on target enrollment by strata

and subgroup. Dots on the bars in Figure 6 mark group-specific award effects for reference. We see,

for example, that among four-year applicants targeting UNO, target compliance is almost double

target compliance for applicants in other four-year strata. Likewise, target compliance is higher

for nonwhite students and Omaha residents. On the other hand, compliance is similar for men

and women. With one exception (the split by Pell-eligibility), target compliance differentials are

consistent with the direction of differences in group-specific award effects.

       Award effects on target compliance by measures of college readiness also parallel the differences

in degree gains seen across college-readiness subgroups. Figure 5 shows especially large degree gains

for applicants with below-median ACT scores and below-median high school GPAs. Differences

in target compliance across these splits are also large, with higher target compliance in less-ready

groups.

       By definition, target compliers in the four-year strata enroll in a four-year program when Ai = 1.

Even so, target compliance helps explain degree gains because, for many applicants in the four-year

strata, non-target programs are unlikely to lead to a BA. We show this by grouping college choices

into categories labeled by c  {4, 2, 0} for four-year, two-year, and unenrolled students, respectively.

Let 1{W0i  c} indicate enrollment in college category c when a student does not have an STBF




                                                       14
award. The conditional mean of this variable,

                                         c = E [1{W0i  c}|T1i > T0i ],

measures the rate at which target compliers enroll in different sorts of programs in the event they fail

to receive an award. As in Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2017), we refer to c as describing the distribution

of counterfactual destinies. We can estimate c using 2SLS.14

       Panel B of Figure 6 plots estimated destiny distributions for target compliers in four-year strata,

separately by target campus and subgroup. A key finding here is the substantial heterogeneity across

subgroups in the fraction of compliers who enroll in four-year programs without STBF aid. In the

breakdown by target campus, for example, only those applicants targeting UNO are very unlikely

to find their way to a four-year program absent an STBF award. This fact, in combination with

a relatively high target-campus compliance rate in the UNO group, contributes to the out-sized

degree gains among applicants targeting UNO. A similar pattern is visible in other conditional

destiny contrasts: applicants in demographic and college-readiness subgroups where degree gains

are most impressive, such as Omaha residents and applicants with low ACT scores, are especially

unlikely to end up in a four-year program absent an STBF award.


4.2      Measuring Mediation

       Figures 4­6 show remarkable alignment between patterns of degree gains, target compliance, and

college enrollment destinies across strata and subgroups. This alignment suggests a parsimonious

mediation hypothesis that focuses on early engagement with four-year programs. To make this

hypothesis concrete, let f1i denote the fraction of a full-time four-year course load an applicant

completes in the school year immediately following random assignment.15 Our mediation hypothesis

leads to model in which awards boost f1i , which in turn increases BA completion, Yi . This model
  14
     Abadie (2002) shows how to identify the marginal distributions of outcomes and complier characteristics in treated
and untreated states under assumptions like those in Imbens and Angrist (1994). In this case, the destiny distribution
is identified by an IV estimand that uses Ai to instrument (1 - Ti ), with outcome variable (1 - Ti )1{Wi  c}:

                               E [(1 - Ti )1{Wi  c}|Ai = 1] - E [(1 - Ti )1{Wi  c}|Ai = 0]
                         c =                                                               ,
                                           E [(1 - Ti )|Ai = 1] - E [(1 - Ti )|Ai = 0]

computed separately for each c. The estimates reported in Figure (6) control for covariates and were therefore
computed using 2SLS.
  15
     Under the rules for award determination, a full load is defined as 12 credit units per semester and 24 credit units
per year.




                                                          15
can be written:

                                     Yi = 1 Xi + µ1 f1i + 1i                                                          (4)

                                    f1i = 10 Xi + 11 Ai + 12 Xi Ai + 1i ,                                             (5)

where 1i in equation (4) is the random part of potential degree completion in the absence of

treatment, and µ1 is the causal effect of interest. Equation (5) is the first stage for a 2SLS procedure

that uses Ai to instrument f1i . The first stage residual, denoted 1i in equation (5), is uncorrelated

with Ai by construction.

       Equation (5) allows the first-stage effect of award offers on first-year four-year credits to vary

with covariates. We can write the covariate-specific first stage as:

                                                (Xi ) = 11 + 12 Xi .

Importantly, the causal relationship of interest, modeled by (4), omits interactions between f1i and

Xi . The reduced form implied by (4) and (5) therefore satisfies

                         (Xi ) = E [f1i |Xi , Ai = 1] - E [f1i |Xi , Ai = 0] =  (Xi )µ1 ,                             (6)

for each value of Xi . In other words, the IV assumptions motivating (4) and (5) imply that all

heterogeneity in reduced-form aid effects by strata and subgroup is explained by differences in the

extent to which offers change early four-year engagement, f1i .

       Figure 7 gauges this mediation hypothesis with a "visual instrumental variables" (VIV) picture

of µ1 . This VIV figure plots estimated reduced-form effects for degree outcomes, ^(Xi ), against the

corresponding first-stage estimates, ^ (Xi ). The sample includes applicants in two-year and four-year

strata, with a single cell for all applicants in the two-year group. The vector Xi includes dummies

indicating four-year target campuses (UNO, UNL, UNK, and state colleges), and dummies for the

demographic and college-readiness subgroups in Figures 4 and 5. Because both ^(Xi ) and ^ (Xi )

vary freely with Xi , the slope of the line through these points is an IV estimate of µ1 identified by

instrumenting f1i in equation (4) using both Ai and the set of interactions between Xi and Ai . The

figure also plots the point determined by "pooled" first stage and reduced form estimates generated

by an IV model without interactions.16
  16
    The figure plots fitted values from a sample-size weighted regression of       ^(Xi ) on  ^ (Xi ), omitting the pooled
estimate since this point is implied by the cell-specific estimates. The sample in this case is the number of observations


                                                           16
    A regression of ^(Xi ) on ^ (Xi ) fits remarkably well (see Panel A of Figure 7). The fitted line

has a slope of 0.58 when estimated with no intercept (as implied by the proportionality restriction

embodied in equation (6)). The first-stage estimate for female applicants in four-year strata suggests

STBF offers boost f1i by about 0.11. This, in turn, boosts BA completion by about 6.3 points, so

the implied IV estimate for this group is 0.57, close to the slope of the line. Without conditioning

on Xi , the just-identified IV estimate (using only award receipt as an instrument) is 0.59, with

an estimated standard error of 0.14. We report these estimates at the top of column 2 in Table

4. The corresponding OLS estimate, that is, the slope from an un-instrumented regression of BA

completion on f1i controlling for Xi , is remarkably close to the IV estimate at 0.58. We report this

estimate in the first column of Table 4.

    Other panels in Figure 7 and Table 4 repeat the analysis of Panel A with different dependent

variables. The VIV and 2SLS estimates in Panel B of these exhibits suggest f1i boosts overall degree

attainment by only around 0.37, a gain well below the estimated increase in BAs. As can be seen

in Panel C, this discrepancy between increased BAs and overall degree gains reflects the fact that

early engagement with four-year colleges decreases associate degrees.

    The conventional over-identification statistic associated with 2SLS provides a formal test of the

hypothesis that variation in (Xi ) is explained by variation in  (Xi ). This test statistic is essentially

a scaled version of the R2 for the lines plotted in Figure 7 (see, e.g., Section 2.2.2 of Angrist and

Pischke 2009). Test results, along with the associated 2SLS estimates and first-stage F-statistics,

appear in columns 3­5 of Table 4 for alternative specifications of Xi . The large p-values associated

with the over-identification test statistics suggest that any deviation between sample moments and

the proportionality hypothesis expressed by equation (6) can be attributed to sampling variance.


Shifting College Credits

    Awards move some students on the extensive margin; for these students, four-year college is

a binary, yes-no decision. For others, however, awards may affect the number of credits earned.

How much does the intensity of four-year college engagement contribute to the causal mediation
at each value of Xi ; within Xi cells, instrument-specific cell means are unweighted. Conventional 2SLS implicitly
weights both covariate- and instrument-specific conditional means by the corresponding cell size (see, e.g., Angrist
and Pischke 2009). The estimates plotted in Figure 7 and reported in Table 4 are from models that include the vector
Xi as controls.




                                                        17
story suggested by Figure 7 and Table 4? Figure 8 gauges this effect in two ways. Panel A plots

the histograms of four-year credits earned in the first post-treatment year, separately for treatment

and control applicants in four-year strata. The figure documents a large decline in the likelihood

of having earned zero four-year credits, from around 12 percentage points in the control group to

around 4 in the treated group, a statistically significant decline. The histograms also show clear

increases in the probably of earning 24­28 four-year credits. This finding is significant because 24

credits marks a full-time load.

   Panel B of Figure 8 provides another view of the award-induced credit shift. This panel plots

the scaled treatment-control difference in the probability an applicant earns at least s credits, for

each value of s  [1, 40]. This plot is motivated by Angrist and Imbens (1995), which shows that in

causal effect models of an ordered treatment, an IV estimator using a dummy instrument identifies

a weighted average of single-unit causal effects (called average causal response, or ACR). The ACR

averages the one-unit average causal effects of increasing credits from s - 1 to s, for each s. Single-

unit effects are specific to applicants who were induced by awards to move from fewer than s to

at least s credits. Under assumptions detailed in Angrist and Imbens (1995), the weights are the

control-minus-treatment difference in the cumulative distribution function of credits earned in each

group, divided by the corresponding first-stage (the normalization factor). These weights can be

interpreted as the probability that an award causes an applicant to go from fewer than s to at least

s credits earned.

   If awards move some applicants from zero credits earned to 24 or more credits earned, with no

one landing on any intermediate value, the weighting function should be flat for s  [1, 24]. Panel B

of Figure 8 supports this scenario, showing a reasonably flat weighting function from s = 1 through

s = 24, with a slight rise between 12 and 24. This pattern suggests that most applicants for whom

awards impact four-year engagement move from having no credits to at least half-time study. A

few, however, move from low-intensity study to more intense but still part-time study. The fact

that the weighting function declines steeply after 24 suggests awards do little to move students to

more than full-time engagement.




                                                  18
Dynamic Exclusion

      Figure 7 and Table 4 support the hypothesis that early four-year college engagement is a key

channel through which STBF awards increase BA completion. But this finding raises the question

of why we should focus on initial engagement and not, say, sophomore or junior-year measures of

credits earned. Is engagement in the first year of college the key step on the path to BA completion?

Defining fti as the fraction of a full credit load earned in year t, it seems reasonable to imagine

that awards boost fti for t > 1 as well as boosting f1i . These gains, in turn, may also contribute to

degree completion.

      In assessing alternative hypotheses, we note that credit completion is serially correlated: credits

earned in one year predict credits earned later. In particular, award-induced gains in f1i are likely

to be visible in subsequent fti . In practice, award-induced changes in downstream fti , as well as

the consequences of these changes for BA completion, can be explained entirely by award effects on

f1i . This finding leads to a dynamic exclusion hypothesis that strengthens the case for f1i as the

key mediator.

      The first row of Table 5 shows that increases in fti boost degrees. Specifically, this row reports

2SLS estimates of coefficient µti in a causal model for the effect of fti on degree completion that

can be written as

                                       Yi = t Xi + µt fti + ti ; t = 2, 3, 4.                                   (7)

The resulting estimates of µt are around 0.6 (the corresponding OLS estimate, reported in column

1, is 0.58). The instruments here are an award dummy, Ai , interacted with the same strata and

covariates (i.e., elements of Xi ) used to compute the estimates in Table 4. In this case, however,

the sample is limited to applicants in four-year strata since degree gains are concentrated in this

group. Table 5 also reports the first-stage F-statistic for these over-identified models. Some of the

F-statistics are low enough to be worrying, but the associated IV estimates vary little as we add

interactions to the instrument list.17 The corresponding over-identification test statistics, reported

at the bottom of Panel A in Table 5, provide little evidence of instrument-error correlation. Thus,
 17
      LIML estimates of µt (not shown) are virtually indistinguishable from the corresponding 2SLS estimates.




                                                         19
like equation (4), equation (7) seems consistent with the hypothesis of a single causal channel

through which awards generate degrees.

       Large values of µ2 , µ3 , and µ4 in equation (7) can be reconciled with a model attributing all

award effects to f1i if award effects on fti are themselves due to award effects on f1i . The following

model of engagement dynamics formalizes this idea:

                                                fti = t Xi + t f1i + ti ,                                       (8)

where t is the causal effect of f1i on fti and ti is a residual assumed to be uncorrelated with

Ai . Panel B in Table 5 reports IV estimates of t in equation (8), computed using the same

instruments used to estimate µt in Panel A. 2SLS estimates of 2 are consistently close to one,

while corresponding estimates of 3 and 4 are smaller. Across the board, however, gains in f1i are

seen to yield large gains in four-year credits down the road. Moreover, the over-identification test

statistics associated with 2SLS estimates of equation (8) are consistent with the claim that STBF

awards affect four-year credits earned in later years solely by increasing f1i .

       The exclusion restrictions that identify equations (7) and (8) imply an illuminating cross-

equation restriction. In particular, using (8) to substitute for fti in (7) shows that the coefficient

on f1i in equation (4) satisfies:

                                                        µ1 = t µt ,                                             (9)

while the residual in this equation is formed as 1i = ti + µt ti . Therefore, we can derive the

exclusion restriction described by (6) from exclusion restrictions imposed on equations (8) and (7).

       Is (9) worth testing? It's easy to show that, with a single instrument and a common sample,

IV estimates of µ1 must equal the product of IV estimates t and µt . In an over-identified model,

however, testing (9) is the same as testing over-identification in (8).18 The bottom of Table 5

compares 2SLS estimates of µ1 computed using equation (4) with the product of the 2SLS estimates

of µt and t in (7) and (8). These alternative estimates of µ1 are remarkably close to each other.
  18
       Note that as long as ^t is positive, the sample analog of (9) holds if and only if

                                                        ^
                                                        f        ^
                                                          ti = t f1i ,

where hats denote first-stage fitted values and stars signify the partialing out of control vector Xi . Provided the
matrix of instruments has full column rank, this is equivalent to the vector of sample restrictions evaluated by the
over-identification test statistic associated with exclusion of offer dummies and interactions from (8).




                                                             20
Although this comparison does not add any statistical information, this finding suggests that the

over-identifying restrictions at hand are acceptable not merely because the underlying IV estimates

are noisy, but rather because they are close to those implied by the dynamic exclusion hypothesis.



5    Comparing Costs and Benefits

    By way of a provisional cost-benefit analysis, we compare predictions of the award-induced

increase in lifetime earnings with measures of program cost (this analysis is provisional because we

anticipate estimating earnings effects in future work). The funder's costs are easily measured and

may affect program viability, but these are not economic costs since most scholarship spending is a

transfer. Scholarships may increase overall educational spending, however, by increasing time spent

in school and by moving students into more expensive programs. We therefore use the experimental

framework to measure the incremental spending induced by awards, while also reporting per capita

funder spending.

    To determine the impact of award offers on funder spending, we put aid disbursements, Di , on

the left hand side of the reduced-form model for treatment effects, that is, equation (1). No aid is

disbursed for control group applicants, so the effect of STBF offers on Di captures average funder

spending on treated applicants.

    To quantify the extent of marginal educational spending, that is, spending induced by awards,

we replace the cost variable Di with a measure of the cost of college attendance. This variable,

denoted COAi , is proxied by the federally-determined cost of attendance as reported in the In-

stitutional Characteristics File of the publicly-available Integrated Postsecondary Education Data

System (IPEDS, U.S. Department of Education 2019). The imputed COAi variable used here

covers tuition, fees, and an allowance for books and supplies. A value of COAi is computed for

all ever-enrolled applicants, including those who attend private schools or non-Nebraska public

schools.19

    The statistics for Di and COAi reported in Panel A of Table 6 highlight the difference between

STBF disbursements and marginal educational spending. As with the estimates of average funder
  19
     This computation omits housing and transportation costs and uses the smaller of credit-based costs or full-time
tuition. Cost data are missing for one applicant. Costs of books and supplies for eight percent of applicants are
imputed using averages for two- and four-year schools.




                                                        21
cost, treatment values of average COAi in this panel are obtained from a regression of imputed COAi

on strata and treatment dummies. Average COAi is roughly $33, 700 among treated applicants in

the four-year strata, close to average program disbursements in this group ($33, 600). On the other

hand, while mean Di is zero for controls, average control COAi is around $28, 000, only modestly

below average cost in the treated group.

   To put these costs in perspective, Panel B reports funder spending and incremental educational

spending (marginal COA) on the extra degrees attributable to STBF awards. For example, this

calculation divides funder cost per treated applicant of $33,600 in four-year strata by the 0.084 new

BAs created by the treatment, yielding a per-degree cost of $400,000. Funder costs range from a high

of $738,000 for applicants targeting UNK to a low of $238,000 in the UNO stratum, where awards

had the biggest impact. High funder costs reflect the fact that most spending is inframarginal,

at least as far as degrees go. The second row of Panel B shows that marginal spending, that is,

incremental COA for each degree created, is well below per-degree funder cost. Dividing the second

row in the panel by the first shows marginal spending to be no more than 20 percent of funder

spending. The level of per-degree marginal spending ranges from $49,000 in the UNO group to a

little below $100,000 for applicants targeting UNL and UNK.

   Finally, Panel C of Table 6 allocates award effects on COAi to a component that reflects increased

time in school and a component that reflects a shift towards more expensive programs. We refer to

the latter as "cost-upgrading." To gauge the relative importance of these components, let COA1i

denote college costs incurred when applicant i is treated and let COA0i denote costs incurred

otherwise. Because {COAji ; j = 0, 1} is the product of years enrolled (denoted Sji ) and cost per

year (denoted Fji ), we can write:

              log (COA1i ) - log (COA0i ) = log (S1i F1i ) - log (S0i F0i )

                                            = log (S1i ) - log (S0i ) + log (F1i ) - log (F0i ) .
                                                     extra years           extra cost per year

The first term on the second line of this expression captures incremental costs generated by more

time in school, while the second captures cost upgrading, both measured in proportional terms. The

average of each piece is obtained by putting observed time in college and per-semester spending,




                                                    22
respectively, on the left-hand side of equation (1). Averages of the levels of cost components

(S0i , S1i , F0i , and F1i ) appear in Panel A of Table 6.20

    As can be seen at the top of Panel C, awards increased COAi by 23 log points. This estimate

differs from the marginal share reported at the bottom of Panel B because the implicit base here

is control average COA, that is, E [COA0i ], rather than average funder cost for the treatment

group. The pattern of proportional marginal spending across applicants' target strata again mostly

parallels the magnitude of treatment effects on BA completion and years of schooling. In particular,

marginal spending is highest for UNO applicants. The remaining entries in Panel C show that overall

marginal spending is due to lengthened time in college and cost upgrading in approximately equal

measure. Cost-upgrading therefore makes a substantial contribution to marginal spending. At 17

percent, the proportional cost increase from upgrading is largest for applicants targeting UNO, as

we might expect given the relatively low probability applicants in this group would have enrolled

in a four-year program absent treatment. Among applicants targeting UNK and state colleges, by

contrast, estimated cost-upgrading effects are not significantly different from zero.


5.1    Projecting Lifetime Earnings Gains

    The expected lifetime earnings impact of scholarship aid is forecast using a Mincerian wage

equation fit to 2012-16 American Community Survey (ACS) data for employed Nebraska-born men

aged 18-70 with at least a high school degree. The wage equation can be written:

                        ln wi = 1 f (si ) + 2 ei + 3 e2                           2
                                                      i + 4 f (si )ei + 5 f (si )ei + i ,                      (10)

where wi is real hourly earnings calculated from the ACS, si is years of education, and ei is years

of potential experience. Equation (10) includes a quadratic function of potential experience, an

additive function of si , and interactions between the two. Hourly wages are converted to annual

earnings assuming workers work 2000 hours per year. The predicted present value of lifetime

earnings as a function of schooling and experience is obtained by summing the fitted values yielded

by this model.21
 20
    Per-semester spending is an average for each individual student, computed over the student's semesters enrolled.
This analysis omits 15 applicants (4 treatment, 11 control) who never enrolled in college.
 21
    The underlying regression estimates appear in Appendix Table A5. Details of this calculation can be found in
Appendix Section A.




                                                        23
      Predicted annual earnings are computed using two alternative choices of f (si ). The first uses

the degree completion data reported in the ACS and the years of schooling values assigned to these

by Jaeger and Page (1996). Potential experience is defined as ei  max {age-s
                                                                           ^i - 6, 0}, where s
                                                                                             ^i

is the Jaeger and Page (1996) imputed years. This specification assumes returns to schooling are

linear, with no `sheepskin' or degree effects. The second specification focuses on degrees, specifying

f (si ) to be a pair of dummy variables indicating two-year or four-year degree attainment, with high

school graduates and below as the omitted group.22 The formula for potential experience, however,

is unchanged. In this specification, each year of college reduces potential experience but increases

predicted earnings only for those completing a degree.

      Table 7 reports estimates of the PDV of expected lifetime earnings in treatment and control

groups. Applying a discount rate of three percent, STBF awards are estimated to raise the PDV

of lifetime earnings by $33, 600 when computed using years of schooling for earnings prediction and

by $29, 200 when schooling returns reward degrees only. With a discount rate of five percent, the

estimated gains fall to $13, 200 when computed using the linear model and to $13, 900 under the

degrees specification. Perhaps surprisingly, with a low discount rate and linear returns to schooling,

STBF awards are cost-effective in the sample as a whole in spite of the fact that the bulk of award

spending is inframarginal. Positive returns reflect the fact that schooling is valuable: estimates of

(10) imply that a BA raises the PDV of lifetime earnings by about $450, 000. These estimates are

roughly in line with those reported in Avery and Turner (2012).


5.2      Picturing Costs and Benefits

      Figure 9 puts the cost-benefit pieces together for each of the subgroups considered in Section

4.23 The cost-benefit comparisons in the figure take the form of intervals, with the top marker

indicating funder costs and the bottom indicating marginal educational spending, that is, effects

on COAi . Predicted lifetime earnings gains are plotted for each group using the linear and degrees

versions of the wage equation. As in Avery and Turner (2012), these are computed using a discount

rate of three percent.
 22
      The BA group includes those with higher degrees.
 23
      Appendix Table A6 reports the estimates plotted in the figure.




                                                          24
    For many groups, predicted earnings gains fall between funder costs and marginal COAi , a

finding that suggests STBF awards generate a positive social return while costing the funder more

than award-induced earnings gains. Interestingly, however, the earnings gains predicted by the

linear model exceed funder costs for nearly half of the subgroups considered. Groups meeting this

test include Pell-eligible applicants, applicants with below median grades or ACT scores, nonwhite

applicants, first-generation applicants, and Omaha residents. The cost-benefit comparison is less

favorable when time in school has no intrinsic value. Assuming that schooling that does not lead

to degrees has no effect on earnings leaves six groups above the funder-cost threshold.

    Based as they are on a predictive model of lifetime earnings, these cost-benefit comparisons are

provisional. In some respects, however, they're conservative, ignoring the fact that college degrees

tend to boost hours worked as well as hourly wages (Murphy and Topel 2016). The calculations

underlying Table 7 and Figure 9 also ignore any economic return to reductions in college debt, such

as improved productivity at school or in work. Scholars have also suggested that the economic

returns to education may be especially high for students whose school decisions are sensitive to

financial constraints (see, e.g., Card 2001 and Zimmerman 2014).



6    Summary and Conclusions

    Most college financial aid is motivated by a desire to increase educational attainment for students

who would otherwise find themselves unable to complete a degree. It's therefore worth evaluating

aid programs in light of this simple goal. The results of our randomized evaluation of an unusually

generous aid program are both encouraging and cautionary. On one hand, STBF awards increase

four-year degrees substantially. On the other, gains in degree completion are unevenly distributed.

The bulk of award spending is a transfer flowing to applicants whose schooling behavior is unchanged

by awards. Aid boosts degree completion most sharply for applicants who aspire to a BA, but are

unlikely to embark on a four-year program in the absence of aid. Those who benefit most include

groups of applicants seeking to enroll at UNO, Omaha residents, nonwhite applicants, and applicants

with below-median grades and test scores.

    We explain the pattern of degree effects with a parsimonious model that makes the main mediator

of award impact a credit-based measure of initial engagement in a four-year college. Estimates of


                                                  25
this model support the notion that awards induce degree completion in proportion to the extent

that they spark and deepen early engagement with four-year college programs. This finding suggests

there may be a large payoff to other, perhaps less costly, interventions that act to enhance early

engagement (examples include Bulman 2015 and Carrell and Sacerdote 2017).

   Most STBF spending on aid is a transfer, flowing to applicants likely to earn degrees even without

an award. The flip side of high transfer cost is the fact that the marginal educational spending

induced by STBF awards is low. For each subgroup considered here, the projected net earnings

gains from scholarship-induced schooling outweighs the corresponding marginal cost. Moreover,

although most award money is inframarginal, by one measure, the projected earnings gains for

roughly half of the subgroups considered here exceeds the corresponding funder cost. Even so,

our evidence indicates that greater front-loading and increased targeting of financial aid awards is

likely to accomplish even more. Conversely, integrated aid--for example, universal publicly paid

tuition--is likely to generate many fewer college degrees per dollar awarded.




                                                26
References

Abadie, Alberto. 2002. "Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment Effects in Instrumental

  Variable Models." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97(457): 284­292.

Abdulkadiroglu, Atila, Joshua D. Angrist, Yusuke Narita, and Parag A. Pathak. 2017.

  "Research Design Meets Market Design: Using Centralized Assignment for Impact Evaluation."

  Econometrica, 85(5): 1373­1432.

ACT. 2012. "ACT National Profile Reports 2012-2016." ACT, Iowa City, IA.

Anderson, Drew M., Katharine M. Broton, Sara Goldrick-Rab, and Robert Kelchen.

  2019. "Experimental Evidence on the Impacts of Need-Based Financial Aid: Longitudinal Assess-

  ment of the Wisconsin Scholars Grant." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 39(3): 1­19.

Andrews, Rodney J., Scott A. Imberman, and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2020. "Recruit-

  ing and supporting low-income, high-achieving students at flagship universities." Economics of

  Education Review, 74: 1­19.

Angrist, Josh, David Autor, Sally Hudson, and Amanda Pallais. 2016. "Evaluating Post-

  Secondary Aid: Enrollment, Persistence, and Projected Completion." NBER Working Paper

  Series No. 23015.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Guido W. Imbens. 1995. "Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of

  Average Causal Effects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity." Journal of the American

  Statistical Association, 90(430): 431.

Angrist,           Joshua        D.,        and         orn-Steffen
                                                       J¨                   Pischke.      2009.

  Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-

  versity Press.

Angrist, Joshua D., Daniel Lang, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. "Incentives and Services for

  College Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Trial." American Economic Journal: Applied

  Economics, 1(1): 136­163.



                                               27
Avery, Christopher, and Sarah Turner. 2012. "Student loans: Do college students borrow too

  much-or not enough?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 167­192.

Bettinger, Eric, Oded Gurantz, Laura Kawano, Bruce Sacerdote, and Michael Stevens.

  2019. "The long-run impacts of financial aid: Evidence from California's Cal Grant." American

  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(1): 64­94.

Bettinger, Eric P., and Rachel Baker. 2014. "The Effects of Student Coaching in College:

  An Evaluation of a Randomized Experiment in Student Mentoring." Educational Evaluation and

  Policy Analysis, 36(1): 3­19.

Bloom, Dan, and Colleen Sommo. 2015. "Building Learning Communities: Early Results

  from the Opening Doors Demonstration at Kingsborough Community College." Educational

  Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 37(4): 520­541.

Bulman, George. 2015. "The Effect of Access to College Assessments on Enrollment and Attain-

  ment." Journal of Applied Econometrics, 7(4): 1­36.

Card, David. 2001. "Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress of Some Persistent Econometric

  Problems." Econometrica, 69(69): 1127­1160.

Carrell, Scott, and Bruce Sacerdote. 2017. "Why Do College-Going Interventions Work."

  Journal Applied Economics, 9(3): 124­151.

Cohodes, Sarah R., and Joshua S. Goodman. 2014. "Merit Aid, College Quality, and College

  Completion: Massachusetts' Adams Scholarship as an In-Kind Subsidy." American Economic

  Journal: Applied Economics, 6(4): 251­285.

Coordinating Commission for Postsecondary Education. 2013. "Nebraska Higher Education

  Progress Report." Lincoln, NE.

Deming, David J., and Susan M. Dynarski. 2010. "Into College, Out of Poverty? Policies

  to Increase the Postsecondary Attainment of the Poor." In Targeting Investments in Children:

  Fighting Poverty When Resources are Limited. eds. Phillip B. Levine, and David J. Zimmerman,

  Chapter 10, 283­302. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                                28
Dynarski, Susan M. 2004. "The New Merit Aid." In College Choices: The Economics of Where

  to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay For It. Vol. I, eds. Caroline M. Hoxby, 67­93. Chicago: Uni-

  versity of Chicago Press.

Dynarski, Susan M, and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2008. "Complexity and Targeting in Federal

  Student Aid : A Quantitative Analysis." In Tax Policy and the Economy. Vol. 22, eds. James

  Poterba, 109 ­ 150. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Dynarski, Susan M., Steven W. Hemelt, and Joshua M. Hyman. 2015. "The Missing Man-

  ual: Using National Student Clearinghouse Data to Track Postsecondary Outcomes." Educational

  Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 37: 53S­79S.

Fuller, Win, Charles F. Manski, and David A. Wise. 1983. "Enrollment Effects of the BEOG

  Program." In College Choice in America. eds. Charles F. Manski, and David A. Wise, Chapter

  7, 118­128. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. "Identification and Estimation of Local

  Average Treatment Effects." Econometrica, 62(2): 467­475.

Jaeger, David A., and Marianne E. Page. 1996. "Degrees Matter: New Evidence on Sheepskin

  Effects in the Returns to Education." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(4): 733.

Kane, Thomas J. 2003. "A Quasi-Experimental Estimate of the Impact of Financial Aid on

  College-Going." NBER Working Paper Series No. 9703.

Kezar, Adrianna, and Joseph A. Kitchen. 2020. "Supporting First-Generation, Low-Income,

  and Underrepresented Students' Transitions to College Through Comprehensive and Integrated

  Programs." American Behavioral Scientist, 64(3): 223­229.

Marx, Benjamin M., and Lesley J. Turner. 2018. "Borrowing trouble? Human capital invest-

  ment with opt-in costs and implications for the effectiveness of grant aid." American Economic

  Journal: Applied Economics, 10(2): 163­201.

Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. 2016. "Human capital investment, inequality, and

  economic growth." Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S2): S199­S127.


                                                 29
U.S. Department of Education. 2019. "Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System: In-

  stitutional Characteristics File."

Weiss, Michael J., Mary G. Visher, Evan Weissman, and Heather D. Wathington. 2015.

  "The Impact of Learning Communities for Students in Developmental Education: A Synthesis of

  Findings from Randomized Trials at Six Community Colleges." Education Evaluation and Policy

  Analysis, 37(4): 520­541.

Zimmerman, Seth D. 2014. "The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal Stu-

  dents." Journal of Labor Economics, 32(4): 711­754.




                                              30
                                                                                                        A. Year one financial aid effects




                                                                                    20
                                                             10,000 of $) 15,000
                                                                                    15
                                                    Amount (thousands
               amount received ($)


                                                                                    10
                                                5,000
                                                                                    5
                                                                                    0




                                                                                             $8.2          $17.5    $13.3   $15.4     $7.5     $1.6    $4.3         $0.5     $0.9
                                                  0




                                                                                             Total            Total              Total         Total                  Work
                                                                                          total
                                                                                           STBF aid
                                                                                                  aid          grants
                                                                                                               aid                  government loans
                                                                                                                                 grants                       work study
                                                                                                                                                                      study
                                                                                                                                        loans

                                                                                                               Treatment                     Control


                                                                                                        B. Aid effects per dollar awarded
                                                                                   $1
                                                                                   80¢
                              Dollars of aid per dollar of STBF grant

                                                                                   60¢
                                                                                   40¢
                                                                                   20¢




                                                                                                                                                  -33¢                 -5¢
                                                                                   0




                                                                                                              52¢                   96¢
                                                                                   -20¢




                                                                                            Total             Total              Total           Total                Work
                                                                                          STBF aid             aid               grants          loans                study




Figure 1 -- Award effects on on post-secondary aid for applicants in four-year strata. Notes: This figure shows the
effect of an STBF award offer on aid of various kinds in the year after scholarship application. The sample is
restricted to students who targeted four-year colleges and enrolled at a Nebraska public institution. Whiskers mark
95 percent confidence intervals for the treatment effect of an award offer. The regressions used to estimate treatment
effects control for strata dummies.



                                                                                                                            31
                                                              .04
                                                  15,000
                      1




                                                                                       .06
                                                                                                                .09
                                                                                                                                    .11
                      .8
Share of applicants




                            amount received ($)
                                                  10,000
                      .6




                                                                                                                                                     .11
                      .4




                                                  5,000
                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                           .00
                      0




                           fall                            spring      fall        spring        fall         spring    fall     spring   fall   spring    fall        spring
                                                  0




                                          Year 1                total aid     Year 2     grants         Year 3 government Year 4 work study Year 5                Year 6
                                                                                                                  loans

                                                                                             Treatment                 Control




Figure 2 -- Enrollment effects in the four-year strata. Notes: This figure plots the effect of an award on
enrollment rates for students in the four year strata without a BA. Samples differ by year. Regressions control for
strata dummies. Whiskers mark 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                                                                         32
                   .2




                                                                                                                                            .15
                                       .2




                                                                                                                                .17
                   .1
Treatment effect




                                                                                              .08
                                                                                                                                      .06                .05
                                                                                       .05            .05                                          .05
                                                                                        .09                   .03
                                       .1
                    Treatment effect




                                                                                                                          .05                .05
                                                                                               .04                                    .04
                              0




                                                    -.01                         .04                   .03
                                                                      -.03
                                             -.05          -.04
                                       0




                                                        -.02
                                                                       -.03
                                                 -.05
                                                               -.05
                   -.1
                                       -.1
                   -.2
                                       -.2




                                                               Year  4
                                                                Year 4                        Year 5
                                                                                                     Year 5                           Year 6
                                                                                                                                                   Year 6

                                             University of Nebraska           University of Nebraska                  University of Nebraska                    State
                                                    Lincoln                          Omaha                                  Kearney                            Colleges

                                                                      UNL          UNO                          UNK                   SC

Figure 3 -- BA effects by target campus. Notes: This figure plots the effect of an STBF award on degree
completion
    FIGURE for
             3 applicants targeting
               -- Degree effects       four-year
                                 by target       campuses.
                                           campus.          Sample
                                                   Notes: This figure differs by
                                                                      plots the  year.
                                                                                effect of Whiskers mark on
                                                                                                         95 degree
                                                                                          an STBF award      percent
                   completion for applicants targeting four-year campuses. Whiskers mark 95 percent confidence intervals. Sample
confidence   intervals.
     differs by year.




                                                                                                      33
                                            Omaha Resident                                                                               Not an Omaha Resident
                                               (32%)                                                                                             (68%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             .05




                                                                                                                                         .8
                                    .8
                                                                                                      .16                                                                             .02




                                    .7




                                                                                                                                         .6
                                    .6
                                                                                .11




                                                                                                                 Share of applicants
             Share of applicants
                                    .5




                                                                                                                                         .4
                                    .4
                                    .3



                                                                                                                                                              -.06




                                                                                                                                         .2
                                    .2




                                                         .00
                                    .1




                                                                                                                                         0
                                    0




                                         fall        spring     fall        spring    fall        spring                                      fall        spring      fall        spring     fall        spring

                                                Year 4                 Year 5                Year 6                                                  Year 4                  Year 5                 Year 6



                                                         Nonwhite                                                                                                    White
                                                          (35%)                                                                                                      (65%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             .07




                                                                                                                                         .8
                                                                                                                                                                                      .05
                                    .8




                                                                                                                                         .7
                                                                                                                                         .6
                                                                                                                  Share of applicants
                                                                                                      .12
                                    .6




                                                                                                                                         .5
             Share of applicants




                                                                                .05




                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                                                                                                                              -.06
                                    .4




                                                                                                                                         .3
                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                                                                         .1
                                    .2




                                                         .00




                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                              fall        spring      fall        spring     fall        spring
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                     Year 4                  Year 5                 Year 6
                                         fall        spring     fall        spring    fall        spring
                                                Year 4                 Year 5                Year 6



                                                              Female                                                                                                  Male
                                                              (61%)                                                                                                  (39%)
                                                                                                                                         .8
                                    .8




                                                                                                      .09
                                                                                .08
                                                                                                                                         .7
                                    .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .09
                                                                                                                                         .6
                                    .6




                                                                                                                   Share of applicants
             Share of applicants




                                                                                                                                                                                       .02
                                                                                                                                         .5
                                    .5




                                                                                                                                         .4
                                    .4




                                                         -.01
                                                                                                                                         .3
                                    .3




                                                                                                                                                              -.07
                                                                                                                                         .2
                                    .2




                                                                                                                                         .1
                                    .1




                                                                                                                                         0
                                    0




                                         fall        spring     fall        spring    fall        spring                                      fall        spring      fall        spring     fall        spring

                                                Year 4                 Year 5                Year 6                                                  Year 4                  Year 5                 Year 6



                                                    Pell-Eligible                                                                                Not Pell-Eligible
                                                       (74%)                                                                                          (26%)
                                    .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .04
                                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                      .10                                                                             .04
                                    .7




                                                                                                                                         .7




                                                                                .06
                                    .6




                                                                                                                                         .6
                                                                                                                   Share of applicants
              Share of applicants
                                    .5




                                                                                                                                         .5
                                    .4




                                                                                                                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                              -.12
                                    .3




                                                                                                                                         .3




                                                         -.01
                                    .2




                                                                                                                                         .2
                                    .1




                                                                                                                                         .1
                                    0




                                                                                                                                         0




                                         fall        spring     fall        spring    fall        spring                                      fall        spring      fall        spring     fall        spring

                                                Year 4                 Year 5                Year 6                                                  Year 4                  Year 5                 Year 6




Figure 4 -- BA completion in demographic subgroups. Notes: This figure plots mean degree completion rates by
treatment status and subgroup for the four-year strata. Grey lines plot completion rates for control applicants; blue
lines plot the sum of control means and strata-adjusted treatment effects. Whiskers mark 95 percent confidence
intervals. Samples differ by year.




                                                                                                            34
                                          Below-median ACT                                                                                         Above-median ACT
                                                (35%)                                                                                                    (65%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .05




                                                                                                                                              .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                  .03




                                                                                                                                              .7
                                     .8




                                                                                                                                              .6
                                     .7




                                                                                                                       Share of applicants
                                                                                                                                              .5
                                                                                                          .14


                                     .6
              Share of applicants                                                   .10




                                                                                                                                              .4
                                     .5
                                                                                                                                                                      -.06




                                                                                                                                              .3
                                     .4




                                                                                                                                              .2
                                     .3




                                                                                                                                              .1
                                     .2




                                                           .00




                                                                                                                                              0
                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                    fall            spring    fall            spring    fall            spring
                                     0




                                                                                                                                                           Year 4                    Year 5                    Year 6
                                           fall        spring      fall        spring     fall        spring

                                                  Year 4                  Year 5                 Year 6



                                          Below-median GPA                                                                                         Above-median GPA
                                                (47%)                                                                                                    (53%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .05
                                     .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .03




                                                                                                                                              .8
                                     .7
                                     .6




                                                                                                          .12
              Share of applicants




                                                                                                                        Share of applicants
                                                                                                                                              .6
                                     .5




                                                                                    .08
                                     .4




                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                      -.07
                                     .3
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                           -.01
                                     .1
                                     0




                                                                                                                                              0
                                           fall        spring      fall        spring     fall        spring                                        fall        spring        fall        spring        fall        spring
                                                  Year 4                  Year 5                 Year 6                                                    Year 4                    Year 5                    Year 6



                                     No parent with a BA                                                             At least one parent with a BA
                                            (66%)                                                                                (34%)
                                     .8




                                                                                                                                              .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                  .03                      .05
                                     .7




                                                                                                          .10




                                                                                                                                              .7
                                                                                    .06
                                     .6




                                                                                                                                              .6
                                                                                                                        Share of applicants
               Share of applicants
                                     .5




                                                                                                                                              .5
                                     .4




                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                       -.06
                                     .3




                                                                                                                                              .3

                                                            -.03
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                              .1
                                     .1




                                                                                                                                              0
                                     0




                                           fall        spring      fall        spring     fall        spring                                        fall        spring        fall        spring        fall        spring

                                                  Year 4                  Year 5                 Year 6                                                    Year 4                    Year 5                    Year 6




             Two-year college alternate                                                                              No two-year college alternate
                      (33%)                                                                                                    (67%)
                                                                                                                                              .8
                                     .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .08
                                                                                                                                              .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .03
                                     .7




                                                                                                          .10
                                                                                                                                              .6
                                     .6




                                                                              .09
                                                                                                                       Share of applicants
               Share of applicants




                                                                                                                                              .5
                                     .5




                                                                                                                                              .4
                                     .4




                                                                                                                                              .3
                                     .3




                                                                                                                                                                      -.05
                                                            -.01
                                                                                                                                              .2
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                              .1
                                     .1




                                                                                                                                              0
                                     0




                                           fall        spring      fall        spring     fall        spring                                        fall        spring        fall        spring        fall        spring

                                                  Year 4                  Year 5                 Year 6                                                    Year 4                    Year 5                    Year 6




Figure 5 -- BA completion in college readiness subgroups. Notes: This figure plots mean degree completion rates
by treatment status and subgroup for the four-year strata. Grey lines plot completion rates for control applicants;
blue lines plot the sum of control means and strata-adjusted treatment effects. Whiskers mark 95 percent confidence
intervals. Samples differ by year. The median ACT score for Nebraska test-takers is 21. The median high school
GPA for the lottery sample is 3.49. STBF award applicants were asked to indicate their first choice ("target school")
and to rank alternatives. "Two-year college alternate" indicates that a student ranked a two-year college among
their alternative target schools on the STBF application.




                                                                                                                35
                                    A. Target school enrollment by target campus and subgroup




               5% 10% 15% 20% 25%
                0




                                                            es nt
                                                          on nt




                                                                    e
                                                            h A




                                                            rn ive
                                                            W ite




                                                           el le
                                                      Lo ible
                                                                   e




                                                         re BA
                                                      pa PA
                           U O
                           U L
                              K
                             SC




                                                              M e
                                                                  te




                                                           h T
                                                       Lo CT




                                                o r a t BA


                                                                 iv
                                                                 al
                                                                al
                                                        a r de
                                                                 e




                                                        ig P
                             N




                                                       ll- ib


                                                       ig C
                             N

                            N




                                                               hi
                                                                h
                                                              id




                                                              at
                                                        lte at
                                                      H G
                                                              m




                                                              G
                                                     H A
                                                             A
                                                             w
                           U




                                                    Pe -elig
                                                             ig
                                                     ah si




                                                      Pa nt


                                                    r a ern
                                                          Fe




                                                            n
                                                           w
                                                   m re




                                                          w




                                                          re


                                                  2y lt
                                                       N




                                                       ll
                                                 O a
                                              ot ah




                                                    Pe




                                                    o
                                             N Om




                                              N 2y
                                                  N
                                                 ot
                                               N
                                                       Effect of an award on target          Effect of an award on
                                                            school enrollment                 degree completion



                                           B. Destiny distributions for target compliers
              100%
              80%
              60%
              40%
              20%
               0




                                                                    te
                                                                      t

                                                              W ite




                                                      Lo ible
                                                                    le
                                                                     e




                                                            h A
                                                            el le




                                                         re BA
                                                      pa PA
                      U O
                      U L
                         K
                        SC




                                                            es t




                                                                   ve
                                                                  en




                                                           h T




                                                            rn e
                                                      Lo CT




                                                2y te A
                                                        a r en




                                                                  al
                                                                 hi


                                                   Pe Ma




                                                       lte tiv
                                                        ig P
                        N




                                                       ll- gib



                                                       ig C
                        N

                       N




                                                                 h




                                            N yr nt B


                                                               ati
                                                               id




                                                               m




                                                      H G
                                                     ah id



                                                              w




                                                              G
                                                              ig

                                                     H A
                                                              A
                      U




                                                    r a rna
                                                     Pa ent
                                                            Fe


                                                    Pe eli
                                                           on
                                                 m es




                                                           w
                                                          w
                                               O ar




                                                          r
                                                       ll-
                                                       N




                                              o al
                                            an ah




                                                   o
                                          ot Om




                                                N
                                                ot




                                               2
                                              N
                                         N




                                           Four year                              Two-year                   Not enrolled




Figure 6 -- First-stage estimates and counterfactual destinies for target-school compliers in four-year strata. Notes:
Panel A plots the first-stage effect of awards on target-campus enrollment for scholarship applicants in four-year
strata. Bar height in Panel A measures the share of four-year applicant subgroups who are target-school compliers;
target school compliers are applicants who enroll in their target school when awarded scholarships but not otherwise.
Panel B shows the distribution of enrollment by school type for target-school compliers when compliers are
untreated. Enrollment status uses first-year data only. Subgroups are the union of those shown in Figures 4 and 5.

                                                                             36
                                                                                           A. Bachelor's degree




                                             .2
                            reduced form effect on BAs
                                                                                                                                                       UNO
                                                                                                                               low ACT       Omaha
                                                                                                           Pell-elg. no parent BA low GPA




                                              .1
                                                                                  no 2yr alternate UNL parent BA male                       nonwhite
                                                                                                                pooled effect
                                                                                    high GPA white            female                2yr alternate
                                                                                                     high ACT
                                                                                                                SC
                                                                                          not Omaha       UNK
                                                                                                                            not Pell-elg.



                                  0
                                                                     2yr



                                                                                                                                             weighted slope: 0.58
                                             -.1


                                                                                    .05                                  .15                                   .25
                                                                                           first stage effect on first year credits earned




                                                                                                     B. Any degree
                                                              .2
                            reduced form effect on any degree
                                                  .1




                                                                                                                                             Omaha     UNO
                                                                                                                               low ACT
                                                                                                              male                          nonwhite
                                                                                  no 2yr alternate Pell-elg.         no parent BA
                                                                                                         UNL any award               low GPA
                                                                                    high GPA white
                                                                                                           UNKfemale                2yr alternate
                                                                                                          parent BA
                                                                                          not Omaha high ACT                not Pell-elg.
                                     0




                                                                     2yr strata                                   SC



                                                                                                                                             weighted slope: 0.38
                                             -.1




                                                                                    .05                                   .15                                   .25
                                                                                            first stage effect on first year credits earned
                   60




                                                                                            C. Associate degree
                                              0 10 20 30 40 50



                                                                      .05
                                         t reduced form effect on AAs




                                                                                  no 2yr alternate       UNK
                                                                                                    high ACT                            nonwhite
                                                                                                       parent BA male
                                                                     2yr            high GPA white UNL Pell elg. parent BA
                                                                                                                         not Pell-elg.
                                                                                                                                         Omaha
                                                                                        not Omaha    female pooled effect         low GPA
                                                     -.05




                                                                                                                                2yr alternate          UNO
                                                                                                               SC          low ACT
                                         e




                                                                                                                                           weighted slope: -0.25
                                     CT

                         pa GPA




                                         e




                                     PA



                                                                                                                                                              CT
                                         e




                             te A




                                                                                                                                                                         nt
                             ia le
                                       A




                2- nts ale
                          al hite



                                        e
              ab med iden




              be Pe ativ
                                      iv
              ab ah gibl




                                      al


                      ar no B




                                     b
                                  sB




                                                                                                                                                                      de
                    pa fem
                                   m
                                   at




                       m ligi
                                   A




                                   G



                                                                                                                                                             A
                    e m -.15




                                 w




                               rn
                               rn
                               es
                                li




                               nt
                               n

                               n




                               n
                 t O ll e




                              e
                             ia

                             ia




                            te
                 ov a r




                            re




                           ll
                         ed




                         ed
                          al




                                                                                    .05                                   .15                                   .25
              no Pe




                        re




                       m
                      ar
                     m




                                                                                            first stage effect on first year credits earned
                      t




                   ye
                   ye
                   no



                    e




                   w
                   w
                 ov




                 lo
                lo
                2-




              be
             no




                                                                   Effects by subgroup                       Effects by strata                    Pooled effect



Figure 7 -- Visual IV estimates of the effect of award-induced four-year credit completion on degrees. Notes: This
figure plots reduced-form offer effects against first-stage offer effects, estimated in separate regressions by strata,
subgroup, and in the randomization sample at-large. The x-axis shows effects on credit-hours earned at any
four-year institution in the first post-application year. Credit-hours are scaled by 24, the STBF standard for
full-time enrollment. The y-axes shows effects on degree completion. Regression lines in each panel are constrained
to run through the origin and estimated using data weighted by strata and subgroup sample sizes. The sample is
restricted to the 2012 and 2013 cohorts. All models control for strata and subgroup main effects. Whiskers mark 95
percent confidence intervals.                                                                                  37
                                                             A. Four-year credit histograms by treatment status



                          .15
                         .1 .15
                Proportion
        0 .05 .05 .1
           Proportion




                                                  0                    10                 20                       30   40
                            0




                                                      0                10       Treatment20                  Control
                                                                                                                 30     40
                                                                                  creditsEarn_4yr_

                                                                                Density                      Density
                                        .04 .05




                                                          B. Normalized treatment-control difference in credit CDFs
                                   .03 .05
                               Difference




                                                                                      first stage estimate: 2.54
                              .02 .04




                                                                                      first stage SE: 0.48
                        difference
                        .01 .03
                     (1-CDF)
                    0 .02
                (1-CDF)
              0 .01
        -.01 -.01




                                                  0                   10                 20                 30          40
                                                                           Average Credits per Semester
                                                  0                    10     at 4yr Institution
                                                                                          20     in Y1      30          40
                                                                          Average credits per semester at a
                                                                          four-year institution in year one



Figure 8 -- The distribution of four-year credits by treatment status. Notes: Panel A plots the histogram of
four-year credits earned in the first post-application year separately by treatment status. Panel B plots the
difference in the (negative of the) CDF of four-year credits earned by treatment status, normalized to generate the
weighting function described in the text. The x-axis in panel B measures the likelihood that an award shifts
applicants from completing fewer than s credit(s) to completing at least s credit(s). Vertical lines mark 16 and 24
credits completed. The sample includes 2012 and 2013 applicant cohorts in the four-year strata.




                                                                                     38
       60
                                      Thousands of dollars
                                    10 20 30 40 50



                              20 30 40 50 60
                                 0
                   es e



        e m an BA
 ab me aren K
                            t




                          te
                        PA




        pa lter ive




          m nw A

                       CT
                sn e




                           t
       w le A
               ia le


               ia ite
       ye te ale
                          L




              a r NO
          ar fe le
                       SC
                ia T
                        en
                          l




                        en
             nt tiv
              a r ib


                       N




                       hi
                       N




                       P
    lo Pel o B
            ed ib
                        a
            ed AC




            ed h
                     id




    2- al m
                     m
                     G




             a at




                     id
           ah ig




                     G


                     A
                     U




                     U
                     w
    ov di t




           ah U
           re na


          m lig
          ar rn




                  es
         m l-el




                   n




                  n


                  n
              n  o
     t O el




              p
  no ot P




         m
       ye




       w


       O
       e
       n




    ov




    lo
    2-




 be
 be
 ab




no




                      Funder cost   Incremental COA    Earnings gains (degrees)   Earnings gains (years)




 Figure 9 -- Earnings gains compared with program costs. Notes: This figure compares program costs with
 estimates of the lifetime earnings generated by award receipt, when the latter are measured by the returns to degree
 completion and the returns to years of schooling. These two measures of gains differ because awards increase
 schooling for many who don't finish degrees. Costs are also measured two ways: the lower tick mark indicates the
 increase in educational spending generated by awards, while the upper tick mark shows average funder cost.
 Estimates are for the 2012 and 2013 cohorts in four-year strata.




                                                          39
                                                       Table 1
                                                 Descriptive statistics

                                                                     Non-experimental                     Experimental
                                                    Eligible               sample                            sample
                                   Nebraska       scholarship       Guaranteed    No                            Treatment-
                                  HS seniors       applicants         award      award                   All      control
                                     (1)              (2)              (3)        (4)                    (5)        (6)
 Female                                0.50            0.62              0.68           0.54            0.62             0.02
                                                                                                                       (0.01)
 White                                 0.76            0.63              0.54           0.57            0.66             0.00
                                                                                                                       (0.01)
 Black                                 0.07            0.06              0.06           0.11            0.06             0.00
                                                                                                                       (0.01)
 Hispanic                              0.12            0.21              0.27           0.22            0.20             0.01
                                                                                                                       (0.01)
 Asian                                 0.03            0.05              0.09           0.04            0.05            -0.01
                                                                                                                       (0.01)
 Other race                            0.02            0.04              0.04           0.05            0.04            -0.00
                                                                                                                       (0.00)
 Family income ($)                   86,605           44,774            37,503         44,073          46,353         -1,131
                                                     [45,178]          [73,675]       [28,233]        [38,911]       (1,226)
 EFC ($)                               ---             2,692             2,026          2,634           2,836            -89
                                                      [3,063]           [2,682]        [3,271]         [3,087]          (75)
 Eligible for Pell grant               ---              0.75              0.80           0.77            0.74            0.01
                                                                                                                       (0.01)
 At least one parent                   0.71            0.66              0.57           0.64            0.68             0.01
   attended college                                                                                                    (0.01)
 At least one parent                   0.44            0.31              0.27           0.28            0.32             0.00
   has BA                                                                                                              (0.01)
 Lives in Omaha                        ---             0.30              0.35           0.38            0.28            -0.01
                                                                                                                       (0.01)
 Took ACT                              .85             0.94              0.94           0.90            0.94             0.00
                                                                                                                       (0.01)
 Composite ACT score                 21.61            21.87             22.67          20.18           21.94            -0.13
                                                      [4.47]            [4.48]         [4.14]          [4.45]          (0.10)
 High school GPA                       ---             3.44              3.61           3.11            3.45             0.01
                                                      [0.43]            [0.36]         [0.40]          [0.42]          (0.01)
 F-statistic                                                                                                             0.01
 p-value                                                                                                                 0.01
 # of applicants                                     11,009             1,667          1,152           8,190          8,190

 Notes:      The treatment-control differences in column 6 come from regressions that control for
Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for the experimental sample and, in the first column, a comparison
  strata
group      dummies
       of Nebraska     (cohort
                     high school by    target
                                  seniors.     college).
                                            Data in column Columns        5 and
                                                              one come from       6 exclude
                                                                               SEER   (gender and   862 ACS
                                                                                               therace),   applicants    offered
                                                                                                                (family income
  COS
and      awards.
     parent          The
             education    sample
                        status), and   the ACTthe
                                     includes         2012-2016
                                                 National             applicant
                                                             Profile Report  (ACTcohorts.    Missing values for
                                                                                    (2012)). Treatment-control         race (4%),
                                                                                                                  differences in
column  six  come  from regressions   that control  for strata dummies    (cohort by target
  family income (4%), and ACT (6%) are imputed from means within strata in the sample of    college). The  sample  includes  the
2012-2016 applicant cohorts. Missing values for race (6 percent), family income (5 percent), and ACT (7 percent) are
  eligible
imputed     applicants.
          from  means withinThe    data
                               strata      appendix
                                       in the sample of provides     further detail
                                                          eligible applicants.            data sources
                                                                                      on deviations
                                                                               Standard                     and variable
                                                                                                      are reported  in brackets.
  definitions
Standard        for
           errors forthe
                      the benchmark       descriptive
                          differences in column    six arestatistics
                                                            reported in   column 1.
                                                                       inparentheses.
 *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10                        40
                                                      Table
                                                      Table 2
                                                            2
                                            Initial enrollment effects
                              Effects of STBF Award Offer on Initial College Choice

                                                         Four-year strata                        Two-year strata
                                                                       NU 2013 - 2016
                                         Control       Award         Regular     COS           Control     Award
                                          mean          effect        award      award          mean        effect
                                           (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)
    Any college enrollment                0.961         0.026         0.025         0.028       0.899       0.058
                                                        (0.004)      (0.005)       (0.006)                  (0.014)

                                                       A. Program type

       Four-year                           0.831         0.106        0.119         0.094        0.060       0.038
                                                        (0.008)      (0.010)       (0.012)                  (0.015)
       Two-year                            0.095        -0.067        -0.078        -0.066       0.837       0.007
                                                        (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.009)                  (0.020)
       Both                                0.035        -0.013        -0.016        0.000        0.003       0.013
                                                        (0.004)      (0.005)       (0.007)                  (0.005)

                                                    B. Sector and location

       Nebraska public                     0.874         0.068        0.070         0.067        0.860       0.079
                                                        (0.007)      (0.009)       (0.011)                  (0.016)
           University of Nebraska          0.677         0.115        0.139         0.124        0.017       0.046
                                                        (0.009)      (0.012)       (0.014)                  (0.011)
           State college                   0.108         0.015        0.002         0.004        0.017       0.012
                                                        (0.005)      (0.004)       (0.005)                  (0.008)
           Community college               0.121         -0.072       -0.084        -0.057       0.827       0.027
                                                        (0.007)      (0.008)       (0.011)                  (0.020)
       Out-of-state public                 0.024         -0.016       -0.018        -0.013       0.018       -0.016
                                                        (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.005)                  (0.006)
       Private                             0.063         -0.026       -0.026        -0.026       0.021       -0.006
                                                        (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.008)                  (0.007)
    # of applicants                       3,786         6,845         4,350         3,787         705        1,345


Notes: This This
    Notes:  table table reports
                  reports         the
                          the effect ofeffect of scholarship
                                        scholarship             offers on
                                                    offers on enrollment  byenrollment
                                                                              the end of the  December
                                                                                          byscholarship    31 of theyear.
                                                                                                         application
The scholarship
     sample includes 2012-2016 applicant cohorts. Columns one and two include all four-year targeters. Columns
three and four include only NU applicants from 2013-2016 cohorts to capture the effect of COS awards. Column
    application
three             year.
      excludes those whoThe   sample
                           were  offeredincludes  2012-2016
                                         COS awards    and only applicant     cohorts.
                                                                  includes students    Selectivity
                                                                                     who             categories
                                                                                           received an  STBF awardare with
    defined  by  IPEDS    according     to 2012   admissions    rates. UNL     admitted  less  than 75
mandated LC participation and control applicants. Column 4 only includes those who were offered an LC   percent   ofaward,
    applicants, UNK and UNO admitted 75-90 percent; state and community colleges admitted
without mandatory   LC participation,  and control applicants. Outcomes    in each panel are mutually  exclusive. Students
simultaneously enrolled at both Nebraska public colleges and universities and non-Buffett eligible campuses are coded
    more than 90 percent. Outcomes in each panel are mutually exclusive. Students dual-enrolled
as Nebraska public only. The regressions used to estimate treatment effects control for strata dummies.
    at both Nebraska public colleges and non-Buffett eligible campuses are coded as Nebraska
    public only. Regressions control for strata dummies. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10


                                                           41
                                                      Table 3
                                              Degree completion effects

                                                             Four-year strata                         Two-year strata
                                                                            NU 2013
                                              Control       Award        Regular        COS         Control       Award
                                               mean          effect       award         award        mean         effect
                                                (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
  Bachelor's degree earned                      0.629         0.084        0.089         0.083        0.232         0.035
                                                             (0.020)      (0.023)       (0.036)                    (0.044)

  Associate degree earned                       0.079        -0.030        -0.026       -0.041        0.545        -0.014
                                                             (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.016)                    (0.050)
         Enrolled at four-year college          0.015        -0.002        -0.001       -0.010        0.052         0.010
                                                             (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.009)                    (0.023)

  No degree earned                              0.310        -0.058        -0.066       -0.050        0.386        -0.016
                                                             (0.019)      (0.022)       (0.035)                    (0.048)
         Enrolled at four-year college          0.058        -0.003        -0.005       -0.026        0.013         0.002
                                                             (0.010)      (0.012)       (0.017)                    (0.012)

  Total years of schooling                      3.950         0.401        0.463         0.204        3.054         0.347
                                                             (0.052)      (0.060)       (0.097)                    (0.159)
         Years at four-year                     3.162         0.648        0.729         0.485        0.749         0.381
                                                             (0.065)      (0.074)       (0.118)                    (0.144)
         Years at two-year                      0.495        -0.215        -0.229       -0.219        2.193        -0.029
                                                             (0.039)      (0.045)       (0.068)                    (0.131)
          Dual enrollment                       0.293        -0.032        -0.037       -0.062        0.112        -0.005
                                                             (0.024)      (0.027)       (0.045)                    (0.038)
  # of applicants                               1,198        2,233         1,721         830           233          395

  Notes:
Notes:  ThisThis  table
              table       reports
                    reports           effects
                             effects on  degreeon  degree completion
                                                completion                 by the end
                                                            and years of schooling  by the   year
                                                                                         ofend      four,
                                                                                                of year    year
                                                                                                        six.     five, effects
                                                                                                             Estimated
onand   year six. Year four outcomes include data from the 2012, 2013, and 2014 applicant
   year-six  outcomes   use  data  from   the 2012  and 2013  cohorts. Columns   one and  two include  all four-year targeters.
Columns three and four include only NU applicants from 2013-2016 cohorts to capture the effect of COS awards.
  cohorts; year five outcomes include data from the 2012 and 2013 cohort, and year six
Column three excludes those who were offered COS awards and only includes students who received an STBF award
  ***
with   p < 0.01,included
  outcomes
     mandated    **
                 LC           * p < from
                            data
                    p participation
                      < 0.05,        0.10   the 2012
                                      and control       cohort.
                                                   applicants.    Regressions
                                                               Column            control
                                                                        4 only includes    forwho
                                                                                        those      were dummies.
                                                                                               strata    offered an LC award,
without mandatory LC participation, and control applicants. Columns five and six use the experimental two-year
strata in the 2012 and 2013 cohorts. The regressions control for strata dummies.




                                                              42
                                                 Table 4
              IV estimates of the effect of initial four-year credits completed on degrees

                                                                                      2SLS
                                                                                                              Strata and
                                                           Just-            Strata     Subgroup
                                          OLS                                                                  subgroup
                                                         identified      interactions interactions
                                                                                                             interactions
                                           (1)            (2)           (3)                     (4)               (5)
                                                   A. Bachelor's degree
 Four-year credits earned                 0.58              0.59              0.60              0.50              0.48
                                         (0.02)            (0.14)            (0.12)            (0.13)            (0.11)
 First stage
    A ny award                                              0.11
                                                           (0.01)
    F-stat                                                                   17.70             10.01              7.78
 O ver-identification test                                    --              0.64             10.74             11.38
    Degrees of freedom                                                         4                 8                12
    p-value                                                                   0.96             0.22              0.50
                                                      B. Any degree

 Four-year credits earned                0.43              0.37               0.42             0.35              0.32
                                         (0.02)            (0.14)            (0.12)            (0.14)            (0.12)
 O ver-identification test                                    --              1.14             10.12             10.80
    p-value                                                                   0.89              0.26              0.55
                                                    C. Associate degree
 Four-year credits earned                -0.20             -0.26             - 0.23            -0.22             -0.23
                                         (0.02)            (0.10)            (0.07)            (0.09)            (0.07)
 O ver-identification test                                    --              0.98              5.16              7.71
    p-value                                                                   0.91              0.74              0.81


Notes: This table reports 2SLS estimates and over-identification test statistics for models where the outcome is BA
completion and the endogenous variable is initial four-year engagement as defined in Figure 7. The just-identified
estimate in column 2 uses a single offer dummy as instrument. Estimates in columns 3 to 5 are from over-identified
models with instrument sets constructed by interacting award offers with sets of dummies indicated in column headings.
The sample is restricted to the 2012 and 2013 cohorts. All regressions control for strata and subgroup main effects.




                                                         43
                                              Table 5
                     Dynamic exclusion parameter estimates and specification tests

                                                                   Strata and subgroup
                         Strata interactions Subgroup interactions     interactions
                       Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
                         (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)
                                    A. Effect of year-t credits on BA completion
    µt                   0.55      0.64      0.61       0.54      0.68       0.61      0.53       0.66      0.61
                        (0.10)    (0.11)    (0.10)     (0.09)    (0.10)     (0.09)    (0.09)     (0.10)    (0.09)
    First stage F        18.2      11.8      13.3       9.35      5.49       6.71      7.62       4.53      5.19
    Over-id test         7.49      9.5       1.52       3.52      5.88       11.4      10.6       13.7      11.7
        p-value         0.058     0.024     0.678      0.897     0.660      0.182     0.474      0.248     0.385
                                  B. Effects of year 1 credits on year-t credits
   t                     1.07      0.91      0.94       0.96      0.76       0.82      0.97       0.77      0.81
                        (0.11)    (0.12)    (0.13)     (0.09)    (0.10)     (0.11)    (0.08)     (0.10)    (0.11)
    First stage F        22.0       --        --        11.1       --         --       8.47        --        --
    Over-id test         3.84      1.41      2.81       18.0      11.5       8.21      21.2       13.3      10.1
        p-value         0.279     0.702     0.421      0.021     0.174      0.413     0.031      0.273     0.524

   tµt                   0.59      0.59      0.57       0.52      0.52       0.50      0.51       0.51      0.49
   µ1                              0.61                           0.50                            0.51
                                  (0.12)                         (0.11)                          (0.10)


Notes: This table reports IV estimates of the dynamic exclusion model described in section 4.2. The instruments
consist of award dummies and interactions with strata and covariates as indicated in the column headings. Parameter
µt is the effect of four-year college credits completed in year t on BA completion. Parameter t is the effect of
four-year college credits completed in year one on credit completion in year t. Dynamic exclusion implies µ1 = t µt .
The over-identification test statistics reported in columns 1-3 tests three restrictions; those reported in columns 4-6
test 8 restrictions; those reported in columns 7-9 test 11 restrictions. The sample is restricted to the 2012 and 2013
cohorts in the four-year strata. All regressions control for strata and subgroup dummies.




                                                          44
                                                 Table 6
                              College costs and marginal spending by campus

                                               Four-year               NU target campuses                  State
                                                strata          UNL           UNO           UNK          Colleges
                                                  (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
                                                  A. College costs
  Treated
      Funder cost                                 33.57         34.01         34.87         34.54          27.40
      Cost of attendance (COA)                    33.70         36.50         32.14         33.56          27.88
      Years of college                             4.30          4.35          4.46          4.27           4.09
      Cost per year of college                     7.57          8.25          7.02          7.37           6.66

  Control
      Cost of attendance (COA)                    28.03         30.88         25.00         29.16          24.32
      Years of college                             3.95          4.06          3.96          3.97           3.84
      Cost per year of college                     7.03          7.61          6.31          7.34           6.34

                                                 B. Marginal costs
  (1) Funder spending per extra degree           399.61       568.80          238.20        737.95        500.07
  (2) Marginal COA per extra degree               67.49         94.06         48.76         93.91          65.03
  Marginal share (2)/(1)                           0.17          0.17           0.20          0.13          0.13

                                     C. Decomposition of marginal spending
  Award effects on:
    (1) Log cost of attendance                     0.23          0.21           0.32          0.11          0.19
                                                  (0.03)        (0.04)         (0.06)        (0.06)        (0.08)
     (2) Log years of college                      0.11          0.09           0.15          0.07          0.10
                                                  (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.05)
     (3) Log cost per year of college              0.12          0.12           0.17          0.03          0.09
                                                  (0.02)        (0.03)         (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.06)
  Share of marginal spending due to
                                                   0.48          0.43           0.48          0.68          0.54
  increased years in college (2)/(1)
  # of applicants                                2,218           953           649           315           301


Notes: This table reports award effects on degree costs. Panels A and B show statistics including students who have
zero years of schooling and thus zero cost of attendance; Panel C excludes these students. Panel A reports mean cost
and years of attendance for control students. Values for treatment students are the sum of control means and strata
adjusted treatment effects. Panel B reports funder spending and incremental cost of attendance per bachelor's degree
created by taking the ratio of per-student spending to the strata-adjusted award effect on BAs. The third row of
Panel B reports the ratio of the first two rows. The first three rows in Panel C report results from regressions of log
COA, log years, and log cost per year on a dummy for winning a scholarship in the given sample. These regressions
include strata dummies. Estimates are for the 2012 and 2013 cohorts in four-year strata. Dollars values are reported
in thousands.




                                                           45
                                                  Table 7
                                     Award effects on lifetime earnings

                                                  Control         Treatment        Difference
                                                    (1)              (2)               (3)
                   Years of schooling
                       3% discount rate             1,181            1,215            33.64
                       5% discount rate              721              735             13.22
                   Degree attainment
                       3% discount rate             1,189            1,216            29.21
                       5% discount rate              734              747             13.86


Notes: This table shows the effect of an award on predicted lifetime earnings (in thousands of dollars), computed as
described in section 5.1. Estimates are for the 2012 and 2013 cohorts in four-year strata.




                                                        46
A        Data Appendix

A.1       Application Data

       The STBF scholarship application collects detailed information on applicants' baseline charac-

teristics. Academic measures such as GPA are gathered primarily from high school transcripts. We

standardize GPAs to a 4.0 scale using the grade conversion formula provided by the University of

Nebraska-Lincoln. We also consider students' ACT score. Since not all high schools report stu-

dents' ACT scores on transcripts, transcript data are supplemented with self-reported scores from

the application survey for 54 percent of the experimental sample.24

       Most of the financial and demographic data used here come from applicants' Student Aid Re-

ports (SARs). These reports are available for all STBF applicants who filed the Free Application

for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). SARs contain responses to more than 100 FAFSA questions re-

garding students' financial resources and family structure, including family income, parents' marital

status, and parents' education. Roughly three percent of scholarship applicants are undocumented

immigrants, who are ineligible for federal financial aid and therefore cannot file the FAFSA. STBF

permits these students to submit an alternate form called the College Funding Estimator (CFE).

The CFE is published by the EducationQuest Foundation, a non-profit organization in Nebraska,

and gathers a similar, though less detailed, set of information.

       Neither SARs nor CFEs report students' race, and the scholarship application did not collect

this variable until the 2014 cohort. Supplemental data on race were obtained from the Nebraska

Department of Motor Vehicles. Over 85 percent of the randomization sample was successfully

matched to driver's license records.


A.2       Financial Aid Data

       Nebraska's public colleges and universities provided detailed information on their students' fi-

nancial aid packages. These data report costs of attendance, grants, loans, and Federal Work Study

aid. While all schools report federal loans, most do not report private loans, which may be obtained

directly from lenders without involving financial aid officers. We therefore exclude private loans
  24
    In Nebraska, the majority of students take the ACT rather than the SAT. In 2012-2013, 70 percent of Nebraska
high school students took the ACT, compared with the national average of 52 percent.



                                                      47
from our analysis. For most STBF applicants, however, federal loans offer the lowest available

interest rate and therefore account for the vast majority of borrowing.


Cost of Attendance

   Publicly available IPEDS institutional characteristics data were used to estimate a sticker price

of college for every student in our experimental sample. The sticker price calculation includes in-

state tuition, fees, and a books and supplies stipend. The institutional characteristics dataset in

each year from IPEDS has nearly full coverage of tuition and fees for schools attended by students

in our experimental sample. There is only one school for whom we do not have tuition and fees for

­ this is a special case in which the student transferred to an out-of-state certificate school. This

school's cost of attendance varies greatly based on certificate program, so we drop the student from

the sample.

   The IPEDS data are missing a books and supplies cost value for 8 percent of the sample. In these

cases we impute costs using the mean books and supplies costs for students in the same calendar

year and college type (four-year vs two-year and for-profit vs not for profit).

   We calculate each student's sticker price by matching credits attempted per term to the cost per

credit at the school attended in every year of attendance. Importantly, we use credits attempted,

as opposed to credits earned because a student is charged for every credit attempted, whether or

not they pass the course. As above, IPEDS has nearly full coverage of cost per credit for schools

attended by our experimental sample. Every school that reports tuition also reports cost per credit.

We also calculate the total cost based on credits attempted for each student at each school. When

this credit-based cost exceeds the school's reported tuition, the cost variable is assigned the full-

time tuition value. Each student's sticker price is then estimated by summing credits-based cost

per term, a books and supplies stipend, and the school-reported fees in each academic year.


A.3    Education Outcome Variables

   Over 90 percent of experimental subjects enrolled in Nebraska's public colleges and universities.

We match STBF applicants to administrative data provided by these schools using names, dates of

birth, and the last four digits of Social Security Numbers (SSNs). To measure enrollment at out-of-

state and private institutions, we match applicants to National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) data

                                                 48
using names and dates of birth. Though the NSC captures more than 91 percent of enrollment

nationwide (and more than 99 percent at four-year public institutions), its name-based match has

limitations, as Dynarski, Hemelt and Hyman (2015) detail. Roughly four percent of experimental

applicants have enrollment at Nebraska's public colleges and universities that does not appear in

our NSC-matched sample. These students are disproportionately nonwhite.


Enrollment Measures

   Many of the enrollment outcomes reported in this paper are enrollment indicators. Table 2, for

example, reports effects on the probability of enrollment in year one. We define follow-up windows

to match the federal financial aid year, which runs from July 1 to June 30. Within each window,

we force binary enrollment outcomes to be mutually exclusive. Students who enroll at both two-

and four-year institutions are coded as "any four-year" enrollment. Likewise, those who enroll at

in-state public colleges do not contribute to the out-of-state or private categories, and selectivity

outcomes are defined by the most selective institution attended.

   We also track cumulative credit completion. Most of these data come from Nebraska's public

colleges and universities. Credits for the seven percent of applicants who attend out-of-state or

private colleges are imputed using the NSC's coarse enrollment status variable: an indicator for

whether students were enrolled full-time, half-time, or less than half-time. Imputed credit is the

predicted value from a regression of credits on enrollment status, degree program, academic term,

and cohort. Less than two percent of applicants attend out-of-state or private schools that do not

report the full-time enrollment indicator to the NSC. These students are coded as enrolled full time

when the full-time enrollment share at their chosen school is at least 85 percent, as reported by

IPEDS.


Years of Schooling Data

   Years of schooling variables are derived from term-wise enrollment status as reported by Ne-

braska's public colleges and universities, or in the NSC when the former are not available. These

indicate "attempted enrollment" at an institution (as opposed to measuring credits completed).

Using data from our NSC-matched sample, we generate a binary enrollment dummy for each stu-




                                                 49
dent in every possible term equal to one if the student appears as enrolled (at any level) in any

institution.


Degrees Data

   Degree completion indicators come from Nebraska's public colleges and universities, or the NSC

when the former is not available. NSC and the colleges report completion of associate degrees and

bachelor's degrees for each student, as well as the year and term in which degree requirements were

completed.


A.4    Earnings Imputation

   The earnings imputation uses an extract of Nebraska-born men aged 18 to 70 in ACS data from

2012-2016; the sample is limited to employed men working full time (greater than 35 hours per

week) and omits full-time students.

   This section completes the description of the lifetime earnings imputation sketched in Section

5.1. The first parameterization of the relationship between schooling and earnings sets f (si ) = si

as in the traditional Mincerian setup. Let y
                                           ^se equal the predicted log annual earnings of a worker

with s years of schooling and e  max {age-s - 6, 0} years of potential experience who works 50

weeks per year at 40 hours per week. Under this parameterization of potential experience, a student

who enters the workforce at high school completion has e = 0 at age 18, and a student who attends

four years of college has e = 0 at age 22. The PDV of lifetime predicted earnings over the course of

52 potential working years is calculated as:
                                                51-c
                                         ^s =           exp [^
                                                             yse ]
                                         Y                         ,                               (11)
                                                e=0
                                                       (1 + r)e+c

where c = s - 12, and r is the discount rate. The second specification assumes that years of college

affect earnings only insofar as they yield a degree. Here, we specify f (s) as a pair of dummy variables

indicating two-year or four-year degree attainment, with high school graduates as the omitted group.

In this specification, each year of college reduces potential experience and career length but only

increases predicted earnings if it leads to a degree. Let y
                                                          ^sde equal the predicted log earnings of a

worker with s years of completed schooling, with highest degree attained d  {HS, AA, BA}, and

with e years of potential experience. The PDV of predicted lifetime earnings in this parameterization


                                                      50
substitutes y
            ^sde for y
                     ^se in equation (11). In this model, students who are induced by awards to

remain in school longer, but fail to complete a degree, may suffer a lifetime earnings loss as a result

of treatment.




                                                  51
                                                                                                  A. Financial aid effects in two-year strata




                                                                                    10
                                                                          15,000
                                                                            of $)

                                                                                    8
                                                           mount (thousands

                                                                                    6
               amount received ($)
                                                          A10,000

                                                                                    4
                                                             5,000
                                                                                    2
                                                                                    0




                                                                                           $3.8           $8.6    $5.8       $7.9    $4.3     $0.6    $1.3   $0.1   $0.2

                                                                                             Total           Total             Total        Total         Work
                                                                                           STBF aid           aid              grants       loans         study
                                                             0




                                                                                         total aid           grants              government       work study
                                                                                                                                     loans

                                                                                                                 Treatment                  Control


                                                                                         B. Aid effects per dollar awarded in two-year strata
                                                                      $1
               Dollars of aid per dollar of STBF grants

                                                                      80¢
                                                                      60¢
                                                                      40¢
                                                                      20¢




                                                                                                                                                     -20¢             -3¢
                                                                        0




                                                                                                          73¢                  96¢
                                                                      -20¢




                                                                                       Total             Total               Total                   Total        Total
                                                                                     STBF aid             aid                grants                  loans      work study




Figure A1 -- Award effects on year one post-secondary aid for applicants in two-year strata. Notes: This figure
shows the effect of an STBF award offer on aid of various kinds in the year following scholarship application. The
sample is restricted to students who targeted two-year colleges and enrolled at a Nebraska public college or
university. Whiskers mark 95 percent confidence intervals for the treatment effect of an award offer. The regressions
used to estimate treatment effects control for strata dummies.



                                                                                                                         52
                                    .2




                                                                                                                      .09
                                    .1




                                                                                             .07   .07
                                                                                                                              .08
                                                                                                           .07
                 Treatment effect




                                                                                       .06
                                    0
                                    -.1
                                    -.2




                                          Fall            Spring       Fall              Spring          Fall             Spring
                                                 Year 4                       Year 5                             Year 6

                                                              STBF Award                      COS Award



Figure A2 -- Bachelor's degree effects by award type. Notes : This figure plots the effect of awards with and
without learning community participation on six-year degree completion for applicants targeting four-year campuses.
Awards without an LC mandate are called College Opportunity Scholarships (COS). Whiskers mark 95 percent
confidence intervals. The samples used to estimate treatment effects differ by year.




                                                                           53
                                                                           Table A1
                                                                    Baseline sample selection

                                    STBF    COS                                         STBF  COS                                          STBF  COS
                         Control   Award   Award   Total                       Control Award Award    Total                       Control Award Award    Total
                           (1)       (2)     (3)    (4)                          (5)     (6)   (7)     (8)                          (9)    (10)  (11)    (12)

      2012 Total          495       504               999   2013 Total          936     484    209    1,629    2014 Total          860     606    211    1,677
      Four-Year Strata    424       431               855   Four-Year Strata    774     395    209    1,378    Four-Year Strata    726     469    211    1,406
       UNK                63        64                127    UNK                71      66     51      188      UNK                73      64     48      185
       UNL                173       175               348    UNL                369     153    89      611      UNL                413     167    93      673
       UNO                141       142               283    UNO                181     123    69      373      UNO                143     140    70      353
       State Colleges     47        50                 97    State Colleges     153     53      0      206      State Colleges     97      98      0      195
      Two-Year Strata     71        73                144   Two-Year Strata     162     89      0      251     Two-Year Strata     134     137     0      271




54
      2015 Total          1,033     624     220     1,877   2016 Total         1,167    619    222    2,008    Total              4,491   2,837   862    8,190
      Four-Year Strata     876      465     220     1,561   Four-Year Strata    986     437    222    1,645    Four-Year Strata   3,786   2,197   862    6,845
       UNK                 103      65      48        216    UNK                122     51     49      222      UNK                432     310    196     938
       UNL                 450      168     91        709    UNL                565     158    91      814      UNL               1,970    821    364    3,155
       UNO                 223      130     81        434    UNO                212     140    82      434      UNO                900     675    302    1,877
       State Colleges      100      102      0        202    State Colleges     87      88      0      175      State Colleges     484     391     0      875
      Two-Year Strata      157      159      0        316   Two-Year Strata     181     182     0      363     Two-Year Strata     705     640     0     1,345



     Notes: This table reports sample counts by applicant cohort and target college. The sample contains applicants who were subject to random assignment. COS
     awards were offered only in the 2013-2016 University of Nebraska strata. Two-year college strata include Central Community College, Metropolitan Community
     College, Mid-Plains Community College, Northeast Community College, Southeast Community College, and Western Nebraska Community College strata. The
     State College strata include Chadron State, Peru Sate, and Wayne State strata.
                                                                               Table A2
                                                                Descriptive statistics by target college

                                                                                  Four-Year Strata
                                                 UNL                       UNO                         UNK              State Colleges        Two-Year Strata
                                                   Treatment                 Treatment                   Treatment             Treatment             Treatment
                                        All         - control     All         - control        All        - control    All      - control     All     - control
                                        (1)            (2)        (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)       (7)         (8)        (9)       (10)
          Female                         .55          .037        .64            .007          .71          -.014       .65      -.003         .61        .027
                                                     (.021)                     (.025)                      (.035)               (.033)                  (.026)
          White                          .67         -.005        .47           -.014          .77          -.004       .83       .024         .69        .013
                                                     (.020)                     (.025)                      (.032)               (.025)                  (.024)
          Black                          .07          .004        .09            .008          .02          -.021       .03       .002         .02        .002
                                                     (.011)                     (.015)                      (.008)               (.011)                  (.008)
          Hispanic                       .16          .005        .30            .032          .19           .033       .10      -.013         .20       -.008
                                                     (.015)                     (.023)                      (.030)               (.020)                  (.022)
          Other race                     .05         -.005        .09           -.010          .01          -.001       .01      -.005         .06       -.011
                                                     (.009)                     (.014)                      (.007)               (.003)                  (.012)
          Family income ($)             49,374       -4,785      42,597          736          50,141        -626       48,335    2,179        42,444      570




55
                                       [29,058]      (3,091)    [27,886]       (1,359)       [39,452]      (3,125)    [33,960]   (2,185)     [33,379]   (1,736)
          EFC ($)                       3,051           2         2,389         -148          3,212         -157       3,167      -59         2,594      -159
                                       [3,115]        (135)      [2,914]        (150)        [3,126]        (238)     [3,195]    (216)       [3,096]     (162)
          At least one parent            .74          .011        .57           -.014          .73          -.028       .75       .029         .59        .046
           attended college                          (.018)                     (.025)                      (.034)               (.030)                  (.026)
          At least one parent earned     .40         -.010        .25            .003          .33          -.012       .36      -.009         .18        .029
           a bachelor's degree                       (.021)                     (.022)                      (.035)               (.033)                  (.021)
          Took ACT                       .98         -.004         .95           .001          .98          -.007       .98      -.000         .80        .011
                                                     (.007)                     (.011)                      (.012)               (.009)                  (.022)
          Composite ACT score           23.8          -.23        21.1          -.28          22.2          -.55       21.7       -.09        18.9        .42
                                        [4.3]         (.18)       [4.6]         (.23)         [3.9]         (.28)      [3.8]      (.27)       [3.4]      (.19)
          High school GPA               3.56         -.017        3.34          -.006         3.52           .041      3.48      -.006        3.26        .053
                                        [.38]        (.016)       [.41]         (.021)        [.41]         (.030)     [.41]     (.029)       [.41]      (.022)
          F-statistic                                 1.10                       .97                        1.64                  .61                    1.19
          p-value                                      .35                       .48                         .06                  .85                     .28
          # of applicants              2,791         2,791       1,575          1,575          742          742        875        875         1,345      1,345



     Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics by target college for the 2012-2016 cohorts. See Table 1 notes for variable definitions and descriptions.
                                                                           Table A3
                                                          Descriptive statistics for Omaha residents


                                                                     Four-              NU Campuses                         State          Two-
                                                         All         Year           UNL    UNO      UNK                    Colleges        Year
                                                         (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)
                  female                                 .65           .65           .62           .66           .88          .74           .61

                  White                                  .42           .43           .49           .37           .62          .54           .26

                  Black                                  .16           .17           .20           .14           .15          .17           .09

                  Hispanic                               .28           .27           .21           .33           .19          .19           .36

                  other race                             .09           .08           .05           .10           .04          .02           .27

                  family income ($)                    43,484        43,775        46,937        39,945        58,522        47,555        40,390




56
                                                      [26,898]      [26,971]      [27,399]      [25,241]      [33,693]      [30,708]      [26,032]
                  EFC ($)                               2,266         2,312         2,568         1,971         3,548         2,925         1,769
                                                       [2,886]       [2,897]       [2,926]       [2,727]       [3,254]       [3,647]       [2,729]
                  at least one parent                    .58           .61           .71           .51           .69          .59           .33
                    attended college
                  at least one parent earned             .28           .29           .38           .21           .42          .30           .11
                    a bachelor's degree
                  took ACT                               .91           .94           .95           .94           .96           .89           .66

                  composite ACT score                   20.9          21.3          22.7          20.2          21.7          20.0          16.8
                                                        [4.7]         [4.7]         [4.4]         [4.7]         [3.6]         [3.9]         [3.2]
                  high school GPA                       3.25          3.27          3.36          3.22          3.13          3.11          3.04
                                                        [.39]         [.39]         [.39]         [.39]         [.43]         [.35]         [.34]

                  # of applicants                       2,268        2,067          686           972            43            85           201


     Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics by target college for Omaha residents the 2012-2016 cohorts. An Omaha resident is any student who listed an
     Omaha home address on their STBF application. See notes for Table 1 for variable definitions and descriptions.
                                                 Table A4
                  Award effects on years of schooling and degree completion by subgroup

                                     BA Completion         Years at any school    Years at four-year   Years at two-year
                                    Control Program        Control Program        Control Program      Control Program
                                     mean    effect         mean       effect      mean       effect    mean      effect
                                      (1)      (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)
                                                       A. Demographic subgroups
       Omaha resident                .474     .156           3.817      .554       2.898      .931       .605     -.283
                                             (.038)                    (.111)                (.127)               (.076)
       Not Omaha resident            .698     .047           4.008      .327       3.279      .510       .446     -.179
                                             (.023)                    (.057)                (.074)               (.046)
       Nonwhite                      .443     .120           3.903      .524       2.888      .862      .748     -.350
                                             (.038)                    (.115)                (.136)              (.086)
       White                         .709     .065           3.970      .355       3.278      .553      .387     -.146
                                             (.022)                    (.056)                (.072)              (.042)
       Male                          .560     .086           3.853      .548       3.132      .755      .496     -.195
                                             (.034)                    (.092)                (.111)              (.065)
       Female                        .673      .085          4.012       .311      3.181       .588     .494      -.234
                                              (.024)                    (.062)                (.079)              (.050)
       Pell-eligible                 .583     .103           3.925      .389      3.145       .592      .503     -.183
                                             (.024)                    (.065)                (.080)              (.049)
       Not Pell-eligible             .745     .038           4.001      .426      3.191       .791      .475     -.298
                                             (.034)                    (.083)                (.109)              (.065)

                                                 B. College readiness subgroups
      Below-median ACT               .434     .144           3.753      .560       2.638      .960      .809     -.379
                                             (.037)                    (.112)                (.131)              (.084)
      Above-median ACT               .726     .053           4.047      .306       3.421      .475      .339     -.130
                                             (.023)                    (.056)                (.071)              (.041)
      Below-median GPA               .412     .120           3.781      .509       2.719      .925      .779     -.380
                                             (.032)                    (.096)                (.111)              (.067)
      Above-median GPA               .804     .051           4.086      .312       3.518      .420      .266     -.080
                                             (.022)                    (.053)                (.072)              (.044)
      Two-year college considered    .523     .100           3.884      .534       2.676      .851      .923     -.388
                                             (.040)                    (.111)                (.139)              (.103)
      No two-year considered         .673     .083           3.977      .352       3.359      .585      .320     -.160
                                             (.023)                    (.059)                (.070)              (.035)
      No parent with a BA            .564     .098           3.874      .506       2.984      .794      .597     -.270
                                             (.026)                    (.071)                (.085)              (.054)
      Parent with a BA               .745     .046           4.084      .225       3.475      .383      .315     -.108
                                             (.030)                    (.075)                (.098)              (.054)
                                                       C. Target campus strata
      UNL strata                     .692     .060           4.0 5 8    .291       3.342      .461      .391     -.108
                                             (.029)                    (.073)                (.093)              (.056)
      UNO strata                     .478     .146           3. 95 7    .591       2.916      .999      .727     -.418
                                             (.038)                    (.109)                (.129)              (.083)
      UNK strata                     .731     .047           3.970      .378       3.216      .661      .351     -.186
                                             (.049)                    (.125)                (.161)              (.088)
      SC strata                      .635     .055           3.8 4 0    .340       3.033      .419      .498     -.123
                                             (.058)                    (.150)                (.182)              (.105)



Notes: This table shows a breakdown of outcomes by student subgroup. Regressions estimates control for strata.
Estimates are for the 2012 and 2013 cohorts in the four-year strata in the indicated subgroup.




                                                                  57
                                                Table A5
                                       Estimated Earnings Function

                                                        (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)
       Years of schooling (schooling)                 0.144        0.157
                                                      (.003)       (.004)
       Associate degree (AA)                                                       0.243        0.237
                                                                                  (.019)       (.025)
       Bachelor's degree (BA)                                                      0.679        0.743
                                                                                  (.015)       (.021)
       Years of experience (experience)                0.014        0.028          0.014        0.015
                                                      (.000)       (.003)         (.000)       (.001)
       Years of experience squared                    -0.094        0.036         -0.093       -0.077
         (Years of experience^2) / 100                (.000)       (.000)         (.004)       (.006)
       Experience * schooling                                      -0.001
                                                                   (.000)
       Experience squared * schooling                              -0.009
                                                                   (.002)
       AA * experience                                                                         -0.003
                                                                                               (.001)
       BA * experience                                                                         -0.003
                                                                                               (.001)
       AA * experience squared                                                                  0.004
                                                                                               (.011)
       BA * experience squared                                                                 -0.042
                                                                                               (.010)
       Constant                                       4.989       4.790           6.755         6.723
                                                      (.044)      (.060)          (.013)       (.037)
       R^2                                            0.294       0.297           0.298         0.299
       N                                              19,099      19,099          19,099       19,099


Notes: This table reports estimates of the Mincerian model used to predict lifetime earnings, that is, equation 10,
described in Section 5.1. The sample is restricted to Nebraska-born men aged 18-70 in the American Community
Survey who work full-time for wages. The first and second columns report estimates constructed using a linear
parametrization for schooling; the third and fourth show estimates of a model using dummies for degrees. The years
of experience variable is centered to be mean zero. Estimates without schooling-experience interaction terms are
reported for reference. Predicted earnings are computed using the estimates in columns 2 and 4.




                                                        58
                                                  Table A6
                    Estimates of award effects on costs and lifetime earnings by subgroup

                                               Costs ($K)                               Earnings ($K)
                                        Funder        Incremental COA             Degrees             Years
                                         (1)                 (2)                    (3)                (4)
                                               A. Demographic subgroups
    Omaha resident                        33.43                7.54                58.99               46.28
                                         ( 1.02 )            ( 1.27 )
    Not an Omaha resident                 33.61                4.73                13.78               27.53
                                         ( 0.59 )            ( 0.84 )
    Nonwhite                              32.74                5.81                45.06               43.82
                                         (1.04)              (1.34)
    White                                 33.94                5.48                20.94               29.94
                                         ( 0.58 )            ( 0.82 )
    Male                                  33.35                 6.84               29.00               47.11
                                         ( 0.84 )             (1.12)
    Female                                33.76                 4.76               30.48               25.40
                                         (0.65)               (0.91)
    Pell-eligible                         32.60                 5.25               38.01               33.65
                                         ( 0.65 )             ( 0.81 )
    Not Pell-eligible                     35.96                 6.07               10.52               34.11
                                         ( 0.77 )             ( 1.38 )
                                             B. College readiness subgroups
    Below-median ACT                     32.40                6.84                 53.27               44.95
                                         (0.95)              (1.15)
    Above-median        ACT              34.20                5.13                 17.10               26.74
                                         (0.60)              (0.87)
    Below-median GPA                     32.50                7.51                 42.15               41.76
                                         (0.84)              (1.02)
    Above-median GPA                     34.39                4.07                 17.33               27.03
                                         (0.64)              (0.94)
    Two-year college considered          32.38                7.13                 31.30               55.75
                                         (1.03)              (1.28)
    No two-year considered               34.15                4.99                 30.49               28.93
                                         (0.59)              (0.84)
    No parent with a BA                  33.40                5.70                 33.38               42.76
                                         (0.66)              (0.89)
    Parent with a BA                     33.86                5.26                 15.91               18.73
                                         (0.81)              (1.14)
                                                C. Target campus strata
    UNL strata                           34.01                5. 62                19.80               25.60
                                         (0.77)              (1.11)
    UNO strata                           34.87                7.14                 53.65               48.25
                                         (1.04)              (1.33)
    UNK strata                           34.54                4. 40                14.71               33.81
                                         (0.99)              (1.77)
    SC strata                            27.40                3.56                 18.04               25.22
                                         (1.38)              (1.70)


Notes: This table reports the effects of an award on costs and earnings by subgroup: the information visualized in
9. Details of the specifications can be found in Section 5. The sample is restricted to four-year strata students in the
2012 and 2013 cohorts.                                     59
