                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                    GANGS, LABOR MOBILITY AND DEVELOPMENT

                                       Nikita Melnikov
                                    Carlos Schmidt-Padilla
                                    Maria Micaela Sviatschi

                                      Working Paper 27832
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27832


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020


We thank Alicia Adsera, Cevat Giray Aksoy, Alberto Alesina, Sofia Amaral, Oriana Bandiera,
Samuel Bazzi, Chris Blattman, Leah Boustan, Timothy Besley, Eli Berman, Ethan Bueno de
Mesquita, Filipe Campante, Doris Chiang, Abby Córdova, Raul Sanchez De la Sierra, Melissa
Dell, Patricio Dominguez, John J. Donohue, Jennifer Doleac, Oeindrila Dube, Thad Dunning,
Stefano Fiorin, Thomas Fujiwara, Tarek Ghani, Edward Glaeser, Jeff Grogger, Sergei Guriev,
Gaurav Khanna, Asim Khwaja, Tom Kirchmaier, Ilyana Kuziemko, Horacio Larreguy, Benjamin
Lessing, Nicola Limodio, Sarah Lowes, Stephen Machin, Atif Mian, Magne Mogstad, Chris
Neilson, Sam Norris, Daniel Ortega, Emily Owens, Rohini Pande, Paolo Pinotti, Oscar
Pocasangre, Nishith Prakash, Stephen Redding, James Robinson, Mark Rosenzweig, Matteo
Sandi, Jacob Shapiro, Santiago Tobón, Daniel Treisman, Oliver Vanden Eynde, Juan Vargas,
Leonard Wantchekon, Austin Wright, Nathaniel Young, Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, Owen Zidar,
Fabrizio Zilibotti, and the participants of seminars and conferences at the AEA, Al Capone,
APPAM, APSA, Berkeley, Bocconi University, CERP, Conference on the Economics of Crime
and Justice, the EBRD, ESOC, Harvard University, the IDB, ifo Institute, London School of
Economics, MIT, NBER summer institute, Paris School of Economics, Princeton University,
Sciences Po, University of Chicago, University of Connecticut, University of Munich, University
of Passau, and Yale University for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank the
International Crisis Group for helping us get access to certain parts of the data. Paulo Matos and
Sarita Ore Quispe provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nikita Melnikov, Carlos Schmidt-Padilla, and Maria Micaela Sviatschi. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gangs, Labor Mobility and Development
Nikita Melnikov, Carlos Schmidt-Padilla, and Maria Micaela Sviatschi
NBER Working Paper No. 27832
September 2020
JEL No. O1,O17,O54

                                          ABSTRACT

We study how two of the world's largest gangs--MS-13 and 18th Street--affect economic
development in El Salvador. We exploit the fact that the emergence of these gangs was the
consequence of an exogenous shift in American immigration policy that led to the deportation of
gang leaders from the United States to El Salvador. Using a spatial regression discontinuity
design, we find that individuals living under gang control have significantly less education,
material wellbeing, and income than individuals living only 50 meters away but outside of gang
territory. None of these discontinuities existed before the emergence of the gangs. The results are
confirmed by a difference-in-differences analysis: after the gangs' arrival, locations under their
control started experiencing lower growth in nighttime light density compared to areas without
gang presence. A key mechanism behind the results is that, in order to maintain territorial control,
gangs restrict individuals' freedom of movement, affecting their labor market options. The results
are not determined by exposure to violence or selective migration from gang locations. We also
find no differences in public goods provision.

Nikita Melnikov                                  Maria Micaela Sviatschi
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building                   Princeton University
Princeton University                             128 Julis Romo Rabinowitz
Princeton, NJ 08544                              Princeton, NJ 08544
United States                                    and NBER
melnikov@princeton.edu                           msviatschi@princeton.edu

Carlos Schmidt-Padilla
University of California at Berkeley
cschmidtpadilla@gmail.com
                                                I    I NTRODUCTION

        How do non-state armed actors, such as criminal organizations, affect economic growth?
In developed societies, the effect is likely to be negative as they might impede the government
from providing public goods, enforcing property rights and contracts, and preventing violence
(Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001; Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013). On the other
hand, if the government is weak and unable to control parts of its territory, non-state armed
actors may take the role of the government and fulfill essential institutional functions, poten-
tially enabling economic growth (Arjona et al., 2019; Bates, Greif and Singh, 2002; De la Sierra,
2020; Olson, 1993; Tilly, 1985).1 In this paper, we study how a specific type of non-state armed
actors--namely, criminal organizations--affect socioeconomic development in Latin America.
In this setting, criminal organizations mainly function in urban centers, often controlling certain
parts of the city, while the others are controlled by the state.
        Drug cartels and gangs, have been greatly responsible for the recent increase in violent
crimes, making Latin America home to 43 of the 50 cities with the highest homicide rates in the
world.2 These criminal organizations often have complete control over certain neighborhoods--
and sometimes even cities--with the government being unable to enter those locations. In many
aspects, these areas resemble autocratic states, with criminal groups having nearly unlimited
control over the residents and using their power to extract rents from the population, often via
extortion and drug selling.
        In this paper, we analyze the effect that two of the world's most powerful gangs--
MS-13 (Mara Salvatrucha) and 18th Street (Barrio 18)--have on socioeconomic development in El
Salvador.3 We take advantage of the following natural experiment that took place in the 1990s.
Before 1997, El Salvador did not have any powerful gangs. However, in 1997, the United States
began implementing a new immigration policy, which made it easier to deport individuals with
criminal backgrounds back to their country of origin. As a result, many Salvadoran migrants,
who were members of California-based gangs (i.e., MS-13 and 18th Street), were deported back
    1
       The origins of gangs in California and of the Italian Mafia are also related to the inability of the state to regulate
illegal activities and protect landowners' property rights (Acemoglu, De Feo and De Luca, 2019; Bandiera, 2003;
Gambetta, 1996; Skarbek, 2011).
     2
       An overview of which cities have the highest homicide rates can be found in this article by the Economist
(accessed on May 8, 2020).
     3
       Both MS-13 and 18th Street also have a major presence in Honduras, Guatemala, and parts of Italy, Mexico,
Spain, and the United States. Moreover, similar criminal organizations are also present in many other countries (e.g.,
Brazil, Colombia, Jamaica, Japan, South Africa, etc.).




                                                             2
to El Salvador, where they established these gangs and quickly gained control over certain parts
of the country.
      To estimate the effect that gangs have had on socioeconomic development, we perform
two empirical exercises. First, we use the boundaries of the gang-controlled neighborhoods in
El Salvador's capital, San Salvador, to perform a spatial regression discontinuity design. The
outcome variables come from the 2007 census and from our own geocoded survey, which we
conducted in 2019. Both the 2007 census and the 2019 survey included respondents from gang-
controlled areas as well as individuals living outside of gang territory. Second, we perform a
difference-in-differences analysis, comparing the growth in nighttime light density in locations
with high and low gang presence between 1992 and 2013.
      The results from the spatial regression discontinuity design indicate that residents of gang-
controlled neighborhoods in San Salvador have worse dwelling conditions, less income, and
lower probability of owning durable goods compared to individuals living just 50 meters away
but outside of gang territory. They are also less likely to work in large firms. The magnitudes are
very large. For instance, we find that residents of gang areas have $350 lower income compared
to individuals living in neighboring non-gang locations and have a 12 percentage points lower
probability of working in a firm with at least 100 employees.
      These differences in living standards did not exist before the arrival of the gangs. In partic-
ular, we replicate the regression discontinuity design with data from the 1992 census, showing
that, at that time, neighborhoods on either side of the boundary of gang territory had similar so-
cioeconomic and geographic characteristics. The difference-in-differences analysis confirms this
result: after the arrival of the gang members from the United States, areas with gang activity ex-
perienced lower growth in nighttime light density compared to places without gang presence,
while before the deportations, both types of locations experienced similar rates of growth.
      A key mechanism through which gangs affect socioeconomic development in the neigh-
borhoods they control is related to restrictions on individuals' mobility. In order to maintain
control over their territory and prevent the police and members of rival gangs from entering it,
both MS-13 and 18th Street have instituted a system of checkpoints, not allowing individuals to
freely enter or leave their neighborhoods (International Crisis Group, 2018). Our analysis sug-
gests that, as a result of these restrictions, residents of gang-controlled areas often cannot work
outside of gang territory, being forced to accept low-paying jobs in small firms in the neighbor-
hoods where they live.


                                                 3
        Using the data from the geocoded survey that we conducted in 2019, we perform a spatial
regression discontinuity design to document the presence of these restrictions on individuals'
mobility. For instance, we show that residents of gang areas are less likely to have been to places
outside of San Salvador and to say that there is freedom of movement in the neighborhood
where they live. We also document that they are 11 percentage points more likely to work in the
same neighborhood where they live and 50 percentage points more likely to work inside of gang
territory. Importantly, while individuals who both live and work in gang-controlled areas have
significantly worse labor market outcomes than individuals from outside of gang territory, this
gap is much smaller for residents of gang locations who work in non-gang areas. For instance,
the latter respondents have an 85% smaller gap in the probability of working in large firms with
at least 100 employees compared to the other individuals from gang areas. Similarly, they have
a much smaller gap in income.4
        We examine other potential determinants of lower socioeconomic development in gang-
controlled neighborhoods but do not find evidence in their support. In particular, we find no
differences in the availability and quality of public goods provision (i.e., schools, hospitals, etc.).
This finding is consistent with the qualitative evidence, which suggests that the government
has been willing to provide public goods in gang-controlled areas in order not to ostracize the
residents of those locations. In addition, the government may have been motivated by politi-
cal considerations: without providing public goods in gang-controlled neighborhoods, political
parties would likely have been unable to campaign in those areas (e.g., see Córdova, 2019).5 We
do not find evidence that the gangs themselves provide public goods, financial assistance, or
help resolve security, legal, and civil problems in the neighborhoods that they control.6
        We also show that lower socioeconomic development of gang-controlled neighborhoods
cannot be explained by selective migration of individuals across the boundary of gang territory,
differential exposure to violence, or higher levels of unemployment and informal employment
in gang-controlled neighborhoods. Overall, although we cannot definitevely say that restrictions
    4
      These results support the conclusions of the existing literature, which has suggested that the mobility of labor
and goods facilitates economic development and integration (e.g., see Asher and Novosad, 2018; Calì and Miaari,
2018; Donaldson, 2018; Faber, 2014)
    5
      This stems from the client-broker relationship between the political parties and the gangs, particularly during
elections. In order to campaign in gang-controlled neighborhoods, political parties need to provide public goods in
those areas.
    6
      This result may be different in other settings where criminal organizations have territorial control. In particular,
in San Salvador, the gangs might not provide these services because the government has been willing to provide
them. However, in settings when the government is not willing and able to do this (e.g., in rural areas where the
government is not present), criminal organizations may perform these services.



                                                            4
on individuals' mobility are the sole mechanism behind the lower socioeconomic development
of gang areas, we are able to reject a number of other plausible explanations.
      Our results present several important policy implications given that a significant share of
the urban population in developing countries lives in areas controlled by criminal organizations
(Blattman et al., 2019). By measuring the effect that gangs have on economic development in El
Salvador, we shed light on the costs of organized crime in developing countries. The results are
particularly relevant to locations where criminal organizations restrict freedom of movement.
For example, non-state armed actors in Brazil and Colombia also regulate the movement of
people for tax collection purposes and to keep territorial control (Arjona et al., 2019; Magaloni,
Franco Vivanco and Melo, 2020). Our results also shed light on the consequences of deporting
individuals with criminal records to a country with low state capacity. In particular, apart from
the direct effect on such countries, the increase in criminal activity abroad may also have an
indirect effect on the rest of the world (e.g., due to drug trafficking and the number of refugees).7
      This paper is related to the literature studying the effects of organized crime (Acemoglu,
De Feo and De Luca, 2019; Alesina, Piccolo and Pinotti, 2019; Bandiera, 2003; Buonanno et al.,
2015; Gambetta, 1996; Khanna et al., 2019; Pinotti, 2015; Skarbek, 2011; Sviatschi, 2019) and the
industry of private protection (Frye and Zhuravskaya, 2000; Gambetta, 1996; Skaperdas, 2001).
While most of the literature has analyzed the role of the Mafia in Italy, we complement this
literature by providing evidence on the socioeconomic impact of criminal organizations in de-
veloping countries with lower state capacity. We also document a novel mechanism through
which criminal organizations can affect development outcomes. Unlike the Mafia, Latin Ameri-
can gangs often have complete control over entire neighborhoods, and, in order to maintain that
control, they frequently restrict individual' mobility. This paper is also related to the literature
studying the emergence and organization of criminal actors (Blattman et al., 2019; Carvalho and
Soares, 2016; Dell, 2015; Lessing and Willis, 2019; Levitt and Venkatesh, 2000; Sviatschi, 2020).
We complement these papers by providing causal evidence on the consequences of gang activity
for socioeconomic development.
      This paper also complements the literature studying criminal governance of armed groups
(e.g., Arjona et al., 2019; Berman, Shapiro and Felter, 2011; De la Sierra, 2020; Magaloni, Franco
Vivanco and Melo, 2020). In particular, while most of the work has focused on rural areas or
   7
     Criminal activities of gangs and drug cartels have recently displaced millions of people in El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, and Mexico (Clemens, 2017; Sviatschi, 2020).




                                                     5
cross regional differences in exposure to organized crime, these findings may not generalize to
urban settings. In urban settings, where criminal organizations and the state closely interact
with each other, criminal organizations may be particularly concerned about maintaining their
territorial security, and, thus, implement measures to protect the borders of the neighborhoods
they control. Also, while in rural areas criminal organizations may provide public services that
the government cannot provide, this is unlikely to be the case in urban areas, where the govern-
ment has more capacity to provide public goods. As Glaeser and Sims (2015) point out, little is
known about the consequences of crime in the urbanized developing world. Our paper aims to
fill this gap.
      The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II describes the rise of criminal
organizations in El Salvador and their organization. Section III describes the main data sources
used in this study. Section IV presents the regression discontinuity design. Section V analyzes
the mechanisms driving the results. Section VI presents the difference-in-differences analysis.
Section VII concludes.


                               II    H ISTORICAL B ACKGROUND

      In this section, we present an overview of how MS-13 and 18th Street developed in Sal-
vadoran migrant communities in the United States and how members of those gangs were then
deported to El Salvador as a result of a shift in United States immigration policy that took ef-
fect in 1997. We then describe how, once in El Salvador, the gangs quickly established their
criminal structures, began recruiting, and gained territorial control over certain neighborhoods,
particularly in urban centers such as the capital, San Salvador.


                            II.A    The origins of MS-13 and 18th Street

      Southern California, and especially Los Angeles, became home for thousands of Salvado-
rans fleeing the country's descent into civil war in the 1980s (Stanley, 1987). Lacking established
network support, Salvadoran migrants lived in poor and overcrowded neighborhoods, often
facing discrimination from other migrant groups (Brettell, 2011). In a typical family, both par-
ents worked, often leaving the children without supervision (Savenije, 2009).
      Left on their own and facing prejudice from other migrant groups and their gangs, some
Salvadoran youth formed the precursors to MS-13, self-defense groups that were initially bet-



                                                  6
ter known for petty crime, affinity to cannabis, and heavy metal rather than brutal violence,
while others joined an existing Mexican gang, 18th Street (Cruz, 2010; Dunn, 2007; Martínez
and Martínez, 2018).8 As membership grew across Salvadoran migrant communities, MS-13
and 18th Street became known to the local authorities, and some of their members were sent
to prison, where they gained criminal capital and social connections that helped them solidify
their structures (Martínez and Martínez, 2018; Womer and Bunker, 2010). By the mid-1980s, both
MS-13 and 18th Street had developed independent identities, organizational structures revolv-
ing around neighborhood cliques (clicas), and a fierce rivalry that continues to date (Ward, 2013).
      In 1996, in an effort to reduce crime in urban areas and deeming Central America "safe"
after the end of the region's civil wars, the United States passed the Illegal Immigration Reform
and Immigration Responsibility Act (IIRIRA) which took effect on April 1997 (Abrego et al.,
2017; Chacón, 2009). IIRIRA drastically increased immigration enforcement, creating expedited
removal procedures, adding new grounds for deportation, and increasing the number of bor-
der patrol agents. In practice, for El Salvador, this shift in American immigration policy had a
profound impact on the number of forced removals of its citizens from the United States, signif-
icantly increasing the number of deportees in 1997 and subsequent years.


                             II.B   The emergence of gangs in El Salvador

      Given that they did not have criminal records in El Salvador, the repatriated gang members--
many of whom were serving sentences in the United States--gained their freedom after return-
ing to their home country (Ward, 2013). In 1997, El Salvador was still recovering from the con-
sequences of the civil war which ended in 1992, and the Salvadoran state did not have sufficient
resources to prevent the gangs from expanding. The 1992 Peace Accords mandated the creation
of a new police force--the Civilian National Police (Policia Nacional Civil, PNC)--and at the time
of the repatriations, the structure of the PNC was still being defined (e.g., there were no rural
police units until 2004). As a result, in 1997, MS-13 and 18th Street filled the vacuum that existed
because of the government's inability to enforce law and order in certain locations. Briscoe and
Keseberg (2019) describe the situation in the following way: "Gangs did not steal the territory
from the state, they simply occupied it when it was empty [after the armed conflict]."
      Both MS-13 and 18th Street quickly expanded their control over many neighborhoods in El
   8
     Prior to adopting their current name, MS-13 was known as MSS: Mara Salvatrucha Stoners (Martínez and
Martínez, 2018).



                                                   7
Salvador, particularly in urban areas such as the capital, San Salvador. Zoethout (2015) describes
how "gang activity evolved [. . . ] negatively affecting citizen security, social cohesion and com-
munity sustainability" and how after the gangs became stronger, they "gained complete control
of [certain] localities."
        At the same time, the police built the capacity to prevent the gangs from expanding their
territory further, which "finalized" the boundaries.9 However, while the state gained the capac-
ity to prevent the gangs from expanding their influence, it is still unable to establish control over
the neighborhoods controlled by the gangs.10 There have been attempts by the police to regain
control over those locations, but they have been unsuccessful. In part, those efforts have failed
because the gangs have formed ties with the local population, cultivating a network of infor-
mants that allows them to elude capture (Boerman and Golob, 2020; Cruz, 2010; Ward, 2013).
        The importance of the boundaries of gang territory has been widely documented. Inter-
national Crisis Group (2017) describes the situation as follows: "In some areas, gangs have ac-
cumulated so much power that they have become de facto custodians of these localities, setting
up road-blocks, supervising everyday life and imposing their own law." In another interview
to International Crisis Group (2018), a resident of San Salvador is even more direct: "Do you see
that place across the road? I could never get in there since it's the 18th Street gang's territory. If
they see me in there, they might think I'm a spy [. . . ] and I could easily get killed."
        However, as will be shown in Subsection IV.C, despite their importance, the boundaries
were not formed as the result of pre-existing socioeconomic (e.g., quality of housing, the pop-
ulation's level of education, etc.) or geographic (e.g., elevation, access to the waterways, etc.)
differences of the neighborhoods. This result is consistent with the fact that the boundaries of
gang territory were formed primarily as the result of turf wars and the eventual ability of the
police to prevent the gangs from expanding.
        It is possible that when the gangs initially arrived in San Salvador in 1997, they began
with establishing their rule over neighborhoods with particularly low levels of state presence.
However, as the gangs expanded their territorial control, the exact locations of the boundaries
were determined primarily by the ability of the police to prevent the gangs from gaining control
    9
       According to our conversations with the police and individuals from gang-controlled areas, in San Salvador, the
boundaries were formed soon after the deportees arrived, and although there are turf wars between MS-13 and 18th
Street, it is for the original territory seized in the late 1990s.
    10
       In June 2019, the government launched the operation "Plan Territorial Control" (Plan Control Territorial), which
seeks to regain control over gang territory. The launch of this plan and its name allude to the gravity of the situation
and to the strength of the gangs: La Prensa Gráfica (accessed on October 5, 2019).



                                                           8
over a particular area at that particular point in time. As a result, when comparing locations
that are only a few meters away from each other but on opposite sides of the boundary of gang
territory, it is plausible to assume that their treatment status (i.e., whether they are located inside
or outside of gang territory) was as good as random.


                       II.C   Gang activity, restrictions on mobility, and public goods

       Once the gangs assert control over a particular neighborhood, they zealously protect it
from outside influence. One of their main goals is to prevent members of rival gangs and po-
lice informants from entering the territory and jeopardizing their security. For this reason, both
MS-13 and 18th Street introduced a system of checkpoints, requiring individuals attempting
to enter or exit the area to show their identification cards, which have the residential address
printed on them (International Crisis Group, 2018). To implement this policy, the gangs have
junior gang members and collaborators (banderas) patrolling the boundaries of their territory
(Boerman and Golob, 2020; International Crisis Group, 2018).11,12 These restrictions on individ-
uals' mobility are likely essential for the gangs' long-term survival. Without them, the gangs
would not be able to maintain control over their territory, which would, in turn, make the gang
members vulnerable to arrest or assassination.
       In addition to improving security, the presence of checkpoints also allows the gangs to
collect "toll" payments from individuals and businesses entering or exiting their territory (e.g.,
distribution and transportation companies). Martínez (2016) describes the situation in the fol-
lowing way: "One of the great advantages of having borders between rival gangs is imposing
taxes. Everyone pays: companies that install cable television, the women that sell in the central
markets, taxi drivers." The fee is equal to at least one-three dollars, a non-trivial expense for in-
dividuals whose average monthly income is approximately 300 dollars, and needs to be paid to
a bandera, who is monitoring the boundary of gang territory (International Crisis Group, 2018).
       It should be noted that both MS-13 and 18th Street also extort businesses and households
in non-gang-controlled parts of San Salvador.13 However, since, for security reasons, gang col-
    11
       Often the banderas are barely 8 years old (International Crisis Group, 2018), which protects them from being
arrested.
    12
       Both MS-13 and 18th Street also sometimes stop public buses and check the identity cards of the people inside.
If a passenger lives in a neighborhood controlled by a rival gang, he or she need to leave immediately or they face
the risk of being killed. For instance, see this report by the BBC (accessed on October 6, 2019).
    13
       For instance, according to the Salvadoran National Council of Small Businesses, 79% of businesses pay extortion
to the gangs, including expensive restaurants and shopping malls (e.g., see this article by the Economist, accessed on
May 8, 2020).



                                                          9
laborators are already monitoring who is entering and leaving the neighborhood, the collection
of "toll" payments requires little additional effort. This type of extortion is also easily enforceable
and, unlike conducting a raid in a different part of the city, involves minimal risk of encountering
the police or a rival gang.
        As the de facto custodians of the territory they control, the gangs claim to be "providing a
`community service' by protecting locals from other criminals and corrupt police" (International
Crisis Group, 2018). However, the government has been willing to invest in infrastructure amd
social and educational programs in gang-controlled neighborhoods in the hope that it would
lead to a reduction in gang violence.14,15 Moreover, even though a permanent reduction in vi-
olence never followed, the government did not stop providing public goods in gang-controlled
areas, which happened for the following two reasons. First, if the government were to stop
investing in public goods in gang territory, its legitimacy in the eyes of the local population
would likely be undermined, increasing support for the gangs (Zoethout, 2015). Second, such a
move could be costly for incumbent politicians. "[G]angs serve as intermediaries between polit-
ical parties and residents in controlled neighborhoods [. . . ] offer[ing] political candidates what
no other broker or intermediary can provide--the use of coercive violence to sway elections
in their favor" (Córdova, 2019). Thus, defunding social programs in gang neighborhoods could
significantly reduce politicians' reelection prospects, in addition to potentially endangering their
lives.16


                                                   III    D ATA

        In this section, we document the primary sources of data drawn upon in this study. Fur-
ther clarifications about the data, as well as a description of the ancillary data sources, can be
found in the Appendix. Table A1 in the Appendix presents the summary statistics of all the
variables used in the analysis.
        Gang boundaries.--In 2015, a local newspaper--El Diario de Hoy (EDH)--published the map
that is utilized in this study, which delimited the locations controlled by MS-13 and 18th Street in
San Salvador. EDH based its report on information and cartography from the Ministry of Justice
   14
      For instance, see this article by InSight Crime (accessed on August 10, 2020).
   15
      The gangs have benefited from infrastructure investments in their neighborhoods. For example, the construction
and repair of roads in gang-controlled neighborhoods has allowed the gangs to collect more "toll" revenue from
trucks and transport firms, passing through their territory (International Crisis Group, 2017).
   16
      For an in-depth look at how gangs use their political power, see, for example, this article by El Faro (accessed
on October 6, 2019).


                                                         10
and Public Security (Ministerio de Justicia y Seguridad Pública, MJSP) and the PNC. The newspaper
further validated the map of gang boundaries by confirming that the gang-controlled neighbor-
hoods on the map are also the places where its distribution network had periodic encounters
with gang members.17
        1992 and 2007 population and household censuses.--The General Directorate of Statistics and
Censuses (Dirección General de Estadísticas y Censos, DIGESTYC) provided us with anonymous
microdata for the 1992 and 2007 censuses. The data covers the socioeconomic characteristics
of all the country's households and individuals, including--but not limited to--educational at-
tainment and material ownership (e.g., having a car, a TV, etc.). Both censuses also recorded the
characteristics of all the dwellings in El Salvador.18 For most outcome variables, both the 1992
and 2007 censuses had the exact same wording of the questions. Hence, the data are directly
comparable across censal exercises.19
        1992 and 2007 censal cartography.--DIGESTYC also provided us with maps of the census
tracts (segmentos censales) for both the 1992 and the 2007 censuses. Each census tract represents
a very small area with a fixed geographic perimeter. In 2007, the average census tract in our
sample included 131 households and 473 individuals. The fact that the census tracts are quite
small allows us to accurately measure their location, which we estimate by using the geographic
coordinates of their centroids. In addition, because of the difficulty with attributing treatment
status, we exclude 26 census tracts (3.9% of the census tracts in San Salvador), which have the
centroid outside of gang neighborhoods, but at least 25% of their territory is controlled by the
gangs. Finally, we limit our analysis to census tracts located within 420 meters of the boundary
of gang territory because after that, there are gaps in the distribution of observations both inside
and outside of gang-controlled areas.
        2019 survey.--To document the mechanisms through which gangs affect socioeconomic
development, we conducted our own geocoded survey in San Salvador in 2019.20 The survey
consisted of in-person interviews, which lasted approximately 30 minutes and contained ques-
tions related to individuals' mobility, employment and income, public goods access and satis-
faction, and the role of formal (i.e., government) and informal institutions in resolving problems
   17
       The map has also been replicated by InSight Crime in 2018 (accessed on May 4, 2020).
   18
       Notably, the data for these variables were not self-reported by the respondents but recorded by the enumerators
based on their observations.
    19
       The notable exception are questions related to technologies that were not widely available in 1992 (e.g., access
to the internet). These questions were only asked in the 2007 census.
    20
       The details of the sampling procedure can be found in the Appendix.



                                                          11
in the neighborhood. However, it should be noted that, for security reasons, we were unable to
ask individuals questions related to gang activity.
          Homicide statistics.--The data on the gang-related homicides come from the PNC and cover
the period from 2003 to 2011. For each observation, we obtained information pertaining to the
time and day it occurred, whether the perpetrator was a member of a gang, and the address of
occurrence. Using these addresses, we manually geocoded the data to obtain the latitude and
longitude of the homicides carried out by gang members.The PNC also shared with us the data
on gang-related homicides in 2000. However, these data are only available at the municipality
level.
          Nighttime light density.--Annual data on nighttime light density (or luminosity) come from
the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program-Operational Linescan System (DMSP-OLS) and
spans the period from 1992 to 2013.21 In particular, we use the DMSP-OLS data, representing
the average stable lights from cities, towns, and other sites with persistent lighting. The data
are provided by the National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI). If for a particular
year, the data were available from more than one satellite, we take the average of the two.
          Notably, the resolution of the data on nighttime light density is 30 arc seconds×30 arc
seconds (i.e., approximately 1 kilometer×1 kilometer). Therefore, the data are not sufficiently
precise to be used in the regression discontinuity design.


                    IV    G ANG CONTROL AND SOCIOECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:
                                  R EGRESSION DISCONTINUITY ANALYSIS

          To estimate the effects of gang presence on socioeconomic development, we begin with
performing a spatial regression discontinuity design, focusing on San Salvador municipality for
which we have data on the boundaries of the locations controlled by the gangs.


                               IV.A    Empirical strategy: Regression discontinuity

          We estimate the effect that gangs have on socioeconomic development in the neighbor-
hoods they control. The main outcome variables come from the 2007 census. For each census
tract, we calculate the distance from its centroid to the boundary of gang territory (in tens of
meters) and perform a spatial regression discontinuity design, using this distance as the forcing
   21
        The data and a detailed description of it are available here: DMSP-OLS (accessed on May 4, 2020).



                                                           12
variable (Specification 1):


             yic = 0 + 1 distancec + 2 gang territoryc distancec + 3 gang territoryc + ic ,                       (1)


where i and c denote individuals and census tracts, respectively. gang territory is a dummy vari-
able for whether the location is controlled by the gangs, distance represents the distance to the
boundary of gang territory, and y--the outcome variable of interest. Standard errors are clus-
tered by 30 meter bins denoting distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for loca-
tions inside and outside of gang territory.22
        The coefficient of interest is 3 , which represents the effect of living in a gang-controlled
neighborhood. The two assumptions for interpreting this effect as causal are as follows. First, it
should be the case that prior to the arrival of the gangs, there were no pre-existing differences
across locations on either side of the current boundary of gang territory. In Subsection IV.C, we
validate this assumption using data from the 1992 census and geographic information. In partic-
ular, we show that before the arrival of the gangs, the census tracts on either side of the current
boundary had similar geographic and socioeconomic characteristics. The second assumption
is that residents of gang territory did not selectively migrate from those areas to neighboring
locations that were part of the control group. Subsection IV.C provides a detailed discussion of
this assumption, showing that our results are very unlikely to be driven by selective migration.


                                               IV.B    Main results

        Table 1 presents the results of estimating Specification (1), using data from the 2007 census.
It shows that, after experiencing gang rule, individuals living in gang-controlled neighborhoods
have significantly worse dwelling conditions, lower levels of education, and are less wealthy
than their peers that live on the other side of the boundary. For instance, individuals living
inside gang territory are estimated to have 20 percentage points lower probability of owning
a car, 15 percentage points lower probability of having a high school degree, and 5 percentage
points lower probability of their houses' walls being made of concrete than individuals living
less than 50 meters away but not under the control of gangs. The results for the other measures
   22
     This size of the bins comes from estimating the optimal bandwidth for each of the outcome variables from the
2007 census, following Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012); Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunik (2014); Calonico, Cattaneo
and Farrell (2018, 2020). 30 meters is the average value of the optimal bandwidth for the variables from the 2007 cen-
sus. In the Appendix, we show that the results are robust to alternative assumptions about the variance-covariance
matrix (Table A2) as well as performing a two-dimensional regression discontinuity design in latitude and longitude
instead of distance to the boundary of gang territory (Table A3).


                                                         13
of socioeconomic development present the same pattern.
       Figure 2 illustrates the findings from Table 1 for the first principal components of the
dwelling, household, and individual characteristics. The vertical axis represents the average
value of the outcomes variables; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to the boundary of
gang territory. Areas to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to
the right are controlled by the gangs. For all the outcome variables, there is a clear discontinuity
at the boundary of gang-controlled neighborhoods.23
       Overall, the results suggest that gangs have had a significant negative effect on socioeco-
nomic development in the neighborhoods they control. To estimate the total monetary cost of
this effect, we consider a variable that potentially aggregates all the effects of living under gang
control into one--household income, which was one of the questions included in the survey
that we conducted in 2019. Figure 3 presents the regression discontinuity plot for this variable.
The results suggest that residents of gang-controlled neighborhoods earn approximately $350
less each month than individuals on the other side of the boundary. Given that the average in-
come in our sample is $625, this discontinuity implies a reduction in income of more than 50%.
Table A4 in the Appendix presents the regression estimates for household income and the other
socioeconomic characteristics from the 2019 survey.


                                         IV.C    Identifying assumptions

       In this subsection, we analyze the assumptions that need to be satisfied for the estimates
from Table 1 to represent the causal effect of gang control on socioeconomic development. In
particular, we show that, before the arrival of the gangs, the areas to either side of the boundary
of gang territory had similar geographic and socioeconomic characteristics. We also show that
the results are unlikely to be driven by selective migration of individuals.
       Geography and socioeconomic development before the arrival of the gangs.--To ensure that areas
on the other side of the boundary are the appropriate counterfactual for the gang-controlled
neighborhoods, we check that, before the arrival of the gangs, those locations did not have any
pre-existing differences in geography or socioeconomic development.
       We estimate Specification (1) for potentially important neighborhood characteristics (e.g.,
elevation, access to the waterways, road density, etc.) and the socioeconomic characteristics
   23
      In the Appendix, we illustrate the results for all the other outcome variables from Table 1. In particular, Fig-
ure A1 presents the results for the dwelling characteristics, Figure A2--for the household characteristics, and Fig-
ure A3--for the individual characteristics.


                                                         14
from the 1992 census (e.g., dwelling conditions, having a TV, etc.).24 Table 2 presents the results.
There are no discontinuities in any of the variables, confirming the notion that initially the loca-
tions on opposite sides of the boundary were not different from one another. Figures A5-A8 in
the Appendix illustrate the results for the neighborhood, dwelling, household, and individual
characteristics, respectively.
        Selective migration: In-sample migration.--Another assumption that needs to be satisfied for
our estimates to be interpreted as causal is that there has been no selective migration of individ-
uals across the regression discontinuity threshold. In particular, selective migration can affect
our results in two ways. The first one is what we will refer to as in-sample migration: indi-
viduals moving from a neighborhood on one side of the boundary to an area on the other side
of the boundary, while remaining in the municipality of San Salvador and, consequently, in our
sample. The second one is what we will refer to as out-of-sample migration: individuals moving
from a location in San Salvador to a different municipality in El Salvador or abroad.
        First, we consider in-sample migration. To show that this type of migration is not driving
our results, we take advantage of the survey that we conducted in San Salvador, where, among
other questions, we asked individuals whether they have lived in the same neighborhood their
entire life. 77% of respondents answered in the affirmative.25 This information allows us to
compare the results for the full sample and for the subsample of respondents for whom we
know the ex-ante treatment status (i.e., that they lived in the location before the arrival of the
gangs). In the absence of in-sample migration, the two sets of results would be quite similar,
whereas, if the results are determined by in-sample migration, the discontinuities would only
appear in the full sample.
        When the sample is limited to individuals who have always lived in the same neighbor-
hood, the results of the regression discontinuity analysis practically do not change. Figure 4
illustrates this fact by showing the regression discontinuity plots for the two samples. The out-
come variable is household income. The left-hand side of the figure presents the results for the
full sample, the right-hand side--for the subsample of never-movers. The two plots are quite
   24
      Some neighborhood characteristics (e.g., elevation or access to the waterways) are time-invariant. Other neigh-
borhood characteristics potentially change in time. For all the variables except for road density, we use the data either
from before the arrival of the gangs or soon after their arrival. A detailed description of the data is available in the
Appendix. For road density, the data come from 2020. However, since our analysis focuses on predominantly urban
areas, road density is unlikely to significantly change over time.
   25
      Thus, most inhabitants of San Salvador do not change their place of residence. In contrast, in the United States,
only 32% of the population has never changed their place of residence, according to the data from a 2000 survey of
5% of the United States population.



                                                           15
similar, suggesting that the results are not driven by selective in-sample migration. Table A4 in
the Appendix presents the regression estimates for the socioeconomic characteristics from the
2019 survey, both for the full sample and for the sample of never-movers.26
        In the 2007 census, individuals were also asked whether they have lived in the same mu-
nicipality their entire life. Since individuals who answered in the affirmative could still have
moved within the municipality, this question is less precise at determining the ex-ante treatment
status of the respondents. However, coincidentally, the share of population that has always
lived in San Salvador municipality is equal to 77%, the same number as the share of population
that has always lived in the same neighborhood according to the 2019 survey. Thus, it appears
that, in this context, individuals primarily move across municipalities and not within the same
municipality. Under this assumption, we estimate Specification (1) for the variables from the
2007 census for the subsample individuals who have always lived in the same municipality.
Appendix Table A5 presents the results, which are very similar to those presented in Table 1,
confirming that in-sample migration is not likely to be driving the results.
        Selective migration: Out-of-sample migration.--Another type of selective migration that can
potentially affect the interpretation of our results is out-of-sample migration--individuals mov-
ing from San Salvador to a different municipality or abroad. In particular, if rich, educated
individuals who initially lived in gang-controlled neighborhoods were more likely to move out
of San Salvador than poor and uneducated individuals from the same areas, it could imply that
the results in Table 1 are partly determined by this change in the composition of the popula-
tion. To directly address this concern, one would need to know the current whereabouts of all
the individuals who lived in gang-controlled locations before the arrival of the gangs as well as
their levels of wealth and education at that time. Such data are nonexistent. However, below we
present a number of tests and robustness checks to show that selective out-of-sample migration
is highly unlikely to be driving our results.27
        First, we perform a test in the spirit of McCrary (2008) to check whether, at the boundary
   26
     Figure A9 in the Appendix illustrates the results for the other socioeconomic characteristics from the 2019 survey.
   27
     It should be noted that while the presence of gang activity has displaced thousands of people in El Salvador,
most of the displaced individuals are from areas of the country which are actively contested (see Sviatschi, 2020).
The situation is different in San Salvador, where the boundaries of gang territory have remained quite stable after
they were initially formed. Moreover, our results would only be affected if rich, educated individuals from gang-
controlled neighborhoods were more likely to move out of San Salvador than poor and uneducated residents of the
same areas. If individuals from both these groups were similarly likely to migrate, our results would remain valid.
Similarly, given that prior to the arrival of the gangs the level of socioeconomic development was the same in gang
and non-gang areas, our results would also not be affected if migration status was solely determined by individuals'
wealth, regardless of whether they live in gang territory or not.



                                                          16
of gang territory, there is a discontinuous change in population density for various groups of the
population. If individuals from gang-controlled neighborhoods were more likely to move from
San Salvador to a different municipality or abroad, we would expect to see a decrease in popu-
lation density at the boundary of gang territory. Table A6 presents the results of the estimation.
There are no discontinuous changes in household and population density at the boundary of
gang territory. In particular, we find no heterogeneity by age and gender. Moreover, the signs of
all the coefficients are positive (albeit not stastistically significant), which is consistent with the
notion that the gangs restrict individuals' mobility, making it difficult for them to change their
place of residence.
        Second, we show that our results are robust to high levels of selective migration. In partic-
ular, as reported in Table A7 in the Appendix, we demonstrate that the results for the first princi-
pal components of the household and individual characteristics remain significant if we exclude
up to 15% of the poorest households and least educated individuals from gang-controlled neigh-
borhoods.28,29
        We also calculate the rates of selective out-of-sample migration from gang-controlled neigh-
borhoods that would be required to generate the discontinuities from Table 1. For each of the
binary household-level characteristics, we define a household to be "rich" if it has that charac-
teristic and "poor" if it does not.30 The only exception is the variable for not having a bathroom,
which is defined in the opposite way. Similarly, for each of the individual-level characteristics,
we define an individual to be "educated" if they have that characteristic and "uneducated" if
they do not. We assume that outside of gang territory, the probability of moving out of San
Salvador is the same for all individuals and that in gang-controlled neighborhoods, poor and
uneducated individuals have the probability  of migrating out of sample.31 Then, for  equal
   28
      To implement this analysis, we rank households and individuals according to the first principal components of
the household and individual characteristics, respectively. We then exclude x% of the observations with the lowest
values of the first principal component. When more than x% of the observations had the values of the first principal
component less than or equal to the value of the xth percentile, we exclude a random subset of observations for
which the first principal component is exactly equal to the xth percentile (all observations with lower values are
always excluded). The estimates do not depend on the subsample of observations that are excluded. In particular,
we perform 1,000 iterations of this procedure and for each variable report the most concervative results, i.e., when
they are least significant.
   29
      Note that this is a very demanding specification. For instance, only 6% of the observations in gang territory do
not have a TV. Therefore, when we exclude 15% of the poorest households in gang territory, we remove nearly all
observations without a TV, making gang territory look better than non-gang areas in terms of this variable. For this
reason, we do not report the results for all the variables from Table 1.
   30
      For instance, in the case of car ownership, a "rich" household is one that owns a car, and a "poor" household is
one that does not.
   31
      If rich, educated individuals from non-gang areas are more likely to migrate out of sample, that would make
the required rates of selective out-of-sample migration from gang territory even higher.



                                                         17
to 0%, 10%, and 20%, we calculate the share of rich households and educated individuals from
gang territory that needed to move out of San Salvador to generate the discontinuities for each
of the outcome variables.32 Table A8 in the Appendix presents the results of these calculations.
Even if we unrealistically assume  = 0% (i.e., that poor and uneducated individuals do not
have a chance to move out of San Salvador), on average, the rate of out-of-sample migration for
rich, educated individuals would have to be as high as 50% to generate the discontinuities from
Table 1. For higher values of , this rate is even higher.
        Can the rate of out-of-sample migration for rich individuals be that high? We estimate this
rate using a proxy for out-of-sample migration: whether a household has a family member who
moved abroad in 1997-2007. We take advantage of the fact that before 2013, migration of entire
families from El Salvador had been very uncommon.33 For instance, according to United States
Customs and Border Protection, in 2012, the number of apprehensions of individuals in family
units constituted less than 3% of all apprehensions of Salvadoran citizens at the Southwest bor-
der of the United States. As a result, by considering the share of households in gang-controlled
neighborhoods in San Salvador that have a family member who moved abroad, we are able to
estimate the extent of out-of-sample migration. In addition, by looking at the correlation be-
tween the probability of a family member moving abroad and the first principal component of
the household characteristics, we are able to address the question of whether individuals from
rich households are more likely to migrate out of San Salvador.
        Table A9 in the Appendix presents the results of the estimation. On average, approxi-
mately 6% of the households have a member of the family who moved abroad in 1997-2007.
This rate does not change at the boundary of gang territory. We also find that rich households
both inside and outside of gang territory are more likely to have a family member living abroad.
However, the correlation between wealth and out-of-sample migration inside and outside of
gang territory are not statistically different from one another. Moreover, although rich house-
holds are more likely to have a family member move abroad, the magnitude of that effect is
much smaller than the rates of selective out-of-sample migration from Table A8 that are re-
quired to generate the discontinuities. In gang territory, a one standard deviation increase in
the first principal component of the household characteristics (0.32) increases the probability of
   32
     In Subsection A.III of the Appendix, we provide more details on how the calculations were performed.
   33
     Before 2013, in the vast majority of cases, families sent only one member of the family abroad at the same time.
The two main reasons for this are the high risks associated with migrating out of the country and the economic costs
of paying an intermediary for help in crossing the borders. For a description of the journey, see, for instance, Amnesty
International (accessed on April 1, 2020) or The Atlantic (accessed on April 1, 2020).


                                                          18
the household having a family member move abroad by only 2.3%, whereas the estimates from
Table A8 suggest that the rate of out-of-sample migration for rich households needs to be at least
50% to explain the discontinuities. In addition, it is possible that some households with a fam-
ily member abroad have increased their wealth because of that fact (e.g., because of receiving
remittances). If that is the case, the results from Table A9 would overestimate the probability of
individuals from rich households migrating out of sample.
       Overall, the results presented in this subsection strongly suggest that the estimates in Ta-
ble 1 are not driven by pre-existing differences in socioeconomic characteristics or by selective
migration of individuals.


                                              IV.D     Robustness checks

       Excluding areas close to the boundary of gang territory.--To show that the results are robust to
potential inaccuracies in the location of the boundaries of gang territory and are not driven by
outlier areas near the boundary, we perform a "donut hole" regression discontinuity design and
estimate Specification (1), excluding observations within 100 meters of the regression disconti-
nuity cutoff.34 The results are presented in Table A10 in the Appendix and are similar to those
in Table 1.
       Excluding 10% of the top observations from non-gang areas.--We show that the results are not
driven by a small number of wealthy individuals living outside of gang territory. In particular,
we exclude 10% of the observations from non-gang areas that have the highest values of the first
principal component of the dwelling, household, and individual characteristics.35 As reported
in Table A11 in the Appendix, the estimates remain statistically significant.
       Regression discontinuity using latitude and longitude.--We show that the results are robust to
using a two-dimensional regression discontinuity design with latitude and longitude as the forc-
ing variables. Specifically, we estimate Specification (1), replacing distance to the boundary of
gang territory with latitude and longitude, normalized to have the mean of zero.36 The results
are presented in Table A3 in the Appendix.
       Different bandwidth and alternative assumptions about the variance-covariance matrix.--Table A2
   34
      The results are robust to the choice of the "donut hole" cutoff. For instance, the results are very similar if we
exclude observations within 50 meters or 150 meters of the boundary of gang territory.
   35
      To implement this analysis, we adopt the same procedure as for the results in Table A7.
   36
      Since our analysis focuses on one city, there is little variation in latitude and longitude. As a result, if one does
not subtract the mean from those variables, their interactions with the dummy for gang territory would be collinear
with that dummy.



                                                            19
in the Appendix shows that the findings are robust to alternative assumptions about the corre-
lation between the error terms.37 In particular, we show that the results are robust to clustering
by census tract, by distance to the boundary of gang territory, by 60 meter distance bins (i.e.,
double the size of the bins in the baseline specification), as well as correcting the standard errors
for spatial correlation following Conley (1999), Hsiang (2010), and Collela et al. (2018).
        We also demonstrate that our findings are robust to alternative choices of bandwidth by
presenting the regression discontinuity plots for larger and smaller distance bins than in the
baseline specification. Figure A12 in the Appendix illustrates the results for the first principal
components of the dwelling, household, and individual characteristics, using 60 meter distance
bins; Figure A13 illustrates the same results using 20 meter bins.
        Under-reporting of wealth.--A potential concern is that residents of gang-controlled neigh-
borhoods might be more likely to underreport their wealth compared to residents of non-gang
areas (e.g., to evade taxation by the gangs). We address this concern in the following ways,
showing that the results are highly unlikely to be driven by selective underreporting of wealth.
        First, in the census, the data on the dwelling characteristics were recorded by the enumer-
ators based on what they observed and not self-reported by the respondents. Thus, the discon-
tinuities in the dwelling characteristics cannot be determined by selective under-reporting of
wealth.
        Second, we consider a non-self-reported measure of individuals' wealth: rent paid for
housing. Specifically, we analyze the data on the housing offers in various parts of San Sal-
vador, which provides us with the landlords' assessment of individuals' ability to pay.38 We
then estimate Specification (1) with monthly housing rent as the outcome variable, additionally
controlling for observable housing characteristics (i.e., the number of rooms, the number of bath-
rooms, square meters, etc.). Table A12 in the Appendix presents the results.39 They suggest that
housing rent is approximately $200 lower in gang-controlled locations, confirming the notion
that residents of those areas are poorer than residents of non-gang neighborhoods.
        Finally, in Section VI, we validate the results of the regression discontinuity design by
   37
       For brevity, we only report the results for the first principal components of the dwelling, household, and indi-
vidual characteristics. The results for the other variables from Table 1 are similar.
    38
       The data were scraped from OLX (accessed on April 8, 2020). It should be noted that we cannot observe whether
a particular property was rented out or not. However, after two months, the vast majority of the offers were no longer
available. It should also be noted that some of the cheapest properties may be rented out on the informal market and
not appear on OLX. If there are more such properties in gang-controlled neighborhoods, our estimates provide a
lower bound on the actual effects of gang control.
    39
       Appendix Figure A11 illustrates the results from Table A12, presenting the regression discontinuity plots for the
residuals of housing rent and log housing rent after subtracting the effects of all the controls.


                                                          20
performing a difference-in-differences analysis using nighttime light density data, which are
collected via satellite from space and cannot be underreported. In particular, we show that,
after 1997, areas that became exposed to gang activity experienced significantly lower growth
in luminosity, confirming the notion that the gangs have had a negative effect on socioeconomic
development.
         Estimating the effects separately for MS-13 and 18th Street.--We show that MS-13 and 18th Street
have had similar effects on socioeconomic development in the neighborhoods they control. In
particular, we estimate Specification (1), replacing the dummy for gang territory with dummies
for the areas controlled by MS-13 and for the areas controlled by 18th Street. The results are
presented in Table A13 in the Appendix and are very similar for both gangs.
         Excluding gang areas within 150 meters of the rival gang.--To show that the negative effects
on socioeconomic development are present not only in areas where the two gangs, which have
an adversarial relationship, are particularly close to each other, we estimate Specification (1),
excluding gang-controlled neighborhoods that are located within 150 meters of the rival gang's
territory.40 The results are presented in Table A14 in the Appendix.
         "Islands" of gang territory.--As shown in Figure 1, most gang-controlled neighborhoods are
located close to each other in the east of city. However, there are also smaller "islands" of gang
territory in other parts of San Salvador. We check whether those "islands" have been affected in
the same way as the main gang areas. Specifically, we estimate Specification (1), replacing the
dummy for gang territory with dummies for the "islands" and for the rest of gang territory. The
results are presented in Appendix Table A15 and suggest that all gang areas have been affected.
         Estimating the effects separately for men and women.--We verify that both male and female
residents of gang territory have been affected. In particular, we estimate Specification (1) for
the individual characteristics from the 2007 census, separately for women and men. The results
are presented in Table A16 in the Appendix.


                                                  V      M ECHANISMS

                                            V.A       Restrictions on mobility

         We show that a major factor driving lower socioeconomic development in gang-controlled
neighborhoods is that both MS-13 and 18th Street restrict individuals' labor choices by not al-
  40
       The results are robust to changing this cutoff.



                                                             21
lowing them to freely move across the boundaries of gang territory.
        There are multiple reasons why gangs restrict individuals' mobility. The main reason is
security. Both MS-13 and 18th Street need to prevent rival gangs and police informants from
entering their territory, a task that would be difficult to implement without creating restrictions
on who can enter and leave the neighborhood. Thus, as was described in Section II, the gangs
instituted a system of checkpoints, checking the identification cards of individuals attempting to
cross the boundary of their territory (International Crisis Group, 2018). In addition to improving
the gangs' security, the system of checkpoints also facilitates the extortion of individuals and
businesses. An individual or firm entering a gang-controlled neighborhood are required to pay
a "toll" when passing the checkpoint.41,42 Finally, the restrictions on mobility help MS-13 and
18th Street to maintain control over the residents of their neighborhoods by making it difficult
for those individuals to migrate to a different part of the country and escape from gang influence.
        To document the presence of restrictions on individuals' mobility, we estimate Specifica-
tion (1) for the mobility questions from the survey that we conducted in San Salvador. Table 3
presents the results. We find that individuals living in gang-controlled neighborhoods are 11
percentage points more likely to work in the neighborhood where they live and 50 percentage
points more likely to work in gang territory. They are also less likely to have been in places
outside of San Salvador: the share of individuals who have ever been to the beach or visited
Santa Ana municipality, which are both 30-60 kilometers away, discontinuously decreases at the
boundary of gang territory. Finally, individuals living in gang-controlled areas acknowledge
that there are restrictions on their mobility, as evidenced by them being significantly less likely
to say that there is freedom of movement where they live.43
        The consequence of these mobility restrictions is that residents of gang-controlled neigh-
borhoods often cannot work outside of gang territory, being forced to accept low-paying jobs in
small firms because of their inability to work in other parts of the city. This fact is confirmed by
anecdotal evidence from the field. For instance, while we were conducting the survey in San Sal-
vador, one of the respondents from a gang-controlled neighborhood told us the following story.
   41
       Payment of the "toll" is a necessary but not sufficient condition. In addition to paying the toll, an individual or
firm also need to get permission to enter from the gang controlling that neighborhood.
    42
       For instance, International Crisis Group (2017) describes how "[t]ransport firms and their workers in particular
have become targets of systematic intimidation and assassination, forced to pay up for crossing gang-controlled
territory".
    43
       Figure 5 presents the regression discontinuity plots for the share of people working in the same neighborhood
as they live, for the share of people working in gang territory, and the share of people who think there is freedom of
movement where they live.



                                                           22
Previously, he used to have a good job at a gas station. However, that gas station was located
close to the territory of a rival gang. For this reason, the gang that controls his neighborhood
told the man that he should find a different job or "face the consequences", and, as a result, the
man left his job at the gas station.
        To document the negative effects of the restrictions on individuals' mobility, we compare
the labor market outcomes for residents of gang neighborhoods who are able to work outside
of gang territory and those who are not. Table 4 presents the results. It shows that, while, on
average, residents of gang-controlled neighborhoods earn less income and work in smaller firms
than individuals from non-gang locations, these gaps are significantly smaller for individuals
from gang territory who work in non-gang areas. In particular, we find that those people are
as likely to work in firms with 100 or more employees as individuals living outside of gang-
controlled locations. They also have a 40% smaller gap in household income compared to other
residents of gang territory.44
        It should be noted that, since the fact of working outside of gang territory is not likely to
be entirely random, the results from Table 4 should be interpreted with caution. For instance,
if better-educated residents of gang-controlled neighborhoods are more likely to get permission
to work in non-gang areas, that could potentially result in an overestimation of the premium
of working outside of gang territory. However, the data suggest that there is considerable vari-
ation in the probability of working outside of gang territory across education levels, which is
consistent with the notion that luck plays an important role in determining whether a resident
of gang territory is allowed to work in a non-gang location (e.g., gang leaders in certain neigh-
borhoods may be less willing than others to enforce restrictions on mobility; individuals might
find ways to circumvent the gangs' restrictions). Moreover, as shown in Table 4, the results are
robust to controlling for the individuals' level of education, suggesting that the results are not
driven by more educated residents of gang-controlled neighborhoods being more likely to work
in non-gang locations.45,46 Overall, the findings suggest that working outside of gang territory
   44
       Note that household income is defined at the level of the household, whereas the individuals' work locations
are defined at the individual level. Thus, if multiple people in the household work outside of gang territory, the
effect on income is likely to be larger. For instance, if two people in the household work in non-gang areas, the gap in
income would be 2×167.64/430  80% smaller, which is close to the results for the probability of working in a firm
with 100 or more employees. Another potential reason why working outside of gang territory does not fully explain
the gap in earnings is that income today depends on past work experience. Therefore, if residents of gang territory
did not have good jobs in the past, they are likely to earn less than individuals who did, even if they now work in
similar firms in non-gang areas.
    45
       The results are also robust to including dummies for all the years of education.
    46
       In all the specifications in Table 4, we also control for whether an individual is currently employed. In the



                                                          23
is an important determinant of individuals' labor market outcomes.
       Why do the gangs not loosen the restrictions on mobility, allow individuals to work in
any part of the city and then "tax" the additional surplus? The first reason is security. Without
restrictions on mobility, members of rival gangs and police informants would be able to enter
gang-controlled neighborhoods, which would threaten the gang's long-term survival. The sec-
ond reason is that the enforcement of such a tax scheme would require a lot more capacity than
the existing system. In particular, it would require monitoring individuals' income and making
sure each person pays the amount they are due--things that even national governments of many
countries are unable to enforce. Furthermore, if the residents of gang territory had full freedom
of movement, they may not choose to live in gang-controlled neighborhoods, which would fur-
ther complicate tax collection. In contrast, in the existing system, the gangs only need to monitor
the boundary of their territory and collect "toll" payments from individuals whom they allow
to cross the boundary, a task that can be performed by junior gang members or collaborators,
often women and children.
       Notably, Salvadoran gangs are not the only ones to use restrictions on individuals' mo-
bility as a tool of control and revenue extraction. The same techniques are used by gangs in
Brazil and non-state armed actors in Colombia (Arjona et al., 2019; Magaloni, Franco Vivanco
and Melo, 2020).47 Moreover, similar mobility restrictions existed in the past during feudalism
and serfdom (Bloch, 2015; Dennison, 2011; Markevich and Zhuravskaya, 2018). For example, in
the Russian empire, restrictions on peasant mobility existed and were enforced by the state until
the second half of the 19th century.


                                           V.B    Public goods provision

       Another potential determinant of lower socioeconomic development in gang neighbor-
hoods is related to public goods provision. If neither the government nor the gangs are able and
willing to provide public goods in those locations, it could have a significant impact on individ-
uals' living conditions. To assess whether this mechanism is present, we perform the following
analysis. First, we use data from Google Maps on the geolocation of schools and hospitals to
survey, unemployed individuals were asked to describe their most recent work experience. Thus, some unemployed
respondents said that their most recent job was in a gang-controlled neighborhood, while others previously worked
outside of gang territory.
   47
      Recently, multiple media outlets have also argued that the institutionalized restrictions on individuals' mobility
have allowed gangs and other non-state armed actors to effectively enforce lockdowns during the recent COVID-19
pandemic (e.g., see this article by Time).



                                                          24
estimate Specification (1) using the number of schools and hospitals per square kilometer as the
outcome variables.48,49 Second, we use data from the 2019 survey, where individuals were asked
to rate on a scale from 1 = "extremely unsatisfied" to 7 = "extremely satisfied" their satisfaction
with the availability and quality of health services, education centers, roads, and electricity ser-
vice. Table 5 presents both sets of results, showing that there is no discontinuity in any of these
variables.50 In addition, as was presented in Table 2, we also do not find any differences in
road density and in the share of urban territory. All these results suggest that the lower levels
of socioeconomic development of gang-controlled neighborhoods are not likely to be driven by
differences in public goods provision.
        The fact that we find no differences in public goods provision across the boundary of gang
territory is not surprising. In an effort to limit violence, the government has been willing to
invest in "peace zones" in gang-controlled neighborhoods, implementing social, educational,
and job training programs, while, in exchange, the gangs promised to reduce the number of
homicides by half, an agreement by which they temporarily abided (Dudley, 2013).51 However,
even after the gangs reneged on their promise, the politicians did not stop providing public
goods in those areas, partly because the rollback of those programs would have potentially
undermined the legitimacy of the government and increased support for the gangs (Zoethout,
2016). Moreover, such a move could have been costly for incumbent politicians, reducing their
reelection prospects and potentially endangering their lives (Córdova, 2019).
        We also analyze whether the gangs themselves provide help to the residents of their ter-
ritory. For instance, anecdotal evidence has suggested that, instead of involving the police or
other government officials, individuals sometimes resort to gangs to resolve disputes (e.g., see
International Crisis Group, 2018). We test this hypothesis by analyzing whether residents of
gang territory are more likely to seek help from informal leaders of the community when they
   48
       Google Maps has the most reliable and up-to-date geocoded data on the schools, hospitals, and other establish-
ments in San Salvador. Administrative records are not always up to date and sometimes do not have the correct
geolocation of the observations (e.g., some of them are outside of El Salvador). However, if we use the data from the
administrative records, the results are very similar.
    49
       In this analysis, the unit of observation is a 10 meter bin, denoting distance to the boundary of gang territory,
separately for locations inside and outside of gang territory. The results are robust to changing the size of the bins.
    50
       In the Appendix, Figure A14 illustrates the results for the number of schools and hospitals per square kilometer;
Figure A15 visualizes the results for individuals' satisfaction with the availability and quality of public goods in their
neighborhood.
    51
       The gangs' have been among the primary beneficiaries of the government's social programs. For example, the
construction and repair of roads in gang-controlled neighborhoods likely allowed the gangs to collect more "toll"
revenue from trucks and transport firms, passing through their territory (International Crisis Group, 2017). In addi-
tion, by allowing the government to provide public goods, increase the welfare of the local population, gangs have
potentially been able to extort more from the individuals living on their territory.



                                                           25
have a problem with public goods provision, a financial problem, or a security, civic, or legal
dispute. The survey could not explicitly ask about the gangs because that could have poten-
tially endangered both the enumerators and the respondents. Therefore, the term "informal
leader of the community" is used as a proxy for "gang leader".52 Table A17 in the Appendix
presents the results, showing that respondents from gang-controlled areas are not more likely
to seek help from the informal leader of the community than individuals living outside of gang
territory. Thus, we do not find empirical evidence supporting the hypothesis that residents of
gang neighborhoods get help from the gangs when they have problems. However, as shown is
Table A17, they are more likely not to seek help from anyone, possibly out of fear that the gangs
might punish them for complaining about there problems.


                                           V.C    Violence and extortion

        We analyze whether the results for lower socioeconomic development in gang-controlled
areas can be explained by differences in violence or the rates of extortion across the bound-
ary of gang territory. In particular, we estimate Specification (1), using the number of gang-
related homicides and violent thefts per square kilometer as the outcome variables.53 We also
use geocoded data from the 2015 survey of firms conducted by the Salvadoran Foundation for
Economic and Social Development (Fundación Salvadoreña para el Desarrollo Económico y Social,
FUSADES) to analyze whether firms in different parts of San Salvador are differentially exposed
to extortion and other types of gang activity. Specifically, we estimate Specification (1) for the
probability that a firm has been extorted and for the probability that there is gang activity in the
location where the firm is situated. Table A18 in the Appendix presents the results, showing that
neighborhoods outside of gang territory are not less exposed to violent crimes or gang activity
in general.54 These findings confirm the notion that both MS-13 and 18th Street operate not only
in the areas they control but also in neighboring locations.55
   52
       When conducting the pilot of the survey, we ascertained that the respondents associate the term "informal leader
of the community" with the gangs.
    53
       The unit of observation is a 10 meter bin, denoting distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for
gang and non-gang areas. The results are robust to changing the size of the bins.
    54
       It should also noted that, once the boundaries of gang territory were formed, violence occurs primarily because
of random encounters between rival gangs and because of people trying to enter gang locations without permission.
These sources of violence are not likely to explain the effect on development outcomes, especially given that results
do not change when we exclude observations close to the boundary of gang territory (see Table A10 in the Appendix).
    55
       For instance, according to the National Council of Small Businesses, which has more than 10,000 members, 79%
of businesses make extortion payments to the gangs, including expensive restaurants and shopping malls in wealthy
neighborhoods (e.g., see this article in the Economist, accessed on May 8, 2020).




                                                          26
       We also present indirect evidence that businesses in gang-controlled neighborhoods do
not pay more in extortion than firms outside of gang territory. Standard economic theory sug-
gests that, if in gang-controlled neighborhoods the effective tax rate is higher than in non-gang
areas, more firms would choose to locate outside of gang territory. Therefore, we use Google
Maps data on the locations of business establishments (i.e., cafes, restaurants, grocery stores,
etc.) to estimate Specification (1) with the number of establishments per square kilometer as the
outcome variable. The results are presented in Table A19 in the Appendix and suggest that there
are no differences in the number of business establishments.56
       Overall, the our findings suggest that there are no differences in exposure to violence or in
the rates of extortion across the boundary of gang territory.


                                V.D     Occupational structure and hours worked

       We show that the differences in socioeconomic development cannot be explained by higher
levels of unemployment in gang-controlled neighborhoods. In particular, we estimate Specifica-
tion (1) for the variables from the 2007 census, focusing on the subsample of employed individ-
uals (i.e., individuals who were in employment the week before the census).57 Table A20 in the
Appendix presents the results. If anything, the differences in socioeconomic conditions are even
larger for employed individuals than for the full sample.58 These findings are consistent with
the notion that due to restrictions of their mobility, residents of gang-controlled neighborhoods
are often unable to get well-paying jobs in large firms.
       We also demonstrate that the differences in socioeconomic development cannot be ex-
plained by higher levels of informal employment in gang territory. Table A21 in the Appendix
presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the variables from the 2007 census, focus-
ing on the subsample of formally employed individuals, which excludes domestic employees,
unpaid workers, and self-employed individuals. For all the outcome variables, the discontinu-
ities remain large and statistically significant.
       In addition, we use the data from the 2019 survey to document that there are no underly-
    56
       Due to the nature of the data, we do not observe the size of the firms or their "quality". However, note that even
if more, bigger, or better firms chose to locate outside of gang territory, without restrictions on individuals' mobility,
that would not be sufficient to generate the gap in labor market outcomes because residents of gang territory would
still be able to work in those firms.
    57
       For the household characteristics, we consider the employment status of the head of the household.
    58
       Notably, there is no discontinuity in the probability of being employed. The results of estimating Specification
(1) suggest that residents of gang territory are only 0.4 percentage points less likely to be employed than individuals
from non-gang areas with the standard error of 1.1 percentage points.



                                                           27
ing differences in the number of hours worked or in the individuals' willingness to work. In the
survey, the respondents were asked to name the number of hours that they currently work as
well as the number of hours they would choose to work if offered an hourly wage of $5, $10, and
$20. Table A22 in the Appendix presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for these out-
come variables, showing that individuals living on either side of the boundary of gang territory
work the same number of hours and have similar willingness to work.


                                        V.E    Summary and discussion

       The evidence presented in Section V suggests that restrictions on individuals' mobility are
likely to explain a significant part of the gap in labor market outcomes between residents of
gang territory and residents of non-gang areas. Conversely, we do not find evidence in support
of other potential drivers of lower socioeconomic development in gang-controlled neighbor-
hoods. We note, however, that this latter finding should be interpreted with caution, and that,
in different settings, some of these factors may have an effect on socioeconomic development.
For instance, in rural areas where the state is not present, and one gang has a monopoly on
power, gang presence may result in more provision of public goods (i.e., compared to neighbor-
ing areas, where neither the state nor the gangs are present).59 Similarly, while we find that in
San Salvador, businesses inside and outside of gang territory are equally likely to be extorted,
this result may not hold in settings where the government has more capacity to enforce law and
order on the territory it controls.
       We also acknowledge that, while restrictions on individuals' mobility are an important
factor limiting socioeconomic development in gang-controlled neighborhoods, it does not nec-
essarily fully explain the differences in living standards in gang and non-gang areas.


                    VI     G ANG CONTROL AND             NIGHTTIME LIGHT DENSITY:

                                  D IFFERENCE - IN - DIFFERENCES ANALYSIS

       In this section, we use data for all of El Salvador to perform a difference-in-differences
analysis, comparing the evolution of nighttime light density in areas that were more and less
exposed to gang activity after 1996. This analysis complements the findings from the regression
   59
      Survey evidence from Mexico confirms this logic: areas where one cartel has a monopoly on power tend to have
more public goods provision by it compared to areas where multiple cartels compete with each other (Magaloni et al.,
2020).



                                                        28
discontinuity design in the following ways. First, it allows us to show that gangs have affected
socioeconomic development not only in San Salvador but also in other part parts of El Salvador.
Second, since the data on nighttime light density are available for all the years from 1992 to 2013,
we are able to confirm that the divergence in the rates of luminosity growth occured right after
the gang members were deported from the United States to El Salvador. In particular, between
1992 and 1997, locations that would later have high levels of gang presence experienced the
same growth in luminosity as areas that would later have low levels of gang activity. Finally,
since the data on nighttime light density are collected via satellite from space, unlike survey
data, these data cannot be selectively underreported or misreported (e.g., if individuals want to
evade taxation by the gangs).60


                               VI.A     Empirical strategy: Difference-in-differences

        We perform a difference-in-differences analysis that exploits two sources of variation: the
timing of the deportation of the gang members from the United States--which led to the emer-
gence of gangs in El Salvador--and the geographic differences in exposure to organized crime.
Our hypothesis is that prior to 1997--the year when the first wave of deportations from the
United States took place--locations that would later have different levels of gang activity expe-
rienced similar rates of economic development. At the same time, after 1997 we expect to see
higher rates of growth in areas with low levels of organized crime.
        Unlike for San Salvador, at the national level, a map of gang-controlled areas is not avail-
able. Instead, we proxy exposure to gang activity at the national level by the presence of homi-
cides committed by the gangs.61 Specifically, we use geo-coded data for the exact locations of
gang-related homicides in 2003-2004, the earliest years for which the data are available. We then
divide the map of El Salvador into grid squares of approximately 5 by 5 kilometers and calcu-
late the distance from each grid square to the nearest homicide.62 A grid cell is assumed to have
gang presence if a person was killed by a gang member within the boundaries of that cell.63
   60
       It should be noted that the resolution of the nighttime light density data is not sufficiently fine for us to be able
to use the maps of gang-controlled neighborhoods in San Salvador and perform a spatial regression discontinuity
design with nighttime light density as the outcome variable.
    61
       This characterization is based on the fact that both MS-13 and 18th Street rely on violence not only when fighting
for territorial control but also to get extortion payments and enforce contracts, making homicides inherent to most
types of gang activity.
    62
       The exact size of the grid squares is 0.045 by 0.045 decimal degrees. The results are robust to using grid squares
of a different size. To be consistent with the regression discontinuity design, we measure distance in tens of meters.
    63
       It should be noted that this definition of gang presence is different from the one used in the regression disconti-
nuity design. In the context of San Salvador, we used the term "gang territory" to refer to locations where the gangs



                                                            29
       The outcome variable of interest is nighttime light density (or luminosity) which recent
studies have found to be a good proxy for development at the local level (Chen and Nordhaus,
2011; Henderson, Storeygard and Weil, 2012). In particular, for each of the grid cells, we cal-
culate the average level of luminosity in each of the years from 1992 to 2013. Figure A16 in
the Appendix provides a visualization of nighttime light density in 1997, the grid cells, and the
locations of the gang-related homicides from 2003-2004.
       We then estimate the following event study model (Specification 2) to measure the effect
of gang presence on socioeconomic development.


                             luminosityi,t = gi + t + t gang presencei + i,t .                                    (2)


luminosity represents nighttime light density in grid square i at time t. The data are in percentage
terms, normalized to be equal to 100 percent both in areas with and without gang presence in
1995--the year before the change in the United States immigration policy. gang presence is a
dummy for whether grid square i has had a homicide committed by the gangs in 2003-2004; gi
and t represent grid square and year fixed effects, respectively. Standard errors are clustered
by grid square. The coefficients of interest are t , which represent the differences in luminosity
growth between locations with and without gang presence.
       We also measure the average effect of exposure to gang activity on nighttime light density,
by estimating the following model (Specification 3).


               luminosityi,t = gi + t +  i t +  gang presencei × 1 {Year > 1997}t + i,t .                         (3)


       The main threat to identification is that, as shown in Figure A16, the gangs were primarily
attracted to large urban areas, which were already well illuminated and, hence, had less capacity
for growth in nighttime light density. Moreover, Figure A17 in the Appendix demonstrates that
all locations that in 1995 had luminosity above a certain threshold ended up being exposed to
gang activity. To address this concern, in the main specification, we limit the sample of grid cells
to those that had below-average nighttime light density in 1995, the year before the change in
the United States immigration policy was announced.64
are not only active but where they have significant control over the local population. In the difference-in-difference
analysis, we use the term "gang presence" to refer to larger locations (i.e., grid squares or municipalities) where
gangs are known to be active. This second definition is strictly broader than the first one because both MS-13 and
18th Street are active in parts of the country, including San Salvador, that they do not fully control.
   64
      When the locations with high nighttime light density are not excluded, as expected, the no pre-trends assump-


                                                         30
       In addition, to address the remaining concerns about the identification, we exploit the fact
that, after being deported, many gang members who were born in El Salvador returned to their
municipality of birth (Sviatschi, 2020). Thus, we use the birth locations of known gang leaders
as an instrumental variable for whether the municipality became exposed to gang activity.65 In
particular, we estimate Specification (3) at the level of the municipalities instead of the grid cells,
using the following equation as the first stage to predict gang presence after 1997.


 gang presencei × 1 {Year > 1997}t = gi + t +  i t +  birth locationi × 1 {Year > 1997}t + i,t , (4)


where birth location is a dummy for whether one of the gang leaders was born in this munici-
pality.66 The assumption behind this approach is that municipalities where a gang leader was
born started experiencing lower rates of luminosity growth after 1997 only because of having a
higher probability of being exposed to gang activity.


                                      VI.B    Difference-in-differences results

       Figure 6 presents the results of estimating the event study model from Specification (2).67
It shows that before 1997 locations that became exposed to gang activity had the same growth
in nighttime light density as places with no gang presence. This result is particularly important
because it complements the findings from the regression discontinuity design, suggesting that
between 1992 and 1997 areas with and without gang presence did not have differential rates of
economic growth. However, after the gang members were deported from the United States to
El Salvador, the grid cells with gang activity experienced significantly lower lunimosity growth.
       The magnitude of the effect is quite large. By 2010, thirteen years after the deportations,
areas with high gang presence had experienced nearly 120 percentage points lower growth in
nighttime light density than places with low gang presence. According to Henderson, Storey-
gard and Weil (2012), a one percentage point change in luminosity corresponds to approximately
a 0.28 percentage point change in GDP. Thus, in 1998-2010, areas with low gang activity had
tion does not hold: well illuminated areas were already experiencing lower growth in luminosity before the arrival
of the gangs.
    65
       The data are only available at the level of the municipality; the precise addresses of birth are not available.
    66
       At the municipality level, the data on gang-related homicides are also available for 2000. Therefore, in addition
to using the data for 2003-2004 (i.e., like in the grid-level analysis), we define a municipality to have gang presence if
it had a gang-related homicide in 2000. The results are robust to using data only for 2003-2004.
    67
       The regression coefficients are reported in Table A23 in the Appendix, which also replicates the results of the
event study at the municipality level.




                                                           31
nearly 120×0.28 = 33.6 percentage points higher growth in GDP than areas with gang presence.
      Table 6 presents the results of estimating Specification (3), confirming that after 1997 areas
with gang presence experienced lower growth in nighttime light density. It also presents the
IV estimates, where exposure to gang activity after 1997 is predicted using a dummy variable
for whether one of the gang leaders was born in that municipality, i.e., Specification (4). The
first stage coefficients are reported in the lower part of the table, and, as demonstrated by the
F-statistic, the instrumental variable accurately predicts exposure to gang activity after 1997.
Notably, the results of the IV analysis are very similar to those presented in the OLS regressions,
suggesting that the OLS results are not likely to be driven by omitted variable bias.
      Overall, the results of the difference-in-differences analysis confirm the findings of the
regression discontinuity design, showing that areas with gang presence experienced lower rates
of economic growth after 1997. They also confirm the notion that this divergence took place
right after the gang members were deported from the United States to El Salvador.


                                VII    C ONCLUDING REMARKS

      In this paper, we exploit a natural experiment that took place in El Salvador in the 1990s
when, after a shift in American immigration enforcement, many Salvadorans with criminal
records were deported from the United States. We document that today, the gangs established
by those individuals--MS-13 and 18th Street--significantly limit socioeconomic development
in El Salvador. In particular, residents of gang territory have worse dwelling conditions (e.g.,
lower probability that the walls of the house are made from concrete), lower probability of own-
ing durables (e.g., a car, a TV, etc.) and earn significantly less income than individuals living
just 50 meters away but not under the rule of gangs. These differences did not exist before the
arrival of the gangs and are not driven by selective migration of individuals or violence.
      We document a novel mechanism through which gangs affect economic development.
Partly for security reasons, partly to maintain control over the local population, both MS-13
and 18th Street limit the mobility of the individuals living on their territory. As a result of
these restrictions on mobility, residents of gang-controlled areas often cannot work outside of the
neighborhood where they live, being induced to accept low-paying jobs in small firms because
of their inability to work in other parts of the city. This problem is not unique to El Salvador.
Restrictions on individuals' mobility also exist in Brazil, Colombia, Honduras, Guatemala, and



                                                32
other countries where gangs, cartels, or other non-state armed actors control parts of the country.
      Our results have broad policy implications. First of all, they highlight the magnitude of
the effect of criminal organizations on socioeconomic development in developing countries, sug-
gesting that improvements in the capacity of those states to provide security can significantly
improve economic growth. Second, our results emphasize the importance of freedom of move-
ment for socioeconomic development. Notably, these findings are likely to be relevant not only
to other situations where non-state actors limit individuals' mobility, but also to mobility across
country borders. Finally, our findings inform about the consequences of deporting individuals
with criminal records to a country with low state capacity.




                                                33
                                                  R EFERENCES
Abrego, Leisy, Mat Coleman, Daniel Martínez, Cecilia Menjívar, and Jeremy Slack. 2017. "Making immigrants
  into criminals: Legal processes of criminalization in the post-IIRIRA era." Journal on Migration and Human Security,
  5(3): 694­715.

Acemoglu, Daron, Giuseppe De Feo, and Giacomo Davide De Luca. 2019. "Weak States: Causes and Consequences
  of the Sicilian Mafia." Review of Economic Studies, 87(2): 537­581.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. "The Colonial Origins of Comparative Develop-
  ment: An Empirical Investigation." American Economic Review, 91(5): 1369­1401.

Alesina, Alberto, Salvatore Piccolo, and Paolo Pinotti. 2019. "Organized crime, violence, and politics." Review of
  Economic Studies, 86(2): 457­499.

Arjona, Ana, Julian Arteaga, Camilo Cardenas, Ana Maria Ibanez, and Patricia Justino. 2019. "The Effects of
  Wartime Institutions on Households' Ability to Cope with Shocks: Evidence for Colombia." WIDER Working Paper
   2019/84.

Asher, Sam, and Paul Novosad. 2018. "Rural Roads and Local Economic Development." Policy Research Working
  Paper 8466.

Bandiera, Oriana. 2003. "Land Reform, the Market for Protection, and the Origins of the Sicilian Mafia: Theory and
  Evidence." Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 19(1): 218­244.

Bates, Robert, Avner Greif, and Smita Singh. 2002. "Organizing violence." Journal of Conflict Resolution, 46(5): 599­
  628.

Berman, Eli, Jacob Shapiro, and Joseph Felter. 2011. "Can Hearts and Minds Be Bought? The Economics of Coun-
  terinsurgency in Iraq." Journal of Political Economy, 119(4): 766­819.

Blattman, Christopher, Gustavo Duncan, Benjamin Lessing, and Santiago Tobon. 2019. "Gangs of Medellin: How
  Organized Crime is Organized." Mimeo.

Bloch, Marc. 2015. Feudal Society. Univerisity of Chicago Press.

Boerman, Thomas, and Adam Golob. 2020. "Gangs and modern-day slavery in El Salvador, Honduras and
  Guatemala: A non-traditional model of human trafficking." Journal of Human Trafficking, 1­17.

Brettell, Caroline B. 2011. "Experiencing everyday discrimination: A comparison across five immigrant popula-
  tions." Race and Social Problems, 3(4): 266­279.

Briscoe, Ivan, and David Keseberg. 2019. "Only Connect: the Survival and Spread of Organized Crime in Latin
  America." PRISM, 8(1): 114­131.

Buonanno, Paolo, Ruben Durante, Giovanni Prarolo, and Paolo Vanin. 2015. "Poor Institutions, Rich Mines: Re-
  source Curse in the Origins of the Sicilian Mafia." Economic Journal, 125(586): F175­F202.

Calì, Massimiliano, and Sami H. Miaari. 2018. "The Labor Market Impact of Mobility Restrictions: Evidence from
  the West Bank." Labour Economics, 51: 136­151.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D. Cattaneo, and Max H. Farrell. 2018. "On the Effect of Bias Estimation on Coverage
  Accuracy in Nonparametric Inference." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(522): 767­779.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D. Cattaneo, and Max H. Farrell. 2020. "Optimal Bandwidth Choice for Robust Bias
  Corrected Inference in Regression Discontinuity Designs." Econometrics Journal, forthcoming.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D. Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik. 2014. "Robust Nonparametric Confidence Intervals
  for Regression-Discontinuity Designs." Econometrica, 82(6): 2295­2326.

Carvalho, Leandro S., and Rodrigo R. Soares. 2016. "Living on the edge: Youth entry, career and exit in drug-selling
  gangs." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 121: 77­98.



                                                         34
Chacón, Jennifer M. 2009. "Managing migration through crime." Columbia Law Review, 109: 135­148.

Chen, Xi, and William D. Nordhaus. 2011. "Using luminosity data as a proxy for economic statistics." PNAS,
  108(21): 8589­8594.

Clemens, Michael A. 2017. "Violence, Development, and Migration Waves: Evidence from Central American Child
  Migrant Apprehensions." Center for Global Development Working Paper 459.

Collela, Fabrizio, Rafael Lalive, Seyhun Orcan Sakalli, and Mathias Thoenig. 2018. "Inference with arbitrary clus-
  tering." University of Lausanne, Mimeo.

Conley, T.G. 1999. "GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence." Journal of Econometrics, 92(1): 1­45.

Córdova, Abby. 2019. "Living in Gang-Controlled Neighborhoods: Impacts on Electoral and Nonelectoral Participa-
  tion in El Salvador." Latin American Research Review, 54(1): 201­221.

Cruz, José Miguel. 2010. "Central American maras: From youth street gangs to transnational protection rackets."
  Global Crime, 11(4): 379­398.

De la Sierra, Raúl. 2020. "On the Origins of the State: Stationary Bandits and Taxation in Eastern Congo." Journal of
  Political Economy, 128(1).

Dell, Melissa. 2015. "Trafficking Networks and the Mexican Drug War." American Economic Review, 105(6): 1738­1779.

Dennison, T. 2011. The Institutional Framework of Russian Serfdom. Cambridge University Press.

Donaldson, Dave. 2018. "Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure." American
  Economic Review, 108(4-5): 899­934.

Dudley, Steven. 2013. "El Salvador's Gang Truce: Positives and Negatives." Insight Crime.

Dunn, William Carl. 2007. The Gangs of Los Angeles. iUniverse.

Faber, Benjamin. 2014. "Trade Integration, Market Size, and Industrialization: Evidence from China's National Trunk
  Highway System." Review of Economic Studies, 81(3): 1046­1070.

Frye, Timothy, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2000. "Rackets, Regulation, and the Rule of Law." Journal of Law, Eco-
  nomics, & Organization, 16(2): 478­502.

Gambetta, Diego. 1996. The Sicilian Mafia: The Business of Private Protection. Harvard University Press.

Glaeser, Edward, and Helen Sims. 2015. "Contagion, crime, and congestion: overcoming the downsides of density."
  IGC Growth Brief.

Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. 2012. "Measuring Economic Growth from Outer
  Space." American Economic Review, 102(2): 994­1028.

Hsiang, Solomon. 2010. "Temperatures and cyclones strongly associated with economic production in the Caribbean
  and Central America." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(35): 15367­15372.

Imbens, Guido, and Karthik Kalyanaraman. 2012. "Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression Discontinuity
  Estimator." Review of Economic Studies, 79(3): 933­959.

International Crisis Group. 2017. "El Salvador's Politics of Perpetual Violence." Latin America Report 64.

International Crisis Group. 2018. "Life Under Gang Rule in El Salvador." Latin America & Caribbean Commentary.

Khanna, Gaurav, Carlos Medina, Anant Nyshadham, Christian Posso, and Jorge A. Tamayo. 2019. "Job Loss, Credit
  and Crime in Colombia." NBER Working Paper No. 26313.

Lessing, Benjamin, and Graham Denyer Willis. 2019. "Legitimacy in Criminal Governance: Managing a Drug Em-
  pire from Behind Bars." American Political Science Review, 113(2): 584­606.




                                                          35
Levitt, Steven, and Sudhir Venkatesh. 2000. "An Economic Analysis of a Drug-Selling Gang's Finances." Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 115(3): 755­789.

Magaloni, Beatriz, Edgar Franco Vivanco, and Vanessa Melo. 2020. "Killing in the Slums: Social Order, Criminal
 Governance, and Police Violence in Rio de Janeiro." American Political Science Review, 114(2): 552­572.

Magaloni, Beatriz, Gustavo Robles, Aila M Matanock, Alberto Diaz-Cayeros, and Vidal Romero. 2020. "Living in
 Fear: the Dynamics of extortion in Mexico's Drug War." Comparative Political Studies, 53(7): 1124­1174.

Markevich, Andrei, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2018. "The Economic Effects of the Abolition of Serfdom: Evidence
 from the Russian Empire." American Economic Review, 108(4-5): 1074­1117.

Martínez, Juan José, and Óscar Martínez. 2018. El niño de Hollywood. Penguin Random House Grupo Editorial.

Martínez, Oscar. 2016. "Living Within the Boundaries of El Salvador's Gang `War'." Insight Crime.

McCrary, Justin. 2008. "Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A density tes."
 Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 698­714.

Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. 2013. "Pre-Colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary African
  Development." Econometrica, 81(1): 113­152.

Olson, Mancur. 1993. "Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development." American Political Science Review, 87(3): 567­576.

Pinotti, Paolo. 2015. "The Causes and Consequences of Organised Crime: Preliminary Evidence Across Countries."
  Economic Journal, 125(586): F158­F174.

Savenije, Wim. 2009. Maras y barras: pandillas y violencia juvenil en los barrios marginales de Centroamérica. FLACSO--
  Programa El Salvador.

Skaperdas, Stergios. 2001. "The political economy of organized crime: providing protection when the state does
  not." Economics of Governance, 2(3): 173­202.

Skarbek, David. 2011. "Governance and Prison Gangs." American Political Science Review, 105(4): 702­716.

Stanley, William Deane. 1987. "Economic migrants or refugees from violence? A time-series analysis of Salvadoran
   migration to the United States." Latin American Research Review, 22(1): 132­154.

Sviatschi, María Micaela. 2019. "Making a Narco: Childhood Exposure to Illegal Labor Markets and Criminal Life
  Paths." Mimeo.

Sviatschi, María Micaela. 2020. "Spreading Gangs: Exporting US Criminal Capital to El Salvador." Mimeo.

Tilly, Charles. 1985. "War-making and State-making as Organized crime." In Collective Violence, Contentious Politics,
   and Social Change. 121­139. Routledge.

Ward, Thomas W. 2013. Gangsters without borders: An ethnography of a Salvadoran street gang. Oxford University Press
  Oxford.

Womer, Sarah, and Robert J. Bunker. 2010. "Sureños gangs and Mexican cartel use of social networking sites." Small
  Wars & Insurgencies, 21(1): 81­94.

Zoethout, Margriet Antoinette. 2015. "Recovering Government Control over Mara Salvatrucha territory: Analysis
  based on the `Santa Tecla, a Municipality Free of Violence' Agreement." Police and Public Security Journal, 5(1): 179­
  246.

Zoethout, Margriet Antoinette. 2016. "Consolidate State control in `The Mara Salvatrucha (Salvatrucha gang)' terri-
  tory: Lessons from community work in high-risk communities." Police and Public Security Journal, 6(2): 115­204.




                                                          36
           VIII   F IGURES


Figure 1: Gang territory in San Salvador




                  37
                            Figure 2: Socioeconomic conditions after 10 years of gang control




Note: By 2007, socioeconomic conditions had become significantly worse in gang-controlled areas. The figure illustrates the results for
the 1st principal components of the dwelling, household, and individual characteristics from Table 1. All the variables come from the
2007 census. The unit of observation is a dwelling, a household, and an individual, depending on the specification. All the variables are
normalized to vary between zero and one with higher values representing better outcomes. The vertical axis represents the average value
of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the
dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs. The dots represent the average value of
the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.




                                                                   38
                                 Figure 3: Household income after 22 years of gang control




Note: Residents of gang territory earn $350 less income per month than individuals who do not live under gang control. The outcome
variable comes from the 2019 survey. The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance
(in meters) to the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to
the right are controlled by the gangs. The dots represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.




                                                                    39
                                    Figure 4: In-sample migration is not driving the results




Note: The figure illustrates the results for household income from Table A4. The left-hand side of the figure presents the results for the
full sample (Panel A of Table A4), the right-hand side--for the subsample of individuals who have lived in the same location all their life
(Panel B of Table A4). The results are very similar. The vertical axis represents the average value of household income; the horizontal
axis--distance (in meters) to the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang
territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs. The dots represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.




                                                                     40
                                        Figure 5: Gang control and mobility constraints




Note: The figure illustrates that residents of gang territory are more likely to work in a gang-controlled location and think that there are
restrictions on the freedom of movement. The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--
distance (in meters) to the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory;
areas to the right are controlled by the gangs. The dots represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.




                                                                    41
                                     Figure 6: Gang presence and nighttime light density




Note: The first part of the figure illustrates the growth in nighttime light density in grid cells with and without gang presence. The data
are in percentage points, normalized to be equal to 100 percent in 1995, one year before the announcement of the change in the United
States immigration policy. The second part of the figure presents an event study graph for the average percentage point difference in
nighttime light density between grid cells with and without gang presence.




                                                                    42
                                                                  IX     TABLES


                             Table 1: Socioeconomic conditions after exposure to gang control

                         Dwelling characteristics                                         Household characteristics
                       Walls made           Bare floor        Has sewerage            Use electricity for     No bathroom         Has internet
                       of concrete                            infrastructure        lighting and cooking

 Gang territory          -0.046***           0.025**                -0.049**              -0.076***              0.005***             -0.127***
                          (0.015)            (0.009)                 (0.020)               (0.020)               (0.002)               (0.028)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.932              0.028                  0.941                  0.108                 0.005                 0.180
 Observations             72,252             60,820                 62,316                 62,316                62,316                59,917
                                                                        Household characteristics
                     Has a motorcycle       Has a car             Has a phone             Has a TV           Has a computer    Number of rooms

 Gang territory          -0.012**           -0.199***              -0.129***              -0.020***             -0.167***             -0.660***
                          (0.006)            (0.044)                (0.033)                (0.006)               (0.034)               (0.193)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.033              0.428                  0.696                  0.952                 0.346                 3.089
 Observations             59,237             60,186                 60,309                 60,525                60,161                62,316
                                     Individual characteristics                                     1st principal component of the:
                        Can read            Has a high       Has a university            Dwelling             Household            Individual
                        and write         school degree          degree                characteristics       characteristics     characteristics

 Gang territory          -0.031***          -0.146***              -0.117***              -0.036***             -0.086***             -0.097***
                          (0.007)            (0.028)                (0.025)                (0.011)               (0.019)               (0.019)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.928               0.448                  0.207                 0.952                 0.377                 0.521
 Observations            208,913             203,423                203,423                60,820                58,434               203,423

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. After experiencing gang control, gang-controlled areas have worse socioeconomic conditions than
neighboring areas that were not under the control of gangs. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the variables
from the 2007 census. The unit of observation is a dwelling, household, or individual, depending on which characteristics are being
considered. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of
the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side
of the boundary).




                                                                         43
                  Table 2: Geographic and socioeconomic characteristics before the arrival of the gangs

                                                                      Neighborhood characteristics
                     Urban territory      Road density         Has access to             Elevation           Territory used for    Tree coverage
                                                              the waterways                                  coffee production

 Gang territory          -0.011              -0.522                  0.018                 0.506                   0.009                -0.004
                         (0.064)             (0.951)                (0.065)               (16.286)                (0.019)              (0.026)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.812               17.83                  0.327                 720.39                  0.049                0.028
 Observations              477                 477                    477                   477                     477                  477

                         Dwelling characteristics                                         Household characteristics
                       Walls made           Bare floor        Has sewerage           Use electricity for       No bathroom        Shared bathroom
                       of concrete                            infrastructure       lighting and cooking

 Gang territory          -0.015              -0.003                 -0.032                 -0.036                  -0.007               0.021
                         (0.036)             (0.028)                (0.047)                (0.039)                (0.017)              (0.032)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.813               0.010                  0.816                  0.182                  0.030                0.142
 Observations             64,899             64,899                 64,899                 64,899                 64,899               64,899
                                                                        Household characteristics
                     Has a motorcycle       Has a car             Has a phone            Has a TV              Has a blender      Number of rooms

 Gang territory          -0.004              -0.049                 -0.030                  0.009                  0.014                -0.069
                         (0.009)             (0.051)                (0.054)                (0.019)                (0.032)              (0.170)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.034               0.285                  0.320                  0.860                  0.625                2.670
 Observations             64,899             64,899                 64,899                 64,899                 64,899               64,899
                                     Individual characteristics                                      1st principal component of the:
                        Can read            Has a high       Has a university            Dwelling              Household             Individual
                        and write         school degree          degree                characteristics        characteristics      characteristics

 Gang territory          -0.000              -0.014                 -0.019                 -0.005                  -0.016               -0.013
                         (0.011)             (0.028)                (0.017)                (0.031)                (0.030)              (0.018)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.904               0.314                  0.112                  0.863                  0.525                0.380
 Observations            234,749             227,281                227,281                64,899                 64,899               227,281

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Before the arrival of the gangs, locations on either side of the boundary of gang territory had
similar geographic and socioeconomic characteristics. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the neighborhood
chracteristics and the variables from the 1992 census. The unit of observation is a census tract, dwelling, household, or individual,
depending on which characteristics are being considered. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang
territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting
distance to gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                          44
                               Table 3: Gang control and restrictions on individuals' mobility

                        Works in the same        Works in         Has been to      Has been to     Has always lived        Freedom of
                         neighborhood          gang territory      Santa Ana        the beach       in this location       movement
                         where they live                          municipality                                            where they live

 Gang territory               0.111***             0.495***         -0.277***         -0.064**           0.172***             -0.097**
                               (0.031)              (0.039)          (0.043)           (0.031)            (0.045)              (0.039)
 Mean of dep. var.             0.302                0.334             0.495            0.872              0.772                0.811
 Observations                  2,071                1,738             2,314            2,314              2,314                2,314

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the mobility questions from the 2019
survey. Santa Ana is a neighboring municipality, which is approximately 60 kilometers away from San Salvador. The sea is approximately
30 kilometers away from San Salvador. The unit of observation is an individual. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to
the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30
meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                     45
                                                 Table 4: Consequences of low labor mobility

                                              Household income                           Works in a firm with                 Works in a firm with
                                                                                           100 employees                        200 employees

 Lives in gang territory              -352.60***    -429.99***     -235.09**        -0.123***   -0.210***   -0.105***   -0.115***     -0.187***    -0.102***
                                       (112.22)      (127.82)       (112.56)         (0.019)     (0.022)     (0.023)     (0.028)       (0.025)      (0.030)
 Lives in gang territory,                            167.64***      85.39***                    0.182***    0.129***                  0.152***     0.110***
 works in non-gang territory                          (32.69)        (30.23)                     (0.026)     (0.025)                   (0.027)      (0.026)
 Has a high school degree                                           89.11***                                0.124***                               0.088***
                                                                     (19.90)                                (0.021)                                 (0.018)
 Has a university degree                                           445.46***                                0.148***                               0.132***
                                                                    (76.96)                                 (0.029)                                 (0.027)

 Mean of dep. var.                      625.00        634.70        638.90           0.169       0.169       0.170        0.133         0.132        0.132
 Observations                           2,314         1,738         1,707            2,071       1,738       1,707        2,071         1,738        1,707

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table shows that the discontinuity in income and firm size is significantly smaller or nonexistent for individuals
living in gang territory but working outside of gang territory. All the variables come from the 2019 survey. For household income, the unit of observation
is a household; for the other variables--an individual. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for
locations on each side of the boundary, and a dummy for whether the individual is currently employed (in the survey, unemployed individuals were asked to
describe their most recent work experience). Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory, separately for
each side of the boundary.




                                                                               46
                                Table 5: Public goods provision in gang-controlled locations

                          Number per km2 :            On a scale from 1 to 7, satisfaction with the availability and quality of:
                         Schools     Hospitals        Health services      Education centers       Roads        Electricity service

 Gang territory           0.714        -0.414               0.173                -0.019             0.299              -0.083
                         (1.825)      (0.645)              (0.172)               (0.173)           (0.338)             (0.125)
 Mean of dep. var.        5.898        1.896                4.080                 4.696             4.263               5.873
 Observations               85          85                  2,314                 2,314             2,314               2,314

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results for estimating Specification (1) for the variables related to public
goods provision. The questions about the satisfaction with the availability and quality of public goods come from the 2019 survey.
For those variables, the unit of observation is an individual. The data on the number of schools and hospitals come from Google
Maps. For those variables, the unit of observation is a 10 meter bin, denoting distance to gang territory, separately for each side of the
boundary. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of
the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side
of the boundary).




                                                                     47
                                      Table 6: Gang presence and nighttime light density

                                                           Nighttime light density (in percentage points relative to 1995)
                                              Grid-level analysis                            Municipality-level analysis
 1 {Year > 1997} ×
    × Gang presence                           -19.75***   -30.65***        -22.18***   -19.59***   -26.22***   -23.50**
                                                (2.14)     (11.64)           (4.00)      (4.68)      (5.07)     (9.43)
    × Gang leader born in municipality                                                                                    -14.47***   -14.61**
                                                                                                                            (3.03)     (5.96)

 Observations                                  20,592      14,190           2,288       1,782       2,288       1,782      2,288       1,782
 Grid cells/ municipalities                     936         645              104         81          104         81         104         81
 IV analysis (2SLS)

 Coefficient for excluded instrument                                                               0.552***    0.622***
                                                                                                    (0.055)     (0.058)
 F-stat, excluded instrument                                                                        100.21     113.13

 Excluding areas with above
 average luminosity in 1995

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (3) for nighttime light density, measured in
percentage points to the level in 1995, one year before the change in the United States immigration policy. It also presents the results of
the IV estimation, where in the first stage gang presence after 1997 is predicted using a dummy for whether there was a gang leader born
in that munnicipality, i.e., Specification (4). In 1995, the outcome variable is equal to 100 percent for both gang and non-gang locations.
Omitted controls include year dummies, grid cell or municipality fixed effects, and separate time trends for each grid cell or municipality.
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by grid cell or municipality, depending on the regression specification.




                                                                      48
                                                 A    D ATA

      In this section of the Appendix, we describe the secondary data sources used in the project,
explain the sampling procedure for the 2019 survey, and provide further details about the pri-
mary data listed in Section III.


                                       A.I    Additional data sources

      Urban territory.--The data on urban density come from New York University's Atlas of
Urban Expansion. The raster map presents the urban areas in the Greater San Salvador region
in 1999.68 We transform the data into a binary raster, equal to one when the location is classified
as urban. Then, for each of the census tracts from the 2007 census, we calculate the share of
census tracts' territory that is urban.
      Waterways.--The map of the waterways in El Salvador comes from the Humanitarian
OpenStreetMap Team.69 Then, for each of the census tracts from the 2007 census, we created
a dummy variable for whether the census tract contains a part of the waterway.
      Road density.--The map of the roads in El Salvador comes from the Humanitarian Open-
StreetMap Team and reflects the roads that existed in the country in March 2020.70 We then
transform the feature-based map into a binary raster file with the resolution of 1 meter×1 meter,
where we replace the lines for roads with grid cells equal to one. After that, for each of the cen-
sus tracts from the 2007 census, we calculate road density, measured in kilometers per square
kilometer.
      Elevation.--The data on elevation at the resolution of 3 arc seconds (approximately 90 me-
ters) come from the CGIAR-Consortium for Spatial Information (CGIAR-CSI).71 For each of the
census tracts from the 2007 census, we calculate the average elevation inside the census tract.
      Territory used for coffee production--The map of land use in 1998 (including coffee produc-
tion) comes from the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (Ministerio de Medio Ambi-
ente y Recursos Naturales, MARN). We convert the feature-based map into a binary raster, equal
to one for areas that are used for coffee production. Then, for each of the census tracts from the
   68
      The San Salvador profile can be accessed here: Atlas of Urban Expansion: San Salvador (accessed on May 4,
2020).
   69
      The map of the waterways in El Salvador can be accessed here: Humanitarian Data Exchange: El Salvador
Waterways (accessed on May 4, 2020).
   70
      The map of the roads in El Salvador can be accessed here: Humanitarian Data Exchange: El Salvador Roads
(accessed on May 4, 2020).
   71
      The elevation map for El Salvador can be accessed here: CGIAR-CSI (accessed on May 4, 2020).



                                                      49
2007 census, we calculate the share of census tracts' territory that is used for coffee production.
        Tree coverage.--The data on tree coverage in 2000 come from Global Forest Watch.72 The
raster file presents the share of territory covered by trees in each 30 meter×30 meter grid cell.
For each of the census tracts from the 2007 census, we calculate the average level of tree coverage
inside of the census tract.
        Locations of schools, hospitals, and other establishments.--The data on the locations of schools,
hospitals, and other establishments in San Salvador come from Google Places API.73 In August
2019, we scraped the data from Google Places API to identify all the establishments in San Sal-
vador. In total, we obtained a dataset with 7,732 establishments. For each observation, Google
provides a classification of the type of establishment (e.g., school, hospital, pharmacy, etc.).
        Violent theft.--The data on violent robberies come from the Metropolitan Planning Office
for San Salvador (Oficina de Planficación del Área Metropolitana de San Salvador, OPAMSS). They
cover the period from 2014 to 2015 and contain information on the time, date, and location of all
the cases of violent robberies, including their latitude and longitude.
        2015 enterprise survey.--The Salvadoran Foundation for Economic and Social Development
(Fundación Salvadoreña para el Desarrollo Económico y Social, FUSADES) shared the microdata of
their 2015 survey of small and medium-sized enterprises (SME). In February 2015, FUSADES
surveyed 3,977 firms with under 40 employees, including 512 firms in San Salvador. In particu-
lar, the survey asked, whether the SME has faced extortion and whether there is gang activity in
the location where the SME operates.
        Housing rent.--To obtain information on housing rent, in August-September 2018, we scraped
the data from the most popular website for rent listings in El Salvador, OLX.74 We focused on
non-commercial listings in which the entire apartment was being rented out (i.e., not a room in
the apartment). The listings included the data on the latitude and longitude of the location, the
rent requested by the landlord, as well as information about the apartment such as the number of
bedrooms, the number of bathrooms, the number of square meters, and whether the apartment
is being rented out by an agency. In total, the dataset contains 1,537 observations.
        It should be noted that we cannot observe whether a particular apartment was rented out
   72
       The data on tree coverage for El Salvador can be accessed here: Global Forest Watch (accessed on May 4, 2020).
   73
       We use the data on the locations of schools and hospitals from Google Places API instead of government records.
The primary reason is the accuracy of the data. For instance, in the shapefile the government has provided to us, some
of the schools are located outside of El Salvador. However, if we use the data from government records, the results
are qualatively very similar.
    74
       The Salvadoran version of the website can be accessed here: OLX.



                                                         50
or not. However, after two months, the vast majority of offers were no longer available.
       It should also be noted that, on average, the properties listed on OLX are larger and more
expensive than the overall pool of properties in San Salvador. In particular, many of the cheapest
properties may be rented out on the informal market and are not listed online. If there are more
such properties in gang-controlled neighborhoods, our estimates would provide a lower bound
on the actual drop in housing rent at the boundary of gang territory.
       Gang leaders' municipalities of birth.--The data on the gang leaders' municipalities of birth
come from El Faro, an investigative newspaper. We use the data from their investigative reports,
focusing on the gang leaders who were deported from the United States and had been later
convicted for committing crimes in El Salvador. Overall, the sample consists of 33 gang leaders
both from MS-13 and 18th Street. We then manually match the names of the gang leaders and the
crimes they commited to the criminal records from the Ministry of Justice and Public Security of
El Salvador, which contain information on the offendent's municipality of birth.


                            A.II   Further details about the primary data sources

       2019 survey.--For the 2019 survey, the following sampling procedure was applied. Given
the uncertainty about their treatment status, census tracts within 15 meters of the boundary of
gang territory were excluded from the analysis. Then, separately for places inside and outside
of gang territory, we split the census tracts into 30 meter bins, denoting distance to the boundary
(i.e., 15-44 meters to the boundary, etc.). After that we randomly selected 10 census tracts from
each bin and surveyed 8-10 people in each of them.75 If there were fewer that 10 census tracts in
that bin, we surveyed individuals in all the census tracts that were available. In total, the survey
includes 2,314 respondents.
       To ensure the safety of the enumerators, if the survey team was denied entry into some
of the gang-controlled neighborhoods, those census tracts were replaced by other ones from the
same bin. If it was not possible to interview 10 individuals in a census tract (e.g., because after
repeated attempts nobody answered the door), additional people were interviewed in other
census tracts in the same bin.
       Gang boundaries.--The map of gang-controlled neighborhoods that we use in this study is
based on data from 2015. To the best of our knowledge, maps of gang-controlled areas for earlier
  75
     In areas within 250 meters of the boundary, we surveyed 10 individuals per census tract. In locations further
away from the boundary, we surveyed 8 individuals per census tract.



                                                       51
years are nonexistent. However, according to multiple sources in the police department as well
as conversations with the local population, the boundaries of gang territory in San Salvador
have remained stable since the early 2000s when the police managed to prevent the gangs from
expanding their influence over new territories. This stability of the boundaries is consistent with
the fact that, while the police managed to stop the expansion of the gangs' influence, it is still
unable to regain control over those locations. If changes to the boundaries do occur, it tends to
be a product of turf wars (i.e., MS-13 and 18th Street taking over each other's territory), but not
because of the state regaining control over gang territories or the other way round.
      The data on the gang-controlled neighborhoods in San Salvador come from El Diario de
Hoy and are presented in Figure 1. However, to accurately calculate distance to the boundary
of gang territory, we also complement these data with confidential maps from the police on
the gang-controlled neighborhoods outside of San Salvador municipality. Since the regression
discontinuity design focuses on the census tracts inside of San Salvador, this never affects the
the treatment status of the census tract (i.e., whether or not it is located inside of gang territory).
However, for the locations outside of gang territory, it does sometimes affect the distance from
them to the boundary of gang territory (i.e., if that location is closer to a gang-controlled location
outside of San Salvador). It should be noted that, even with the extended map of gang territory,
we are unable to perform the regression discontinuity design outside of San Salvador because
the map additionally includes only a small number of locations in the Greater San Salvador area.
      1992 and 2007 censal cartography.--It should be noted that the boundaries of the census
tracts in the 1992 and 2007 censuses were not the same. Therefore, we are not able to perform
a difference-in-differences analysis at the level of the census tracts. However, in both cases, the
size of the census tracts was quite similar, allowing us to accurately measure the distance from
the census tract to the boundary of gang territory. Thus, the distance between a particular loca-
tion and the boundary of gang territory is very similar, regardless of whether we use the 2007 or
1992 census tracts.
      It should also be noted that, although the General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses
(DIGESTYC) digitized a map the 1992 census tracts, it did not fully finish that work. Specifically,
the 1992 map does not have the boundaries of 18.9% of the census tracts in the North-West of San
Salvador. However, the vast majority of those neighborhoods are located more than 420 meters
away from gang territory and, therefore, would not be included in the analysis in any case. In
particular, nearly all of gang territory (except for a few small "islands") and the neighborhoods


                                                  52
right next to it are included in the 1992 map. Thus, it is highly unlikely that our estimates would
change if all the census tracts were included.76


    A.III   Calculating the rates of selective out-of-sample migration that would generate the results

        Table A8 in the Appendix presents the rates of selective out-of-sample migration from
gang territory that are required to generate the discontinuities from Table 1. These calculations
were performed in the following way. First, it should be noted that we focus on the binary
outcome variables. For these variables, a household/individual is defined to be "rich" or "ed-
ucated" if for them the value of the outcome is equal to one (i.e., they have a car, a high school
degree, etc.). The only exception is the outcome variable for not having a bathroom, for which
the status is defined in the opposite way.
        We use the example of the share of households with a computer to show how these rates
were calculated. From the regression output, we get the predicted share of households with a
computer for observations zero meters away from the boundary of gang territory, separately for
locations inside and outside of gang territory. We denote those numbers as G and NG, respec-
tively. We further denote the number of "rich" households (i.e., those that have a computer) in
gang-controlled areas before any migration took place as x and the share of "poor" households (i.e.,
those that do not have a computer) as 1 - x. Next, we assume that a fraction  of the "rich"
households and a fraction  of the"poor" households migrated out of sample. Thus, in the data,
we observe the following relationship.

                                              (1 - )x
                                                               = G.                                            (5)
                                       (1 - )x + (1 - )(1 - x)

Then, assuming different values of , we calculate the value of  that would make this rela-
tionship hold if, in the absense of migration, there would not have been any difference in the
outcome variable between gang and non-gang locations (i.e., x = NG). The results of the calcu-
lation are presented in Table A8.




   76
     DIGESTYC also told us that the work on digitizing the map of the census tracts had to stop because of the lack
of funding and that there was no specific reason why some census tracts were digitized and some were not.


                                                        53
                                                  B      TABLES


                       Table A1: Summary statistics of the variables used in the estimation

                                               Mean           SD    Observations                Source
Panel A: 2007 census

Walls made of concrete, 2007                    0.932      0.252       72,252                 2007 census
Bare floor, 2007                                0.028      0.165       60,820                 2007 census
Has sewerage infrastructure, 2007               0.941      0.236       62,316                 2007 census
Use electricity for lighting & cooking, 2007    0.108      0.311      62,316                  2007 census
No bathroom, 2007                               0.005      0.069       62,316                 2007 census
Has internet, 2007                              0.180      0.384       59,917                 2007 census
Has a motocycle, 2007                           0.033      0.180       59,237                 2007 census
Has a car, 2007                                 0.428      0.495       60,186                 2007 census
Has a phone, 2007                               0.696      0.460       60,309                 2007 census
Has a TV, 2007                                  0.952      0.214       60,525                 2007 census
Has a computer, 2007                            0.346      0.476       60,161                 2007 census
Number of rooms, 2007                           3.089      1.649       62,316                 2007 census
Can read and write, 2007                        0.928      0.259      208,913                 2007 census
Has high school degree, 2007                    0.448      0.497      203,423                 2007 census
Has university degree, 2007                     0.207      0.405      203,423                 2007 census
1st principal component of the:
     Dwelling characteristics, 2007              0.952     0.176       60,820                 2007 census
     Household characteristics, 2007             0.377     0.182       58,434                 2007 census
     Individual characteristics, 2007            0.521     0.296      203,423                 2007 census
Has always lived in San Salvador, 2007           0.767      0.422     225,467                 2007 census
Household density (per km2 ), 2007              3651.7     3381.2       477                   2007 census
Population density (per km2 ), 2007            13131.6    11965.3       477                   2007 census
Family member moved abroad, 1997-2007            0.061      0.239      62,316                 2007 census
Panel B: 1992 census

Walls made of concrete, 1992                    0.813      0.390       64,899                 1992 census
Bare floor, 1992                                0.100      0.299       64,899                 1992 census
Has sewerage infrastructure, 1992               0.816      0.388       64,899                 1992 census
Use electricity for lighting & cooking, 1992    0.182      0.386       64,899                 1992 census
No bathroom, 1992                               0.030      0.170       64,899                 1992 census
Shared bathroom, 1992                           0.142      0.349       64,899                 1992 census
Has a motocycle, 1992                           0.034      0.182       64,899                 1992 census
Has a car, 1992                                 0.285      0.451       64,899                 1992 census
Has a phone, 1992                               0.320      0.467       64,899                 1992 census
Has a TV, 1992                                  0.860      0.347       64,899                 1992 census
Has a blender, 1992                             0.625      0.484       64,899                 1992 census
Number of rooms, 1992                           2.670      1.706       64,899                 1992 census


                                                         54
Can read and write, 1992                        0.904     0.294    234,749   1992 census
Has high school degree, 1992                    0.314     0.464    227,281   1992 census
Has university degree, 1992                     0.112     0.316    227,281   1992 census
1st principal component of the:
     Dwelling characteristics, 1992             0.863     0.301     64,899   1992 census
     Household characteristics, 1992            0.525     0.228     64,899   1992 census
     Individual characteristics, 1992           0.380     0.270    227,281   1992 census
Panel C: 2019 survey

Has high school degree, 2019                    0.508      0.500    2,275    2019 survey
Has university degree, 2019                     0.180      0.384    2,275    2019 survey
Household income, 2019                          625.05    632.84    2,314    2019 survey
Works in a firm with                             0.169     0.375    2,071    2019 survey
 100 employees, 2019
Works in a firm with                            0.133     0.340     2,071    2019 survey
 200 employees, 2019
Has always lived in location, 2019              0.772     0.419     2,314    2019 survey
Works in neighborhood where lives, 2019         0.302     0.459     2,071    2019 survey
Works in gang territory, 2019                   0.334     0.472     1,738    2019 survey
Has been to Santa Ana, 2019                     0.495     0.500     2,314    2019 survey
Has been to the beach, 2019                     0.872     0.335     2,314    2019 survey
Freedom of movement in area, 2019               0.811     0.392     2,314    2019 survey
Satisfaction with availability and quality:
      Health services, 2019                     4.080     1.815     2,314    2019 survey
      Education centers, 2019                   4.696     1.589     2,314    2019 survey
      Roads, 2019                               4.263     1.761     2,314    2019 survey
      Electricity service, 2019                 5.873     1.024     2,314    2019 survey
Would seek help from informal leader for:
      Public goods provision, 2019              0.220     0.415     2,314    2019 survey
      A security, civil, or legal issue, 2019   0.090     0.287     2,314    2019 survey
      A financial problem, 2019                 0.013     0.115     2,314    2019 survey
Would seek help from nobody for:
      Public goods provision, 2019              0.084     0.277     2,314    2019 survey
      A security, civil, or legal issue, 2019   0.046     0.209     2,314    2019 survey
      A financial problem, 2019                 0.115     0.319     2,314    2019 survey
Hours worked, 2019                              8.613     3.098     2,071    2019 survey
Hours would work for a wage of:
      $5 per hour, 2019                         7.596     4.223     2,314    2019 survey
      $10 per hour, 2019                        8.280     2.788     2,314    2019 survey
      $20 per hour, 2019                        8.245     2.933     2,314    2019 survey
Panel D: Google Maps

Number of establishments per km2 :
   All establishments, 2019                     133.41    22.39      85      Google Maps
   Schools, 2019                                5.898     4.360      85      Google Maps


                                                         55
     Hospitals, 2019                           1.896     2.175     85              Google Maps
     Cafes & restaurants, 2019                 9.970     5.379     85              Google Maps
     Grocery stores, 2019                      5.504     3.923     85              Google Maps
     Pharmacies, 2019                          1.839     2.060     85              Google Maps
Panel E: Data on housing rent (OLX)

Housing rent, 2018                             1008.8     614.2   1,537               OLX
Log housing rent, 2018                         6.731     0.653    1,537               OLX
1 room in apartment, 2018                      0.113      0.317   1,537               OLX
2 rooms in apartment, 2018                     0.187      0.390   1,537               OLX
3 rooms in apartment, 2018                     0.528      0.499   1,537               OLX
4 rooms in apartment, 2018                     0.110      0.312   1,537               OLX
5 rooms in apartment, 2018                     0.040      0.197   1,537               OLX
6 rooms in apartment, 2018                     0.010      0.102   1,537               OLX
7+ rooms in apartment, 2018                    0.012      0.108   1,537               OLX
1 bathroom in apartment, 2018                  0.157      0.364   1,537               OLX
2 bathrooms in apartment, 2018                 0.176      0.381   1,537               OLX
3 bathrooms in apartment, 2018                 0.446      0.497   1,537               OLX
4 bathrooms in apartment, 2018                 0.141      0.348   1,537               OLX
5 bathrooms in apartment, 2018                 0.053      0.224   1,537               OLX
6 bathrooms in apartment, 2018                 0.019      0.136   1,537               OLX
7+ bathrooms in apartment, 2018                0.008      0.092   1,537               OLX
Square meters, 2018                            189.38    264.65   1,537               OLX
Rented out by agency, 2018                     0.491      0.500   1,537               OLX
Panel F: Other RDD variables

Urban territory, 1999                          0.812     0.298     477     NYU Atlas of Urban Expansion
Road density (km per km2 ), 2020               17.83      8.80     477     Humanitarian OpenStreetMap
Has access to waterway                         0.327     0.470     477     Humanitarian OpenStreetMap
Elevation                                      720.4     87.83     477             CGIAR SRTM
Territory used for coffee production           0.028     0.132     477      Ministry of the Environment
                                                                              and Natural Resources
Tree coverage, 2000                            0.048     0.116     477         Global Forest Watch
Gang homicides per km2 , 2003-2011             5.450     5.629     85                   PNC
Violent robberies per km2 , 2014-2015          25.99     15.37     85                OPAMSS
Business has been extorted, 2015               0.246     0.431     512               FUSADES
Gang activity in the location, 2015            0.738     0.440     493               FUSADES
Panel G: Difference-in-differences variables

Luminosity (grid level), 1992-2013             4.743     7.765    20,592           DMSP-OLS
Gang presence (grid), 1992-2013                0.110     0.313    20,592             PNC
Luminosity (municipality), 1992-2013           10.18     14.07    2,288            DMSP-OLS
Gang presence (municipality), 1992-2013        0.538     0.499    2,288              PNC
Gang leaders' municipality of birth            0.163     0.370    2,288             El Faro



                                                        56
                Table A2: Robustness to alternative assumptions about the variance-covariance matrix

                                                                                 1st principal component of the:
                                                                           Dwelling         Household             Individual
                                                                         characteristics   characteristics      characteristics

        Coefficient for Gang territory                                       -0.036              -0.086              -0.097

        Clustering by:
             30 meter bins (baseline specification)                        (0.011)***         (0.019)***           (0.019)***
             Census tracts                                                 (0.012)***         (0.023)***           (0.022)***
             Distance to the boundary of gang territory                    (0.012)***         (0.024)***           (0.024)***
             60 meter bins                                                 (0.010)***         (0.019)***           (0.021)***
        Conley correction for spatial correlation within:
             A 50 meter radius                                             (0.012)***         (0.023)***           (0.022)***
             A 100 meter radius                                            (0.013)***         (0.024)***           (0.023)***

        Observations                                                         60,820             58,434               203,423

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table shows that the results are robust to alternative assumptions about the variance-covariance
matrix. In particular, we present the standard standard errors with clustering by census tract, distance to the boundary of gang territory,
and 60 meter distance bins. We also present Conley standard errors adjusted for spatial correlation at 50 and 100 meter radii.




                                                                    57
                     Table A3: Two-dimensional regression discontinuity in latitude and longitude

                         Dwelling characteristics                                        Household characteristics
                       Walls made           Bare floor        Has sewerage           Use electricity for     No bathroom         Has internet
                       of concrete                            infrastructure       lighting and cooking

 Gang territory          -0.051***           0.009*                 -0.006               -0.075***              0.004***             -0.139***
                          (0.007)            (0.005)                (0.015)               (0.008)               (0.001)               (0.011)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.932              0.028                  0.941                 0.108                 0.005                 0.180
 Observations             72,252             60,820                 62,316                62,316                62,316                59,917
                                                                       Household characteristics
                     Has a motorcycle       Has a car             Has a phone            Has a TV           Has a computer    Number of rooms

 Gang territory          -0.006**           -0.253***              -0.172***             -0.023***             -0.196***             -0.792***
                          (0.002)            (0.021)                (0.017)               (0.003)               (0.016)               (0.088)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.033              0.428                  0.696                 0.952                 0.346                 3.089
 Observations             59,237             60,186                 60,309                60,525                60,161                62,316
                                     Individual characteristics                                    1st principal component of the:
                        Can read            Has a high       Has a university           Dwelling             Household            Individual
                        and write         school degree          degree               characteristics       characteristics     characteristics

 Gang territory          -0.025***          -0.158***              -0.139***             -0.028***             -0.102***             -0.107***
                          (0.004)            (0.012)                (0.012)               (0.006)               (0.009)               (0.009)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.928               0.448                  0.207                0.952                 0.377                 0.521
 Observations            208,913             203,423                203,423               60,820                58,434               203,423

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the variables from the 2007 census,
using latitude and longitude as the forcing variables. The unit of observation is a dwelling, household, or individual, depending on
which characteristics are being considered. Omitted controls include a linear trend in latitude and longitude (demeaned), separately for
locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory
(separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                         58
                               Table A4: Socioeconomic characteristics from the 2019 survey

                          Has a high      Has a university      Household income        Works in a firm with       Works in a firm with
                        school degree         degree                                      100 employees              200 employees
 Panel A: All survey respondents

 Gang territory            -0.311***           -0.254***             -352.60***                -0.123***                 -0.115***
                            (0.057)             (0.062)               (112.22)                  (0.019)                   (0.028)
 Mean of dep. var.           0.508               0.180                   625.0                   0.169                     0.133
 Observations                2,275               2,275                   2,314                   2,071                     2,071

 Panel B: Respondents who have lived in the same location their entire life

 Gang territory            -0.281***           -0.173***              -271.05**                -0.114***                  -0.104**
                            (0.061)             (0.056)                (118.14)                 (0.033)                    (0.041)
 Mean of dep. var.           0.474               0.149                   602.3                   0.155                     0.123
 Observations                1,757               1,757                   1,787                   1,589                     1,589

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. After years of gang control, gang-controlled areas have worse socioeconomic conditions than
neighboring areas that were not under the control of gangs. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the variables
from the 2019 survey. Panel A presents the results for the full sample; Panel B--for the subsample of respondents who have always lived
in the same location. For household income, the unit of observation is a household; for all the other variables--an individual. Omitted
controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary.
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of the
boundary).




                                                                    59
Table A5: Socioeconomic conditions after exposure to gang control, subsample of individuals who have always
                                            lived in San Salvador

                         Dwelling characteristics                                         Household characteristics
                       Walls made           Bare floor        Has sewerage            Use electricity for     No bathroom         Has internet
                       of concrete                            infrastructure        lighting and cooking

 Gang territory          -0.046***           0.025**                -0.058**              -0.074***              0.005***             -0.129***
                          (0.015)            (0.009)                 (0.023)               (0.018)               (0.002)               (0.030)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.932              0.028                  0.934                  0.104                 0.005                 0.178
 Observations             72,252             60,820                 38,987                 38,987                38,987                37,204
                                                                        Household characteristics
                     Has a motorcycle       Has a car             Has a phone             Has a TV           Has a computer    Number of rooms

 Gang territory          -0.019***          -0.220***              -0.140***              -0.023***             -0.174***             -0.710***
                          (0.007)            (0.043)                (0.033)                (0.006)               (0.036)               (0.183)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.036              0.426                  0.682                  0.955                 0.345                 3.046
 Observations             36,736             37,385                 37,471                 37,599                37,349                38,987
                                     Individual characteristics                                     1st principal component of the:
                        Can read            Has a high       Has a university            Dwelling             Household            Individual
                        and write         school degree          degree                characteristics       characteristics     characteristics

 Gang territory          -0.026***          -0.145***              -0.116***              -0.036***             -0.091***             -0.095***
                          (0.006)            (0.029)                (0.027)                (0.011)               (0.018)               (0.020)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.931               0.444                  0.200                 0.952                 0.374                 0.519
 Observations            156,959             153,280                153,280                60,820                36,204               153,280

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the subsample of individuals who
have always lived in San Salvador. For the dwelling characteristics, none of the observations are excluded because all the dwellings have
always been located in San Salvador. For the household characteristics, we limit the sample to those observations for which the head
of the household has always lived in San Salvador. All the variables come from the 2007 census. The unit of observation is a dwelling,
household, or individual, depending on which characteristics are being considered. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to
the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30
meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                         60
                                                  Table A6: McCrary density test

                          Household density                                  Population density (per km2 ):
                             (per km2 )                Full sample         Male  Female Age 16-25 Age 26-40                     Age >40

 Gang territory                   264.99                 1,317.30          664.23     653.08        268.15         315.63        160.05
                                 (384.97)               (1,429.95)        (645.80)   (784.44)      (251.17)       (355.78)      (390.66)
 Mean of dep. var.               3651.66                 13131.64         6026.93    7104.71       2344.41        3087.13       3939.25
 Observations                      477                     477              477        477           477            477           477

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for household and population density,
measured in households and individuals per square kilometer, respectively. The unit of observation is a census tract. The household
count, population count, and the size of the census tracts come from the 2007 census. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance
to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Observations are weighted by the size of the
census tracts areas. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each
side of the boundary).




                                                                     61
                     Table A7: Robustness to excluding the poorest individuals from gang territory

                                                                          1st principal component of the:
                                                                  Household                                Individual
                                                                 characteristics                         characteristics

        Excluding 5% of the poorest households and least educated individuals from gang territory

        Gang territory                                               -0.071***                               -0.070***
                                                                      (0.019)                                 (0.019)
        Observations                                                  56,626                                 196,804

        Excluding 10% of the poorest households and least educated individuals from gang territory

        Gang territory                                               -0.060***                               -0.047**
                                                                      (0.018)                                 (0.019)
        Observations                                                  54,818                                  190,185

        Excluding 15% of the poorest households and least educated individuals from gang territory

        Gang territory                                               -0.050**                                 -0.035*
                                                                      (0.018)                                 (0.019)
        Observations                                                  53,010                                  183,566

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) after excluding 5%, 10%, and 15% of the
observations with the lowest levels of the first principal component from gang areas. For the household characteristics, we use the first
principal component of the houeshold characteristics; for the individual characteristics--the first principal component of the individual
characteristics. When more than 5%/10%/15% of observations had the first principal component less than or equal to the value of the
5th/10th/15th percentile, we exclude a random subset of observations for which the first principal component is exactly equal to the
5th/10th/15th percentile. The estimates do not depend on which subsample of observations are excluded. In particular, we perform
1,000 iterations of this procedure, and for each variable report the most concervative results, i.e., when they are least significant. All the
variables come from the 2007 census. The unit of observation is a household or an individual, depending on which characteristics are
being considered. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each
side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for
each side of the boundary).




                                                                     62
 Table A8: Rates of out-of-sample migration for rich households and educated individuals from gang territory
                                   required to generate the discontinuities

                                                              Household characteristics
                Has sewerage       Use electricity for        No bathroom        Has a motocycle        Has a car       Has a phone
                infrastructure   lighting and cooking
 --out-of-sample migration rate for poor households and uneducated individuals from gang territory

      = 0%          57.4%                57.0%                   72.6%                57.0%              28.8%               55.9%
      = 10%         61.6%                61.3%                   74.4%                61.3%              35.9%               60.3%
      = 20%         65.9%                65.6%                   77.3%                65.6%              43.0%               64.8%

                                 Household characteristics                                      Individual characteristics
                 Has a phone           Has a TV              Has a computer         Can read           Has a high     Has a university
                                                                                    and write        school degree        degree
 --out-of-sample migration rate for poor households and uneducated individuals from gang territory

      = 0%          47.8%                36.4%                   51.6%                39.4%              44.7%               50.5%
      = 10%         53.0%                42.8%                   56.5%                45.5%              50.2%               55.5%
      = 20%         58.2%                49.1%                   61.3%                51.5%              55.7%               60.4%

Note: The table presents the rates of out-of-sample migration for rich households and educated individuals from gang territory required
to generate the discontinuities from Table 1 under different assumptions about the migration rate for poor households and uneducated
individuals from gang territory. All the variables come from the 2007 census. The unit of observation is a household or an individual,
depending on which characteristics are being considered.




                                                                  63
                             Table A9: Estimating the actual rates of out-of-sample migration

                                                                                   Family member moved abroad in 1997-2007
 Gang territory                                                                        -0.003               -0.002            -0.010
                                                                                       (0.005)              (0.004)           (0.007)
 1st principal component of the household characteristics                              0.063***            0.061***
                                                                                        (0.008)             (0.008)
 1st principal component of the household characteristics ×
      × Non-gang territory                                                                                                    0.055***
                                                                                                                               (0.010)
      × Gang territory                                                                                                        0.071***
                                                                                                                               (0.012)

 Mean dep. var                                                                          0.056                0.062              0.056
 Observations                                                                          36,204               58,434             36,204
 p-value for equal coefficients inside and                                                                                     0.313
 outside of gang territory
 Household head has always lived in San Salvador

Note: The table presents the results of estimating the rates of out-of-sample migration from San Salvador. All the variables come from the
2007 census. The unit of observation is a household. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory,
separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to
the boundary of gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                    64
                  Table A10: Excluding observations within 100 meters of the boundary of gang territory

                          Dwelling characteristics                                        Household characteristics
                        Walls made           Bare floor        Has sewerage           Use electricity for     No bathroom         Has internet
                        of concrete                            infrastructure       lighting and cooking

 Gang territory           -0.064***           0.053***              -0.090***             -0.096***               0.001               -0.166***
                           (0.020)             (0.011)               (0.027)               (0.018)               (0.003)               (0.026)
 Mean of dep. var.         0.936              0.026                  0.943                 0.116                 0.004                 0.194
 Observations              50,348             42,432                 43,405                43,405                43,405                41,867
                                                                        Household characteristics
                      Has a motorcycle       Has a car             Has a phone            Has a TV           Has a computer    Number of rooms

 Gang territory           -0.030***          -0.271***              -0.190***             -0.032***             -0.224***             -0.933***
                           (0.008)            (0.053)                (0.057)               (0.009)               (0.048)               (0.263)
 Mean of dep. var.         0.034              0.455                  0.707                 0.954                 0.361                 3.173
 Observations              41,346             42,052                 42,105                42,249                42,001                43,405
                                      Individual characteristics                                    1st principal component of the:
                         Can read            Has a high       Has a university           Dwelling             Household            Individual
                         and write         school degree          degree               characteristics       characteristics     characteristics

 Gang territory           -0.037***          -0.195***              -0.154***             -0.056***             -0.118***             -0.128***
                           (0.010)            (0.033)                (0.030)               (0.013)               (0.024)               (0.023)
 Mean of dep. var.         0.930               0.463                  0.222                0.955                 0.387                 0.532
 Observations             145,474             141,698                141,698               42,432                40,792               141,698

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the variables from the 2007 census
after excluding observations within 100 meters of the boundary of gang territory. The unit of observation is a dwelling, household, or
individual, depending on which characteristics are being considered. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary
of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins,
denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                          65
   Table A11: Excluding 10% of the observations with the highest values of the 1st principal components from
                                               non-gang areas

                         Dwelling characteristics                                         Household characteristics
                       Walls made           Bare floor        Has sewerage            Use electricity for       No bathroom         Has internet
                       of concrete                            infrastructure        lighting and cooking

 Gang territory          -0.041**            0.023**                -0.046**               -0.027*                 0.005**              -0.060***
                          (0.016)            (0.010)                 (0.022)               (0.016)                 (0.002)               (0.022)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.929              0.030                  0.939                  0.081                   0.005                 0.143
 Observations             69,157             57,725                 59,701                 59,701                  59,701                57,302
                                                                        Household characteristics
                     Has a motorcycle       Has a car             Has a phone             Has a TV             Has a computer    Number of rooms

 Gang territory           -0.002            -0.158***              -0.109***              -0.016***               -0.117***             -0.463**
                          (0.006)            (0.044)                (0.034)                (0.006)                 (0.031)               (0.181)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.028              0.402                  0.682                  0.950                   0.316                 2.980
 Observations             56,622             57,571                 57,694                 57,910                  57,546                59,701
                                     Individual characteristics                                       1st principal component of the:
                        Can read            Has a high       Has a university            Dwelling               Household            Individual
                        and write         school degree          degree                characteristics         characteristics     characteristics

 Gang territory          -0.025***          -0.097***               -0.038*                -0.032**               -0.053***             -0.053***
                          (0.007)            (0.027)                (0.022)                 (0.012)                (0.017)               (0.018)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.924               0.421                  0.169                 0.949                   0.359                 0.498
 Observations            199,604             194,114                194,114                57,725                  55,819               194,114

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) after excluding 10% of the observations
with the highest levels of the first principal component from non-gang areas. For the dwelling characteristics, we use the first
principal component of the dwelling characteristics; for the household characteristics--the first principal component of the household
characteristics; for the individual characteristics--the first principal component of the individual characteristics. When more than 10%
of observations had the first principal component less than or equal to the value of the 10th percentile, we exclude a random subset
of observations for which the first principal component is exactly equal to the 10th percentile. The estimates do not depend on which
subsample of observations are excluded. In particular, we perform 1,000 iterations of this procedure, and for each variable report the
most concervative results, i.e., when they are least significant. All the variables come from the 2007 census. The unit of observation is a
dwelling, household, or individual, depending on which characteristics are being considered. Omitted controls include a linear trend
in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                         66
                                                       Table A12: Housing rent

                                                                           Log of housing rent        Housing rent

                     Gang territory                                               -0.191***              -203.20***
                                                                                   (0.052)                 (56.33)
                     Number of rooms in the apartment:

                          2 rooms                                                 0.210***                  19.93
                                                                                   (0.053)                 (30.79)
                          3 rooms                                                 0.296***                 87.65**
                                                                                   (0.059)                 (42.09)
                          4 rooms                                                  0.189**                  33.14
                                                                                   (0.070)                 (73.21)
                          5 rooms                                                   0.134                   2.46
                                                                                   (0.107)                (124.27)
                          6 rooms                                                 0.383***                330.19**
                                                                                   (0.089)                (148.86)
                          7+ rooms                                                0.365***                378.31*
                                                                                   (0.124)                (194.71)
                     Number of bathrooms in the apartment:

                          2 bathrooms                                             0.507***               209.67***
                                                                                   (0.073)                (49.22)
                          3 bathrooms                                             0.718***               350.97***
                                                                                   (0.062)                (46.61)
                          4 bathrooms                                             0.836***               473.41***
                                                                                   (0.066)                (82.91)
                          5 bathrooms                                             0.992***               650.37***
                                                                                   (0.080)                (130.00)
                          6 bathrooms                                             1.095***              1,028.51***
                                                                                   (0.113)                (213.85)
                          7+ bathrooms                                            0.979***               786.86***
                                                                                   (0.160)                (233.44)
                     Square meters                                                0.140***               190.59***
                                                                                   (0.018)                (22.68)
                     Square meters squared                                        -0.003***               -4.29***
                                                                                   (0.000)                 (0.61)
                     Rented out by an agency                                      0.269***               242.29***
                                                                                   (0.034)                (15.55)

                     Mean dep. var                                                  6.731                 1,008.81
                     Observations                                                   1,537                   1,537

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for housing rent requested by landlords,
controlling for the characteristics of the apartments that are being rented out. The unit of observation is an apartment. Omitted controls
include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors
in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                     67
                          Table A13: Estimating the effects separately for MS-13 and 18th Street

                         Dwelling characteristics                                         Household characteristics
                       Walls made           Bare floor        Has sewerage            Use electricity for       No bathroom         Has internet
                       of concrete                            infrastructure        lighting and cooking

 MS-13                   -0.050***           0.023**                -0.057**              -0.077***                0.006***             -0.137***
                          (0.017)            (0.010)                 (0.025)               (0.021)                 (0.001)               (0.030)
 18th Street             -0.043**            0.026**                -0.044**              -0.076***                0.005*               -0.121***
                          (0.017)            (0.010)                 (0.021)               (0.022)                 (0.003)               (0.030)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.932              0.028                  0.941                  0.108                   0.005                 0.180
 Observations             72,252             60,820                 62,316                 62,316                  62,316                59,917
                                                                        Household characteristics
                     Has a motorcycle       Has a car             Has a phone             Has a TV             Has a computer    Number of rooms

 MS-13                   -0.014**           -0.234***              -0.157***              -0.023***               -0.191***             -0.796***
                          (0.006)            (0.048)                (0.035)                (0.006)                 (0.037)               (0.192)
 18th Street             -0.011*            -0.179***              -0.113***              -0.018***               -0.153***             -0.582***
                         (0.006)             (0.047)                (0.036)                (0.006)                 (0.036)               (0.210)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.033              0.428                  0.696                  0.952                   0.346                 3.089
 Observations             59,237             60,186                 60,309                 60,525                  60,161                62,316
                                     Individual characteristics                                       1st principal component of the:
                        Can read            Has a high       Has a university            Dwelling               Household            Individual
                        and write         school degree          degree                characteristics         characteristics     characteristics

 MS-13                   -0.035***          -0.173***              -0.140***              -0.036***               -0.099***             -0.115***
                          (0.007)            (0.029)                (0.026)                (0.012)                 (0.020)               (0.020)
 18th Street             -0.028***          -0.131***              -0.104***               -0.035**               -0.078***             -0.087***
                          (0.008)            (0.030)                (0.026)                 (0.013)                (0.020)               (0.021)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.928               0.448                  0.207                 0.952                   0.377                 0.521
 Observations            208,913             203,423                203,423                60,820                  58,434               203,423

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) with the dummy for gang territory
replaced with two dummies for areas controlled by MS-13 and areas controlled by 18th Street. All the variables come from the 2007
census. The unit of observation is a dwelling, household, or individual, depending on which characteristics are being considered.
Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the
boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of
the boundary).




                                                                         68
                               Table A14: Excluding areas within 150 meters of the rival gang

                         Dwelling characteristics                                        Household characteristics
                       Walls made           Bare floor        Has sewerage           Use electricity for     No bathroom         Has internet
                       of concrete                            infrastructure       lighting and cooking

 Gang territory          -0.040**            0.025**               -0.059***             -0.073***              0.004***             -0.119***
                          (0.015)            (0.010)                (0.020)               (0.019)               (0.001)               (0.026)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.942              0.027                  0.938                 0.121                 0.003                 0.206
 Observations             60,352             50,887                 52,080                52,080                52,080                50,089
                                                                       Household characteristics
                     Has a motorcycle       Has a car             Has a phone            Has a TV           Has a computer    Number of rooms

 Gang territory          -0.012**           -0.183***              -0.115***             -0.019***             -0.154***             -0.579***
                          (0.005)            (0.042)                (0.031)               (0.006)               (0.030)               (0.190)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.001              0.076                  0.038                 0.003                 0.051                 0.066
 Observations             49,412             50,319                 50,447                50,621                50,285                52,080
                                     Individual characteristics                                    1st principal component of the:
                        Can read            Has a high       Has a university           Dwelling             Household            Individual
                        and write         school degree          degree               characteristics       characteristics     characteristics

 Gang territory          -0.029***          -0.145***              -0.112***             -0.034***             -0.079***             -0.095***
                          (0.007)            (0.027)                (0.023)               (0.011)               (0.017)               (0.018)
 Mean of dep. var.        0.932               0.474                  0.230                0.957                 0.396                 0.539
 Observations            174,962             170,398                170,398               50,887                48,760               170,398

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) after excluding gang-controlled neigh-
borhoods that are located within 150 meters of the rival gang. The unit of observation is a dwelling, household, or individual, depending
on which characteristics are being considered. All the variable come from the 2007 census. Omitted controls include a linear trend in
distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                         69
                                                   Table A15: "Islands" of gang territory

                                  Dwelling characteristics                                         Household characteristics
                                Walls made           Bare floor        Has sewerage            Use electricity for       No bathroom         Has internet
                                of concrete                            infrastructure        lighting and cooking

 "Island" of gang territory       -0.028**            0.023**                -0.083**              -0.063***                0.005***             -0.099***
                                   (0.013)            (0.009)                 (0.038)               (0.020)                 (0.001)               (0.029)
 Rest of gang territory           -0.056***           0.027**                -0.027                -0.085***                 0.005               -0.144***
                                   (0.020)            (0.010)                (0.028)                (0.022)                 (0.003)               (0.029)
 Mean of dep. var.                 0.932              0.028                  0.941                  0.108                   0.005                 0.180
 Observations                      72,252             60,820                 62,316                 62,316                  62,316                59,917
                                                                                 Household characteristics
                              Has a motorcycle       Has a car             Has a phone             Has a TV             Has a computer    Number of rooms

 "Island" of gang territory       -0.010*            -0.208***              -0.124***              -0.016***               -0.161***             -0.676***
                                  (0.006)             (0.048)                (0.030)                (0.005)                 (0.036)               (0.186)
 Rest of gang territory           -0.014**           -0.194***              -0.132***              -0.022***               -0.170***             -0.651***
                                   (0.005)            (0.047)                (0.037)                (0.007)                 (0.035)               (0.201)
 Mean of dep. var.                 0.033              0.428                  0.696                  0.952                   0.346                 3.089
 Observations                      59,237             60,186                 60,309                 60,525                  60,161                62,316
                                              Individual characteristics                                       1st principal component of the:
                                 Can read            Has a high       Has a university            Dwelling               Household            Individual
                                 and write         school degree          degree                characteristics         characteristics     characteristics

 "Island" of gang territory       -0.039***          -0.188***              -0.144***               -0.025**               -0.083***             -0.123***
                                   (0.007)            (0.027)                (0.025)                 (0.010)                (0.019)               (0.019)
 Rest of gang territory           -0.025***          -0.119***              -0.100***              -0.042***               -0.087***             -0.081***
                                   (0.007)            (0.032)                (0.028)                (0.014)                 (0.020)               (0.022)
 Mean of dep. var.                 0.928               0.448                  0.207                  0.952                   0.377                0.521
 Observations                     208,913             203,423                203,423                60,820                  58,434               203,423

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) with the dummy for gang territory
replaced with dummies for the "islands" of gang territory and for the other gang-controlled locations. All the variables come from the
2007 census. The unit of observation is a dwelling, household, or individual, depending on which characteristics are being considered.
Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the
boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of
the boundary).




                                                                              70
                                Table A16: Effect on the individual characteristics, by gender

                        Can read and write       Has a high school degree       Has a university degree       1st principal component
                         Female       Male        Female           Male          Female          Male          Female           Male

 Gang territory         -0.038***   -0.023***    -0.129***       -0.169***      -0.097***      -0.144***      -0.087***       -0.111***
                         (0.008)     (0.005)      (0.024)         (0.032)        (0.020)        (0.032)        (0.017)         (0.022)
 Mean of dep. var.       0.915        0.943        0.431           0.468          0.186           0.233         0.504          0.542
 Observations           114,686       94,227      111,492         91,931         111,492         91,931        111,492         91,931

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the individual characteristics from
the 2007 census, separately for men and women. The unit of observation is an individual. Omitted controls include a linear trend in
distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                    71
                                           Table A17: Informal public goods provision


                              Would seek help from informal leader                        Would not seek help from anyone
                              of the community if a problem with:                                if a problem with:
                            Public goods        Security, civil,      Finance         Public goods        Security, civil,      Finance
                             provision         or legal dispute                        provision         or legal dispute

  Gang territory                 0.055                -0.059           -0.012             0.052**             0.045***           0.059*
                                (0.059)              (0.044)          (0.010)             (0.022)              (0.012)           (0.029)
  Mean of dep. var.              0.220                0.090            0.013               0.084                0.046            0.115
  Observations                   2,314                2,314            2,314               2,314                2,314            2,314


Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the probability of seeking help from
an informal community leader or not seeking help from anyone to solve problems with public goods provision, finance, and security,
civil, and legal disputes. The term "informal community leader" is used as a proxy for "gang leader" because, for security reasons, the
survey could not directly mention gangs. The unit of observation is an individual. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to
the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30
meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                     72
                                                  Table A18: Violence and extortion

                              Gang homicides (per km2 ):                   Violent theft          Business has          Gang activity
                             All  Year 2007 Year >2007                      (per km2 )            been extorted        in the location

 Gang territory              1.41          0.29              1.12               4.42                  -0.066                -0.036
                            (1.02)        (1.09)            (0.87)             (7.03)                 (0.065)               (0.061)
 Mean of dep. var.           5.45          3.44              2.01               26.0                   0.246                 0.738
 Observations                 85            85                85                 85                     512                   493

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the number of violent crimes per
square kilometer and for the probability of a firm being exposed to gang activity. For the number of violent crimes, the unit of observation
is a 10 meter bin, denoting distance to the boundary of gang territory, weighted by the size of the area of the distance bins. These data
come official police records. For the probability of being exposed to gang activity, the outcome variable is a firm in the 2015 survey
of firms conducted by FUSADES. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for
locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory
(separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                     73
                                         Table A19: Number of business establishments

                                               Number of business establishments (per km2 ):
                                     All businesses Cafes & restaurants Grocery stores Pharmacies

        Gang territory                     4.26                        -0.97                       0.48                  -0.24
                                          (13.66)                     (1.44)                      (0.72)                (0.57)
        Mean of dep. var.                 133.40                       9.97                        5.50                  1.84
        Observations                        85                          85                          85                    85


Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the number of business establish-
ments. The data come from Google Maps. The unit of observation is a 10 meter bin, denoting distance to the boundary of gang territory,
weighted by the size of the area of the distance bins. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory,
separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to
gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                     74
                           Table A20: Socioeconomic conditions after exposure to gang control,
                                           subsample of employed individuals

                                                                  Household characteristics
                        Has sewerage         Use electricity for         No bathroom             Has internet         Has motocycle
                        infrastructure     lighting and cooking

 Gang territory             -0.046**              -0.073***                 0.005**                -0.148***              -0.016**
                             (0.022)               (0.019)                  (0.002)                 (0.031)                (0.007)
 Mean of dep. var.           0.940                   0.104                   0.004                    0.207                 0.039
 Observations                41,158                 41,158                  41,158                   39,813                39,365
                                                                  Household characteristics
                           Has a car            Has a phone               Has a TV             Has a computer       Number of rooms

 Gang territory            -0.217***              -0.128***                -0.016**                -0.179***              -0.656***
                            (0.045)                (0.033)                  (0.006)                 (0.039)                (0.198)
 Mean of dep. var.           0.465                   0.683                   0.959                    0.388                 3.066
 Observations                39,987                 40,041                  40,195                   39,982                41,158
                                          Individual characteristics                              1st principal component of the:
                           Can read              Has a high           Has a university           Household               Individual
                           and write           school degree              degree                characteristics        characteristics

 Gang territory            -0.018***              -0.174***                -0.179***               -0.091***              -0.124***
                            (0.004)                (0.032)                  (0.032)                 (0.020)                (0.022)
 Mean of dep. var.           0.967                   0.623                   0.333                    0.388                 0.634
 Observations                91,114                 88,820                  88,820                   38,827                88,820

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the variables from the 2007 census
for the subsample of employed individuals. For the household characteristics, we limit the sample to those observations for which the
head of the household is employed. The unit of observation is a household or an individual, depending on which characteristics are
being considered. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each
side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for
each side of the boundary).




                                                                    75
                            Table A21: Socioeconomic conditions after exposure to gang control,
                                       subsample of formally employed individuals

                                                                    Household characteristics
                         Has sewerage         Use electricity for          No bathroom              Has internet          Has motocycle
                         infrastructure     lighting and cooking

 Gang territory              -0.045**               -0.073***                0.004***                 -0.148***               -0.015*
                              (0.020)                (0.020)                  (0.001)                  (0.034)                (0.008)
 Mean of dep. var.            0.947                   0.121                    0.003                     0.246                  0.043
 Observations                 28,250                 28,250                   28,250                    27,360                 26,983
                                                                    Household characteristics
                            Has a car            Has a phone                 Has a TV             Has a computer        Number of rooms

 Gang territory             -0.214***               -0.119***                 -0.010*                 -0.168***              -0.676***
                             (0.047)                 (0.033)                  (0.005)                  (0.040)                (0.209)
 Mean of dep. var.            0.520                   0.726                    0.969                     0.451                  3.226
 Observations                 27,464                 27,488                   27,602                    27,469                 28,250
                                           Individual characteristics                                1st principal component of the:
                           Can read                Has a high           Has a university            Household               Individual
                           and write             school degree              degree                 characteristics        characteristics

 Gang territory             -0.009***               -0.165***                -0.190***                -0.089***              -0.122***
                             (0.002)                 (0.031)                  (0.035)                  (0.020)                (0.022)
 Mean of dep. var.            0.987                   0.739                    0.415                     0.414                  0.706
 Observations                 63,563                 62,244                   62,244                    26,610                 62,244

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the variables from the 2007 census for
the subsample of formally employed individuals. For the household characteristics, we limit the sample to those observations for which
the head of the household is employed. The unit of observation is a household or an individual, depending on which characteristics are
being considered. Omitted controls include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each
side of the boundary. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for
each side of the boundary).




                                                                      76
                                                     Table A22: Hours worked

                                        Hours worked            Number of hours would work for a wage of:
                                                                $5 per hour         $10 per hour           $20 per hour

            Gang territory                     0.050                 -0.371              0.155                   0.336
                                              (0.421)               (0.341)             (0.239)                 (0.203)
            Mean of dep. var.                  8.613                 7.596                8.280                  8.245
            Observations                       2,071                 2,314                2,314                  2,314


Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (1) for the number of hours worked and for
individuals' willingness to work. All the variables come from the 2019 survey. The unit of observation is an individual. Omitted controls
include a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations on each side of the boundary. Standard errors
in parentheses are clustered by 30 meter bins, denoting distance to gang territory (separately for each side of the boundary).




                                                                    77
                                      Table A23: Event study for nighttime light density

                                                                           Nighttime light density
                                  Unit of observation:              Grid cell-year     Municipality-year

                                  Gang presence ×
                                       × Year = 1992                      -0.25               12.73
                                                                        (13.27)               (8.25)
                                       × Year = 1993                      -9.41                1.42
                                                                         (8.87)               (5.81)
                                       × Year = 1994                      -3.47                7.26
                                                                        (12.83)               (5.46)
                                       × Year = 1996                      -5.72                -4.74
                                                                        (12.01)               (4.30)
                                       × Year = 1997                      1.57                 -3.20
                                                                        (10.30)               (4.34)
                                       × Year = 1998                   -47.02***            -17.32***
                                                                         (9.15)               (4.97)
                                       × Year = 1999                   -47.36***            -20.78***
                                                                         (8.98)               (5.07)
                                       × Year = 2000                   -33.94***            -17.76***
                                                                        (11.01)               (5.17)
                                       × Year = 2001                   -44.98***            -28.94***
                                                                        (13.10)               (7.36)
                                       × Year = 2002                    -26.00*             -19.47***
                                                                        (13.73)               (7.07)
                                       × Year = 2003                   -30.30***            -14.70***
                                                                        (10.41)               (5.20)
                                       × Year = 2004                   -82.10***            -31.56***
                                                                        (13.89)               (6.69)
                                       × Year = 2005                   -55.40***            -27.22***
                                                                        (12.31)               (6.28)
                                       × Year = 2006                   -71.17***            -30.24***
                                                                        (12.67)               (5.85)
                                       × Year = 2007                   -76.05***            -35.15***
                                                                        (14.93)               (6.67)
                                       × Year = 2008                   -70.94***            -33.11***
                                                                        (15.62)               (7.43)
                                       × Year = 2009                   -64.39***            -32.30***
                                                                        (16.80)               (7.80)
                                       × Year = 2010                  -118.08***            -49.80***
                                                                        (17.93)              (12.05)
                                       × Year = 2011                   -55.51***            -29.23***
                                                                        (18.65)               (8.73)
                                       × Year = 2012                   -79.42***              -16.42
                                                                        (20.68)              (10.64)
                                       × Year = 2013                    -39.75*              -19.70*
                                                                        (20.95)              (11.12)

                                  Observations                            14,190              1,782
                                  Grid cells/ municipalities               645                  81
                                  Excluding areas with above
                                  average luminosity in 1995

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The table presents the results of estimating Specification (2) for nighttime light density, measured in
percentage points to the level in 1995, one year before the change in the United States immigration policy. In 1995, the outcome variable
is equal to 100 percent for both gang and non-gang locations. Omitted controls include year dummies and grid cell or municipality fixed
effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by grid cell or municipality, depending on the regression specification.



                                                                     78
                                                            C    F IGURES


            Figure A1: Socioeconomic conditions after 10 years of gang control: Dwelling characteristics




Note: The figure illustrates the results for the dwelling characteristics from Table 1. All the variables come from the 2007 census. The
unit of observation is a dwelling. All the variables represent the share of dwellings that have the outcome variable (walls from concrete
and a bare floor). The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to
the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are
controlled by the gangs. The dots represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.




                                                                   79
                                 Figure A2: Socioeconomic conditions after 10 years of gang control: Household characteristics
80




     Note: The figure illustrates the results for the households characteristics from Table 1. All the variables come from the 2007 census. The unit of observation is a household.
     All the variables except "Number of rooms" represent the share of households that have the outcome variable (a car, a tv, etc.); "Number of rooms" is the number of rooms
     in the apartment or house where the household lives. The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to
     the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs. The dots
     represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.
            Figure A3: Socioeconomic conditions after 10 years of gang control: Individual characteristics




Note: The figure illustrates the results for the individual characteristics from Table 1. All the variables come from the 2007 census. The unit
of observation is an individual. All the variables represent the share of individuals that have the outcome variable (can read and write,
have a high school degree, etc.). The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in
meters) to the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the
right are controlled by the gangs. The dots represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.




                                                                      81
            Figure A4: Socioeconomic conditions before the gangs' arrival: Neighborhood characteristics




Note: The figure illustrates the results for the neighborhood characteristics from Table 2. The unit of observation is a census tract. The
vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to the boundary of gang
territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs.
The dots represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.




                                                                     82
               Figure A5: Socioeconomic conditions before the gangs' arrival: Dwelling characteristics




Note: The figure illustrates the results for the dwelling characteristics from Table 2. All the variables come from the 1992 census. The
unit of observation is a dwelling. All the variables represent the share of dwellings that have the outcome variable (walls from concrete
and a bare floor). The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to
the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are
controlled by the gangs. The dots represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.




                                                                   83
                                    Figure A6: Socioeconomic conditions before the gangs' arrival: Household characteristics
84




     Note: The figure illustrates the results for the households characteristics from Table 2. All the variables come from the 1992 census. The unit of observation is a household.
     All the variables except "Number of rooms" represent the share of households that have the outcome variable (a car, a tv, etc.); "Number of rooms" is the number of rooms
     in the apartment or house where the household lives. The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to
     the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs. The dots
     represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.
               Figure A7: Socioeconomic conditions before the gangs' arrival: Individual characteristics




Note: The figure illustrates the results for the individual characteristics from Table 2. All the variables come from the 1992 census. The unit
of observation is an individual. All the variables represent the share of individuals that have the outcome variable (can read and write,
have a high school degree, etc.). The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in
meters) to the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the
right are controlled by the gangs. The dots represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.




                                                                      85
    Figure A8: Socioeconomic conditions before the gangs' arrival: 1st principal components of the dwelling,
                                 household, and individual characteristics




Note: The figure illustrates the results for the 1st principal components of the dwelling, household, and individual characteristics from
Table 2. All the variables come from the 1992 census. The unit of observation is a dwelling, a household, and an individual, depending
on the specification. All the variables are normalized to vary between zero and one with higher values representing better outcomes.
The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to the boundary of gang
territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs.
The dots represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.




                                                                     86
                      Figure A9: I N - SAMPLE MIGRATION IS NOT DRIVING THE RESULTS : 2019 SURVEY




Note: The figure illustrates the results from Table A4. The left-hand side of the figure presents the results for the full sample (Panel A of
Table A4), the right-hand side--for the subsample of individuals who have lived in the same location all their life (Panel B of Table A4). The
results are very similar. The vertical axis represents the average value of household income; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to the
boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled
by the gangs. The dots represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.



                                                                       87
              Figure A10: Excluding observations within 100 meters of the boundary of gang territory




Note: The figure illustrates the regression discontinuity plots for the 1st principal components of the dwelling, household, and individual
characteristics from the 2007 census after excluding observations within 100 meters of the boundary of gang territory. The unit of obser-
vation is a dwelling, a household, and an individual, depending on the specification. All the variables are normalized to vary between
zero and one with higher values representing better outcomes. The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the
horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside
of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs. The dots represent the average value of the outcome variable in that 30
meter bin.




                                                                    88
                                                      Figure A11: Housing rent




Note: The figure illustrates the regression discontinuity plots for the residual of housing rent and log housing rent after subtracting the
effects of all the control. The unit of observation is an apartment listing. The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes
variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are
located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs. Omitted controls include dummies for the number of
rooms, dummies for the number of bathrooms, a quadratic polynomial in square meters, a dummy for whether the apartment is being
rented out by an agency rather than an individual, and a linear trend in distance to the boundary of gang territory, separately for locations
on each side of the boundary.




                                                                     89
                                       Figure A12: Alternative bandwidth: 60 meter bins




Note: The figure illustrates the regression discontinuity plots for the 1st principal components of the dwelling, household, and individual
characteristics from the 2007 census, using a larger bandwidth than in the baseline specification: the dots represent the average value
of the outcome variable for 60 meter bins. The unit of observation is a dwelling, a household, and an individual, depending on the
specification. All the variables are normalized to vary between zero and one with higher values representing better outcomes. The
vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to the boundary of gang
territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs.




                                                                     90
                                       Figure A13: Alternative bandwidth: 20 meter bins




Note: The figure illustrates the regression discontinuity plots for the 1st principal components of the dwelling, household, and individual
characteristics from the 2007 census, using a narrower bandwidth than in the baseline specification: the dots represent the average value
of the outcome variable for 20 meter bins. The unit of observation is a dwelling, a household, and an individual, depending on the
specification. All the variables are normalized to vary between zero and one with higher values representing better outcomes. The
vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to the boundary of gang
territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs.




                                                                     91
                                           Figure A14: Availability of public goods




Note: The figure presents the regression discontinuity plots for the number of hospitals and schools per square kilometer. The unit of
observation is a 10 meter bin, denoting distance to the boundary of gang territory. The vertical axis represents the average value of the
outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to the boundary of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed
line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs. The dots represent the average value of the
outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.




                                                                   92
                                              Figure A15: Satisfaction with the availability and quality of public goods
93




     Note: The figure presents the regression discontinuity plots for the questions about satisfaction with the availability and quality of public goods from the 2019 survey. The
     unit of observation is an individual. For all the questions, the respondents were asked to rate the availability and quality of public goods on a scale from 1 (extremely
     unsatisfied) to 7 (extremely satidfied). The vertical axis represents the average value of the outcomes variable; the horizontal axis--distance (in meters) to the boundary
     of gang territory. Neighborhoods to the left of the dashed line are located outside of gang territory; areas to the right are controlled by the gangs. The dots represent the
     average value of the outcome variable in that 30 meter bin.
                 Figure A16: Grid squares, gang homicides in 2003-2004, and nighttime light density




Note: The top part of the figure presents the locations of the gang-related homicides in 2003-2004. The bottom part of the figure presents
the map of nighttime light density in 1995, one year before the change in the United States immigration policy. Both parts of the figure
also present the boundaries of the grid cells used in the analysis.




                                                                   94
Figure A17: Grid squares, gang homicides in 2003-2004, and nighttime light density




                                       95
