                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ON PUBLIC SPENDING AND ECONOMIC UNIONS

                                        Fernando Broner
                                         Alberto Martin
                                         Jaume Ventura

                                      Working Paper 27831
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27831


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2020, Revised November 2020




We thank Philippe Martin, Linda Tesar, and participants at the IMF's 20th Jacques Polak Annual
Research Conference and LBS seminar for their comments. Broner and Martin acknowledge
support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness through the I+D
Excelencia grant (ECO2016-79823-P). Broner, Martin and Ventura acknowledge support from
Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation, through the Severo Ochoa Programme for Centers
of Excellence in R&D grant (CEX2019-000915-S), from the Generalitat de Catalunya (AGAUR
grant 2017SGR01393), the CERCA Programme/Generalitat de Catalunya, and from the
Barcelona GSE Research Network. In addition, both Martin and Ventura acknowledge support
fromthe ERC Consolidator Grant FP7-615651-MacroColl and Horizon 2020 Programme,
Advanced Grant 2020-693512-GEPPS respectively. Janko Heineken and Carl-Wolfram Horn
provided excellent research assistance. The views presented here are those of the authors and not
of the European Central Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Fernando Broner, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On Public Spending and Economic Unions
Fernando Broner, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura
NBER Working Paper No. 27831
September 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. E62,F32,F34,F36,F41,F45

                                           ABSTRACT

We analyze the conduct of fiscal policy in a financially integrated union in the presence of
financial frictions. Frictions create a wedge between the return to investment and the union
interest rate. This leads to an over-spending externality. While the social cost of spending is the
return to investment, governments care mostly about the (depressed) interest rate they face. In
other words, the crowding out effects of public spending are partly "exported" to the rest of the
union. We argue that it may be hard for the union to deal with this externality through the design
of fiscal rules, which are bound to be shaped by the preferences of the median country and not by
efficiency considerations. We also analyze how this overspending externality -- and the union's
ability to deal with it effectively -- changes when the union is financially integrated with the rest
of the world. Finally, we extend our model by introducing a zero lower bound on interest rates
and show that, if financial frictions are severe enough, the union is pushed into a liquidity trap
and the direction of the spending externality is reversed. At such times, fiscal rules that are
appropriate during normal times might backfire.

Fernando Broner                                   Jaume Ventura
CREI - Universitat Pompeu Fabra                   CREI
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27                         Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona - Spain                           08005-Barcelona
and Barcelona GSE                                 SPAIN
fbroner@crei.cat                                  and Barcelona GSE
                                                  and also NBER
Alberto Martin                                    jventura@crei.cat
European Central Bank
Sonnenmannstrasse 20
60314 Frankfurt
Germany
and CREI-Universitat Pompeu Fabra
amartin@crei.cat
1       Introduction
During the last three decades there has been a large and growing spread between estimates of
the return to capital and the interest rates at which many governments borrow. This increase
in the spread has been driven mostly by a reduction in interest rates, while estimates of the
return to capital have remained stable. Figure 1 illustrates this for European countries.1 Since
1990 real interest rates have fallen from 5% to -2%, while the return to capital has remained
around 7%-8%.2




                  Figure 1: Return to Capital and Real Interest Rate in Europe


    What are the implications of these trends for fiscal policy? A popular view is that the
downward trend in interest rates implies that governments should increase public spending.
The argument is very simple: If the rates at which governments borrow reflect the social cost
    1
      Real short-term interest rates are computed from OECD data, by combining the series `Short-term
interest rates' and `Inflation (CPI)'. To compute the EA12 average, each country is weighted by its GDP
in each year. The return to capital is constructed with data from the AMECO database, which provides
aggregated measures for the EA12 countries. We divide the series `Net operating surplus: total economy' by
`Net-Capital Stock at 2015 prices: total economy', where the latter is multiplied by `Price deflator gross fixed
capital formation: total economy'. EA12 includes Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, and Greece.
    2
      Similar trends have been documented for the US. See, for instance, Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas
(2017) and Farhi and Gourio (2019).

                                                       1
       of funds, and the marginal value of public spending has not declined dramatically,
   governments should react to a reduction in their cost of borrowing by spending more.3

  This view seems quite natural, but it relies on the assumption that interest rates do in fact
reflect the social cost of funds. Whether this is the case is not at all clear, especially given
the large and growing spread between interest rates and estimates of the return to capital.
And how one interprets this spread turns out to make a big difference for the effects of fiscal
policy.
  A first interpretation is that the spread in Figure 1 mostly reflects growing mismeasurement
of the return to capital, possibly due to the rise of intangibles.4 In other words, there has
been no change in the spread as the return to capital has fallen alongside the interest rate. A
second interpretation is that the spread reflects growing risk premia from higher investment
risk or lower investor tolerance for such risk. In other words, the risk-adjusted return to capital
has instead fallen alongside interest rates.5 Both of these interpretations suggest that interest
rates reflect the social cost of funds.
  In this paper we focus on a third interpretation of the spread. Market frictions, such as
financial constraints and market power, depress investment demand, creating a spread between
the (risk-adjusted) return to capital and the interest rate.6 To the extent that public spending
crowds out private investment, its social cost is the return to capital, and interest rates provide
a misleading measure of these costs. This would not be a problem in financial autarky since
governments would internalize this discrepancy. But this is not the world we live in. During
the last few decades, there has been a strong process of financial integration, especially within
economic unions such as the euro area.7 We argue that, in such an integrated world, the spread
between the return to capital and the interest rate can lead to excessive public spending.
  To study this problem, we construct a simple multi-country model. Each country has a
government, which chooses how much to spend on a public good that raises the utility of the
country's residents. The private sector, in turn, organizes production within firms. These
   3
      See for example Blanchard (2019). Note that one does not need to appeal to Keynesian arguments to
argue this.
    4
      For evidence consistent with this view, see Farhi and Gourio (2019).
    5
      For evidence in support of this view, see Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017), Farhi and Gourio
(2019), and Marx, Mojon, and Velde (2019).
    6
      For evidence consistent with the relevance of such market frictions see Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold
(2018), Farhi and Gourio (2019), and Faltermeier (2019). The former two show that market power plays a
significant role in accounting for the spread, while the latter shows that financial frictions must also play a
role.
    7
      For an overview of the evidence on international financial integration see Lane and Milesi-Firretti (2017).
For evidence of even faster integration within the euro area see Kalemli-Ozcan, Papaioannou, and Peydr´        o
(2010).

                                                       2
firms hire workers in the labor market, and borrow from savers in the credit market to finance
investment.
  We make two crucial assumptions regarding the credit market. First, it is integrated across
borders, i.e., savers located in any country within the union can lend to firms and governments
located in any other of the union's countries without additional transaction costs. This is the
defining feature of an economic union for us. Second, credit is hampered by a financial friction,
namely, firms can only pledge a fraction of their capital income to savers. This friction limits
borrowing and investment by firms, and generates a wedge between the return to capital and
the interest rate.
  Our first result is that this setup generates an overspending externality. To see this, assume
countries are small relative to the union and take the interest rate as given. From the per-
spective of any country, the opportunity cost of its public spending equals the union interest
rate. From the perspective of the union as a whole, the opportunity cost of public spending is
the return to the private investment that it crowds-out. Since the interest rate is lower than
the return to capital, public spending inefficiently high. This raises the question of whether
some power over public spending should be transferred to the union.
  Our second result, however, is that it is generically difficult for the union to correct the
overspending externality through a centralized system of taxes or limits on spending. To
show this, we make two assumptions about the union's policy-making process. The first one
is that decisions are made democratically, i.e. by majority vote. The second assumption is
that compliance with union decisions is compulsory, i.e. there are no opt-out clauses.
  We then proceed in two steps. First, we endow the union with the power to set idiosyn-
cratic spending limits on its members. Unfortunately, this institutional arrangement produces
undesirable outcomes, as the union uses its fiscal power to impose extreme fiscal austerity and
policy uniformity. The union's median voter, which effectively sets the policy of the group,
does not internalize the local benefits of public spending but only its costs to the rest of the
union in terms of crowding-out. Second, we endow the union with the power to tax public
spending and distribute the proceedings among its members lump-sum. This institutional
arrangement works much better, and might help to mitigate the overspending externality.
But it can also worsen it, or even convert it into an underspending problem. The reason is
that the policy adopted by the union will be guided by the preferences of the median voter
and not by efficiency considerations.
  These results are derived under the assumption that public spending crowds out investment
in the union one-to-one. But this is not the case if part of the union's public spending can


                                               3
be financed with foreign resources, i.e., by issuing debt outside of the union. To allow for
this realistic possibility, we consider the effects of financial integration between the union and
the rest of the world. In particular, we assume that some governments are "credible" and
can issue debt outside of the union. By doing so, they effectively export the crowding-out
effect of their public spending outside of the union. Financial integration with the rest of
the world thus mitigates the overspending externality and raises the efficiency of the decen-
tralized equilibrium. Somewhat paradoxically, we show that it may also reduce the union's
ability to deal effectively with the overspending externality that remains. The reason is that
credible governments have an incentive to impose excessively tight spending limits on union
governments without credibility.
  Finally, we reconcile the view developed here, in which financial frictions lead to exces-
sive public spending, with the widespread notion that public spending may sometimes be
insufficient because governments do not internalize the positive demand externalities of their
spending. To do so, we extend the model and introduce a lower bound on the real interest
rate. When financial frictions are not too severe, the interest rate remains above this lower
bound and our main results remain valid. But if financial frictions become severe enough, pri-
vate demand becomes so low that the interest rate reaches its lower bound. At this point, the
economy enters a liquidity trap, output becomes demand-determined and there is economic
slack. From the perspective of the union, the cost of public spending falls discontinuously
from the marginal return to private investment, which is higher than the interest rate, to the
marginal cost of production, which is below the interest rate. Consequently, the overspending
externality is replaced by an underspending externality. We use this extension of the model
to provide a narrative of the European crisis and to illustrate how austerity measures adopted
during "normal" times can backfire when the economy is in a liquidity trap.
  Our paper is related to the literature on fiscal spillovers. To the extent that most estimates
of fiscal multipliers are lower than one, they suggest that there is some crowding out of
private spending.8 Most of these studies focus on domestic multipliers, however. Those that
account for cross-border spillovers find that these are positive but quantitatively small. More
specifically, spillovers appear to be significant during recessions or when the zero lower bound
binds, and negligible otherwise.9
  This evidence is consistent with our framework. Our model suggests that spillovers should
   8
      Boehm (2011), for instance, estimates the fiscal multipliers of government consumption in the OECD to
be around 0.8, and those of government investment to be practically zero.
    9
      See for instance Beetsma, Giuliodori, and Klaassen (2006), Beetsma and Giuliodori (2011) and Blagrave,
Koloskova, and Vesperoni (2017) on the former, and Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013) and Blagrave,
Koloskova, and Vesperoni (2018) on the latter.

                                                     4
depend negatively on financial linkages, which lead to crowding-out externalities, and ­ at least
in certain states of nature ­ positively on trade linkages, which lead to demand externalities.
Unfortunately, the literature accounts for trade linkages but has not paid attention to financial
linkages. Still, indirect evidence on the role of the latter exists. First, Faini (2006) shows that
fiscal expansions in the euro area raise the interest rate throughout the union, and thus
presumably lead to crowding out abroad. Second, Broner and others (2019) show that fiscal
multipliers are increasing in the share of public debt held by foreigners. This is presumably
because, under strong financial linkages, the negative crowding-out effects of public spending
are suffered less domestically and more abroad.
  Fiscal spillovers create the need for policy coordination, which has been widely studied.
Part of this work was motivated by Europe's adoption of the Maastricht Treaty as it ad-
vanced towards monetary integration.10 A general result is that uncoordinated fiscal policy is
suboptimal if (i) countries have power in world markets;11 (ii) there are distortions that create
a wedge between the "local" and the "global" cost of public spending;12 or (iii) governments
are able to shift part of the fiscal cost of their spending to others.13 Here we focus on (ii) and
study an environment with financial frictions, in which the interest rate (the "local" cost) lies
below the return to capital (the "global" cost). Note that, while most of the work based on
(iii) has emphasized externalities generated by fiscal deficits, we focus here on those generated
by public spending itself.
  When analyzing the need for policy coordination, we are indeed touching upon a large
literature in political economy that asks which level of government (here the countries or the
union) is the right one to make a decision (here public spending). The traditional approach
to this problem, due to Oates (1972, 1999), views the union as a benevolent dictator subject
to a policy-uniformity constraint that forces it to impose the same policies to all its member
countries. We do not take this approach here. Instead, we assume that the union can tailor
its policies to the needs of its members, and that it chooses policies democratically. See
Lockwood (2002), Besley and Coate (2003) and Ventura (2019). This last paper shows that
the political equilibria discussed here are robust under more complex voting schemes, and it
   10
      See Beetsma and Giuliodori (2010) for a survey of this literature.
   11
      Devereux (1991), Epifani and Gancia (2009), and Hettig and M¨       uller (2018) show that, when public
spending improves countries' terms of trade, global spending may be inefficiently high. The latter, like us,
also find that the externality may switch signs when the interest rate is constrained by a lower bound.
   12
      See Chang (1990), Chari and Kehoe (1990) and Canzoneri and Diba (1991).
   13
      The literature on "balanced budget rules", for instance, emphasizes the benefits of limiting fiscal deficits in
the presence of cross-border fiscal transfers (e.g. Bassetto and Sargent (2006) and Azzimonti, Battaglini, and
Coate (2016)). In a similar vein, Gourinchas, Martin, and Messer (2018) analyze the cross-border spillovers
that arise from fiscal transfers or inflationary bias within a monetary union.



                                                         5
compares them to those that arise in the traditional approach.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 develops the baseline model and derives
the over-spending externality. Section 3 analyzes the effects of endowing the union with fiscal
powers. Section 4 introduces financial integration between the union and the rest of the world.
Finally, Section 5 modifies the baseline model to allow for liquidity traps. Section 6 concludes.


2      A fiscal policy problem
We study an economic union with countries that have heterogeneous preferences over public
spending. Labor markets are local, but there is a single financial market for all union members.
As a result, public spending choices in one country are transmitted to the rest of the union
through the common interest rate.
    Public spending crowds out investment. Its social cost, thus, is the marginal product of
the capital it displaces. Its private cost, however, is the interest rate paid on the debt used
to finance it. If financial markets work well, the interest rate equals the marginal product of
capital and decentralized governments choose the efficient level of public spending. If financial
markets do not work well, a wedge arises between the interest rate and the marginal product
of capital. In particular, the interest rate drops below the marginal product of capital if credit
constraints depress the demand for credit. As a result, decentralized governments do not pay
the full social cost of borrowing and choose levels of public spending that are too high.
    This section describes this overspending externality and the factors that determine its im-
portance. It also provides a recipe to fight it consisting of: (i) a set of fiscal policies that move
the union from the decentralized equilibrium to a constrained Pareto optimum, and (ii) a set
of country transfers that ensure that the efficiency gains from this move are equally shared by
all union members.


2.1     The setup
There are two dates, Today and Tomorrow. The union contains a unit mass population,
uniformly distributed across countries. There is a single consumption good that can be shipped
across countries at zero trade costs. There are two factors of production, capital and labor,
which can produce together only if located in the same country. The union has removed all
barriers to trade.
    Countries differ on their taste for public goods, as measured by a parameter   [L , H ] .
Let F ( ) be its distribution function, i.e., F (x) is the measure or share of member countries

                                                 6
such that   x . Since all countries have the same population, F (x) is also the measure
or share of the union's population such that   x . Since (i) there is no other source of
heterogeneity across countries; and (ii) we always focus on symmetric equilibria, we can index
country variables by  . For instance, we refer to the country with parameter  as "country
 ", and write its utility function as U ( ) .
  Country  maximizes the utility function

                                          U ( ) = c ( ) +  · ln g ( ) ,                                           (1)

where c ( )  0 and g ( )  0 are the consumption of private and public goods Tomorrow.
Equation (1) implies that (i) there is no consumption of private or public goods Today; and
(ii) utility is linear in the consumption of private goods Tomorrow. This choice of preferences
simplifies the analysis substantially. For instance, it makes the savings decision trivial as
countries save any income they have Today.14
  All countries start Today with an endowment of private goods equal to  . Tomorrow, their
income will consist of the wage w ( ) , plus the return to savings R ·  , minus taxes t ( ) .
Thus, we can write the budget constraint of country  Tomorrow as follows:

                                        c ( ) = w ( ) + R ·  - t ( ) .                                            (2)

Note that the wage can vary across countries, since labor markets are local. But the interest
rate is common to all countries since there is a global financial market.
  To produce private goods, firms use capital and labor using a standard constant-returns
technology:
                                                y ( ) = f (k ( )) ,                                               (3)

where y ( ) and k ( ) are output and capital per worker, respectively. The function f (·) is
continuous, twice differentiable, with f (·) > 0 , f (·) < 0 and limk0 f (k ) =  . To produce
one unit of capital for Tomorrow, one unit of private goods must be invested Today.
  To produce public goods, governments use public capital only. We normalize units so that
one unit of public capital produces one unit of public goods. To produce one unit of public
capital for Tomorrow, one unit of private goods must be spent Today. Thus, g ( ) stands for
both public goods and public capital, and we refer to it as public spending.

   14
      With quasi-linear preferences, it is theoretically possible to have equilibria with corner solutions, i.e., such
that c ( ) = 0 for some  . We disregard these equilibria throughout and consider only equilibria such that
c ( ) > 0 for all  .

                                                          7
  Let us now describe how firms work. Firms are nothing but contracts between workers
that provide labor and savers that provide funds to invest in capital, respectively. Under
the optimal contract, workers receive the marginal product of labor while savers receive the
marginal product of capital. Ex-post, however, both factors would like to appropriate all
output. We now introduce a standard limited-pledgeability constraint. In particular, firms
are controlled by workers and they can only pledge a fraction   (0, 1) of the capital income
to savers. Thus, ex-ante contracts must reflect this constraint and output is distributed as
follows:
                               w ( ) = f (k ( )) -  · f (k ( )) · k ( ) ,                                (4)

                                            R =  · f (k ( )) .                                           (5)

This limited-pledgeability constraint plays a central role in what follows. It reduces the
demand for savings and it creates a wedge between the interest rate and the marginal product
of capital. Thus, savers only receive a fraction  of the marginal product of the capital they
finance (See Equation (5)). And workers receive not only the full marginal product of their
labor, but also a fraction 1 -  of the marginal product of capital (see Equation (4)).15
  Since all countries have the same technology and the friction  is common to all countries,
it follows that all countries must have the same stock of capital and wage. Indeed, for a given
interest rate R , Equations (4) and (5) define these common values w ( ) = w and k ( ) = k
. Thus, factor prices are equalized across countries and, despite the limited-pledgeability
constraint, the union's capital stock is efficiently distributed across countries. We shall see
shortly, however, that this constraint distorts the size of the union's capital stock.
  Let us consider next the financial market. On the supply side, savers supply funds. On the
demand side, firms and governments demand funds to invest. Since there is no production or
default risk, there is a unique interest rate R for all borrowers that clears the financial market
                                             H
                                     =           [k + g ( )] · dF ( ) .                                  (6)
                                            L



  15
     To provide a more formal justification for this constraint, assume that only a subset of individuals
("entrepreneurs") with with mass  in each country can write contracts with savers and workers. Assume,
moreover, that entrepreneurs can divert a fraction 1 -  of capital income ex post. It is straightforward to
show that the financing that entrepreneurs obtain from savers cannot exceed

                                               · f (k )
                                                          ·  · .
                                            R -  · f (k )

The case that we consider can be interpreted as the limit in which   0 , so that ­ to satisfy market clearing
­ the borrowing constraint is always binding and R   · f (k ) .

                                                     8
Equation (6) simply says that the interest rate must be such that the supply of funds by savers
must equal the demand for funds by firms and governments.
  We can now collect the results obtained so far to find that

                   U ( ) = f ( - g ) +  · f ( - g ) · g - t ( ) +  · ln g ( ) ,                (7)

where g is total union public spending or public capital (as a rule, we denote union totals by
omitting the index  )
                                            H
                                       g=       g ( ) · dF ( ) .                               (8)
                                            L

Equations (7)-(8) show how utility depends on the fiscal policies of all countries. Naturally,
low taxes and high public spending at home raise welfare. But fiscal policy in the rest of
the union also affects welfare at home. In particular, high public spending around the union
reduces the capital stock and this lowers utility. This crowding-out effect will play a central
role in the discussion that follows.
  To complete the model, we need to explain how fiscal policy is determined. That is, we
need a theory for the functions {g ( ) , t ( )} . Before developing such a theory, we note that
the equilibrium functions {g ( ) , t ( )} must be such that
                           H
                               [ · f ( - g ) · g ( ) - t ( )] · dF ( ) = 0.                    (9)
                          L


Equation (9) says that debt payments must be financed by taxes. This is an aggregate or
union resource constraint for governments. But it does not preclude transfers between country
governments. If  · f ( - g ) · g ( ) > t ( ) for some  , for instance, part of the debt payments
of country  are financed by a transfer from governments of other countries. Since private
consumption cannot be negative, the equilibrium functions {g ( ) , t ( )} must also satisfy

                               t ( )  f ( - g ) +  · f ( - g ) · g .                          (10)


2.2    The decentralized equilibrium
Let us start by describing the decentralized or Nash equilibrium of this world. In such an
equilibrium, (i) there are no transfers across governments, i.e., t ( ) = R · g ( ) ; and (ii) each
government chooses g ( ) so as to maximize U ( ) .




                                                 9
  Without transfers, we can write the utility function in Equation (7) as follows:

                    U ( ) = f ( - g ) +  · f ( - g ) · [g - g ( )] +  · ln g ( ) .                        (11)

Then, government maximization implies

                                           
                                               =  · f  - gD ,                                             (12)
                                        gD ( )
                                                                                          H
where g D ( ) is public spending in the decentralized equilibrium, and g D =              L
                                                                                              g D ( ) · dF ( )
. Equation (12) says that governments choose spending so that the marginal utility of public
goods equals the interest rate.16
  Equation (12) defines g D ( ) as a function of g D . We can use it to obtain (implicitly) the
entire distribution of public spending:

                                                                A
                                          gD · f  - gD =          ,                                       (13)
                                                                
                                                         
                                             g D ( ) =     · gD ,                                         (14)
                                                         A
                                                      H
where A is the union average  , i.e. A =              L
                                                            · dF ( ) . Equation (13) implicitly defines
                                                     D
the union's average public spending. For g                [0,  ] , the LHS defines a continuous and
increasing function that takes values in [0, ) , while the RHS is a constant. Thus, we know
that Equation (13) defines a unique solution g D . Moreover, it is easy to check that this
solution is increasing in  and decreasing on  . The reason is that an increase in  lowers
the interest rate, while an increase in  raises it. Equation (14) shows how the union's public
spending is distributed across countries. Not surprisingly, country level public spending is
increasing in  . Also, we note that changes in  and  affect public spending in all countries
proportionally.


2.3     The overspending externality
From a country perspective, the cost of government debt is the interest rate. From a union
perspective, however, the cost of government debt is the marginal product of capital. To see

  16
      The simplicity of Equation (12) is in part due to some convenient assumptions. One should read this
equation essentially as stating the optimal rule to allocate public and private capital from the perspective of
the country. This rule says that the marginal product of public capital (which here is one!) times the marginal
utility of public goods must equal the interest rate times the marginal utility of private goods (which here is
one!).

                                                      10
this, we construct the set of constrained Pareto optima. In particular, we choose the functions
{g ( ) , t ( )} so as to maximize the utility in Equation (7) for some country  , keeping the
utility of all other countries constant at some pre-specified levels. By changing these levels,
we find the set of all optima. Note that this is a notion of constrained Pareto efficiency since
it takes the allocation of capital and labor as given by the market.
  There are many Pareto optima in this subset, each of them with a different function t ( ) .
But all of them have the same function g P ( ) , which is defined as17

                                                 
                                                     = f  - gP ,                                             (15)
                                            gP   ( )
                                                                                            H
where g P ( ) the Pareto efficient provision of public goods, and g P =                     L
                                                                                                g P ( ) · dF ( ) .
Equation (15) says that Pareto efficiency requires that public spending be chosen so that the
marginal utility of public goods equals the marginal product of capital.
  Equation (15) defines g P ( ) as a function of g P . We can use it to obtain (implicitly) the
entire distribution of public spending:


                                            g P · f  - g P = A ,                                             (16)
                                                             
                                                 g P ( ) =     · gP .                                        (17)
                                                             A
Equation (16) defines a unique solution g P which is increasing in  . Comparing equations
(13) and (16), we find that union spending in the decentralized equilibrium is too high relative
to the Pareto optima, i.e. g D > g P . Equation (17) shows that public spending is indeed too
high in all countries, i.e. g D ( ) > g P ( ) for all  .
  The pledgeability constraint depresses the interest rate and this creates an overspending
externality. From a union perspective, an additional unit of public spending by country
 reduces the union's capital stock by one unit, which in turn reduces union's output by
f ( - g ) units. The unit reduction in the union's capital stock is split across countries
uniformly, so that all countries experiment an infinitesimal reduction in their capital stock
and output. A fraction  of the output loss is suffered by savers all over the union. But
this loss is compensated by country  , who needs to borrow to pay for the additional unit
of public spending and offers savers government debt that is a perfect substitute for capital.
A fraction 1 -  of the output loss is suffered by workers all over the union. But workers
receive no compensation for their loss. Since country  is infinitesimal, only an infinitesimal

  17
       This is because we are ignoring equilibria with corner solutions. See footnote 13.

                                                        11
fraction of this loss affects its own workers. Thus, country  does not take this output cost
into account when choosing its public spending.
  Some readers might be asking why do we use the label "overspending" instead of "overbor-
rowing" when we refer to the externality. After all, country governments are financing their
public spending exclusively with debt. Is it really spending or is it debt that matters?
  To find out, assume now that countries can finance their spending with a combination of
taxes Today, i.e. t0 ( ) ; and taxes Tomorrow, i.e. t1 ( ) . Then, the budget constraint of
country  becomes:
                                  c ( ) = w ( ) + R · [ - t0 ( )] - t1 ( ) ,                       (18)

In the decentralized equilibrium, there are no transfers among countries and the budget con-
straint of the government of country  is now given by:

                                          t1 ( ) = R · [g ( ) - t0 ( )] .                          (19)

For given spending, taxes Today reduce government debt and the need for taxes Tomorrow. A
quick look at Equations (18) and (19) reveals that this extension makes no difference. Equation
(11) still holds and all our results flow from it.18 Thus, Ricardian equivalence applies and a
shift from debt to taxes has no effects on consumption and welfare.
  This is an important observation. We analyze next various policies such as limits and taxes
on spending. As we do so, we should keep in mind that these policies cannot simply be
replaced by limits and taxes on debt. The latter would only produce a shift from debt to
taxes without affecting consumption and welfare.


2.4       A blueprint for a policy improvement
We next show how to produce a Pareto improvement over the decentralized equilibrium. Con-
sider the gain that country  would experience after a move from the decentralized equilibrium




  18
       To see this, use Equation (18) instead of Equation (2) to find that:

                      U ( ) = f ( - g ) +  · f ( - g ) · g - R · t0 ( ) - t1 ( ) +  · ln g ( ) .
Then, use Equation (19) to recover Equation (11).

                                                         12
to a Pareto optimum with a tax function tP ( )

               U P ( ) - U D ( ) = f  - g P - f  - g D + A · ln g P - ln g D                         (20)
                                  + ( - A ) · 1 -  + ln g P - ln g D
                                  +  ·  - tP ( ) .

Equation (20) provides a useful decomposition of this gain. The first line shows the average
utility effect of the move, which is always positive. The second line contains the differential
utility effect of the move in the absence of transfers, i.e. if we impose tP ( ) = R · g P ( ) =  · 
. On the one hand, countries with  > A experiment a larger reduction in their borrowing
and debt payments and therefore a larger increase of private consumption. On the other
hand, these countries also experience a larger utility loss as their consumption of public goods
shrinks. Finally, the third line shows the transfer that country  receives which can be positive
or negative.
    There are various sets of transfers such that all countries gain from a move from the decen-
tralized equilibrium to a Pareto optimum. For instance, if we set taxes as follows:

                         tP ( ) =  ·  + ( - A ) · 1 -  + ln g P - ln g D                             (21)

we have that (i) the union raises enough funds to pay for the public spending g P ( ) ; and (ii)
all countries equally share the gains from a shift from g D ( ) to g P ( ) .19 The set of transfers
implicit in Equation (21) are given by tP ( ) - R · g P ( ) = ( - A ) · 1 -  + ln g P - ln g D .
    This discussion sets the stage for the analysis that follows. There are gains from cooperation
and the question is how to structure interactions among countries to reap these gains. In
particular, if a move from g D ( ) to g P ( ) can be coupled with an appropriate set of country
transfers it raises the welfare of all countries. How could the union produce such a move?


3        A union with fiscal powers
A pure economic analysis of the fiscal policy problem would end with the solution described by
Equations (16) and (17). These equations provide the recipe for a fiscal policy that eliminates
the overspending externality, while Equation (21) provides a financing scheme that ensures
equal sharing of the gains from such a move. What else could one wish for? Unfortunately, it

    19
    To show (i) substitute Equation (21) into Equation (9) and use Equation (15). To show (ii), substitute
Equation (21) into Equation (20) and note that only the first line remains.

                                                   13
is unlikely that such a fiscal policy be the outcome of the union's policy-making process. Eco-
nomic unions are not mythical social planners, but real-life institutions that produce imperfect
outcomes. It is to these outcomes that we turn next.
  We make two assumptions about the union's policy-making process. The first one is that
decisions are made democratically, i.e. by majority vote. The second assumption is that
compliance with union decisions is compulsory, i.e. there are no opt-out clauses.
  First, we endow the union with the power to set spending limits. Unfortunately, this
institutional arrangement produces undesirable outcomes, as the union uses its fiscal power to
impose extreme fiscal austerity and policy uniformity. Second, we endow the union with the
power to tax public spending and distribute the proceedings among its members lump-sum.
This institutional arrangement works much better. It might help mitigate the overspending
externality. But it can also worsen it, or even convert it into an underspending problem.


3.1    Setting spending limits
Let the union have the power to set spending limits. Recognizing that countries have different
tastes for public goods, we allow these limits to be country-specific. That is, the union chooses
           ¯ ( )   and then countries choose g ( ) subject to g ( )  g
a function g                                                         ¯ ( ) . The lower bound
on spending limits  > 0 is assumed to be arbitrarily small but not zero. This is just a technical
requirement to ensure that utilities are always well defined.
  These case-by-case spending limits provide a natural starting point for the analysis. First,
they are relevant in practice. Even though economic unions are often built on common rules
(e.g. Maastricht for the European Union), it is also common to grant individual exceptions
to these rules. In the case of the euro area, for instance, individual countries have received
idiosyncratic treatment in times of crisis. Through the lens of our model, these are equivalent
to country-specific restrictions. Second, case-by-case limits are conceptually important. They
illustrate why a high degree of flexibility, which might seem appropriate in an heterogeneous
union, may backfire in practice.
  The equilibrium with spending limits satisfies: (i) there are no transfers across governments,
i.e., t ( ) = R · g ( ) ; (ii) spending limits are chosen case by case through majority voting;
and (iii) each government chooses g ( ) so as to maximize U ( ) subject to g ( )  g
                                                                                  ¯ ( ) .
  Without transfers, Equation (11) still applies. Thus, for given spending limits g
                                                                                  ¯ ( ) , country
 chooses its spending as follows:

                                                  
                            g U ( ) = min                  ,g
                                                            ¯ ( ) ,                         (22)
                                             · f ( - g U )

                                               14
                                                                                H
where g U ( ) is the equilibrium fiscal policy under the union, and g U =       L
                                                                                    g U ( ) · dF ( )
. Equation (22) says that, if the spending limit is not binding, country  chooses public
spending so that the marginal utility of public goods equals the interest rate. If the spending
limit is binding, though, the country sets its public spending equal to the limit. Adding up
across countries, we find that the union's average spending is implicitly determined as follows:
                                H
                                                
                        gU =        min                   ¯ ( ) · dF ( ) .
                                                         ,g                                    (23)
                               L           · f ( - g U )

Equation (23) shows that relaxing a binding limit g
                                                  ¯ ( ) for country  raises the union's average
spending g U , i.e. g U  g
                         ¯ ( ) > 0 . There is a direct effect, which is the increase in public
spending in country  itself. But there is also an indirect effect since the interest rate increases
and this lowers public spending in countries where the spending limit is not binding. This
indirect effect cannot fully offset the direct one, though.
  Equations (22)-(23) determine the equilibrium fiscal policy for given spending limits g
                                                                                        ¯ ( ) .
The union would implement a Pareto optimum if it could somehow deliver the policy outcome:
¯ ( ) = g P ( ) for all  . Unfortunately, this is not going to happen as it will become clear
g
soon.
  The first step is to determine preferences over policy. An almost trivial observation is that
                                                                                    ¯ ( )  0
relaxing its own spending limit cannot lower the welfare of country  , i.e. U ( )/  g
. A less trivial observation is that relaxing the spending limit for other countries, i.e.  = 
, has the following effect on the welfare of country  :

        U ( )    g U
              =-       · (1 - ) · f  - g U +  · f              - g U · g U - g U ( )    .      (24)
        g
        ¯ ( )    g
                 ¯ ( )

Relaxing spending limits in other countries increases the union's average public spending, and
this raises the interest rate and crowds out capital. This has two effects for country  , which
correspond to the two terms inside the brackets. The first term captures the wage loss in
country  that results from a reduction in its capital stock. This is nothing but the cost of
the overspending externality. The second term is a terms-of-trade effect that results from an
increase in the interest rate. This terms-of trade effect is a cost for debtor countries (i.e.,
g U ( ) > g U ), but a benefit for creditor ones (i.e., g U ( ) < g U ). Since the only asymmetry
across countries is the taste for public goods, public spending is the key determinant of the net
foreign asset position. Countries choosing high public spending are debtors, while countries
choosing low public spending are creditors.
  Preferences over other countries' spending limits are determined by the balance of these

                                                15
effects. If country  is either a debtor or a small creditor, the balance of these effects is
negative and its welfare grows monotonically as the spending limit of any other single country
becomes tighter. If country  is instead a large enough creditor, the terms-of-trade benefit
exceeds the cost of the overspending externality and its welfare declines monotonically as
the spending of any other single country becomes tighter. Thus, for a given set of spending
limits for all other countries, country  's preferences over the spending limit of country  are
single-peaked. There is a threshold value of  such that for all countries below the threshold
the peak corresponds to the tightest spending limit, while for all countries above the threshold
the peak corresponds to any non-binding spending limit.
  The union chooses spending limits case by case, which means that a specific spending
limit is voted for each country separately. Since preferences are single peaked and the policy
space is unidimensional, the median voter theorem applies to each of these votes. Thus, the
spending limits for all countries coincide with the bliss point of the median country M , i.e.
F (M ) = 0.5 .20 Interestingly, this procedure might generate multiple equilibria. The reason
is that the outcome of the vote for the spending limit of a given country depends on the
outcomes of the votes for the spending limits of other countries.
  There is always an equilibrium in which all spending limits are as tight as possible:

                                                g
                                                ¯ ( ) = .                                             (25)

To prove this, we simply note that, if g
                                       ¯ ( ) =  for all  , the median country is neither a
debtor nor a creditor and it prefers to set g
                                            ¯ ( ) =  for all  = M . Thus, the union ends up
imposing a single limit to all countries. Moreover, this limit is the tightest possible one. Since
 is arbitrarily small, endowing the union with the power to set spending limits produces an
arbitrarily large utility loss. One can describe this undesirable outcome as the union imposing
an extreme austerity bias and a strong policy uniformity.
  Why does the union exhibit such extreme austerity bias? An increase in public spending
in any one country would generate a local benefit, but also a negative externality in all other
countries in the union. In the decentralized equilibrium, countries maximize the local benefit
and disregard the externality. Since the externality is negative, the decentralized equilibrium
produces overspending. In the union equilibrium, the union minimizes the externality and dis-
regards the local benefit. Since the local benefits are positive, the union equilibrium produces
underspending.

  20
    To be precise, the assumption that F (·) is continuous and differentiable ensures that in all votes the
median voter is always arbitrarily close to M .

                                                    16
  Why does the union exhibit such a strong policy-uniformity? We have assumed that the
lower bound for the spending limit is the same for all countries. If this lower bound were
to vary across countries, the spending limits chosen by the union would be equal to each
country's lower bound. Thus, the strong policy-uniformity result follows from the combination
of extreme austerity and a common lower bound for spending limits.
  Is this undesirable equilibrium unique? The answer is affirmative if the median country's
taste for public goods is not too low relative to that of the average country. Otherwise, there
is also an equilibrium in which the spending limits are irrelevant, i.e.

                                         ¯ ( )  g D ( ) .
                                         g                                                   (26)

To prove this, simply note that, if g ( ) = g D ( ) for all  , the median country prefers to set
a non-binding limit if and only if

                             M     1-     f  - gD
                               <1-    ·                    .                                 (27)
                             A          -f ( - g D ) · g D

That is, the median country has to have a sufficiently large creditor position in the decentral-
ized equilibrium. If this is the case, there is an equilibrium in which the union sets non-binding
limits and these have no effects on public spending.
  We conclude therefore that endowing the union with the power to set spending limits is a
bad idea. At best, it is ineffective. At worst, it generates harmful uniformity and austerity
biases. The union sets policy country by country and, when each country is considered, all the
other countries (which naturally form a majority) care only about externalities and disregard
local benefits. Thus, they all vote for the tightest possible spending limit. This converts an
overspending problem into an underspending one.
  One way to soften the austerity bias created by the union is to reduce its power and force
it to impose a single uniform spending limit for all countries. Such a restriction links local
benefits and externalities in the union's decision-making process. When each country votes
for this single limit, it knows that it will affect its own spending in addition to the spending
of other countries. Thus, a single spending limit g
                                                  ¯ would soften the austerity bias. This
cannot be the right solution, though, since it does so by imposing an undesirable degree of
policy uniformity. This seems too high a cost to pay. Indeed, there are better institutional
arrangements that produce outcomes that respect preference heterogeneity.
  An alternative, more classic, approach to fight the overspending externality consists of
taxing public spending. If we give the union the power to set a tax schedule country by

                                               17
country, the same problems resurface. Essentially, the union's strong austerity bias leads it
to choose a set of country-specific taxes that produce a uniform and arbitrarily low level of
public spending. If we instead restrict the union to choose a single tax for all countries, local
benefits and externalities become linked in the union's decision-making process. Moreover,
this is achieved without much of a cost. Having a uniform tax is much less costly (in fact, it is
the right thing to do!) than having a single spending limit (which is clearly the wrong thing
to do!). We explore this idea next.


3.2    Taxing public spending
Let us now endow the union with the power to choose a single tax schedule for all countries.
In particular, let the union choose t  0 such that

                                   t ( ) = -z + t · R · g ( ) ,                                  (28)

where z is a lump-sum transfer that balances the union's budget:
                                              H
                              z = (t - 1) ·        R · g ( ) · dF ( ) .                          (29)
                                              L


If t = 1 , each country pays for its own public spending and there are no transfers, z = 0 . If
t > 1 the union imposes a tax on public spending and transfers are positive, z < 0 . If instead
t < 1 , the union gives a subsidy on public spending and transfers are negative, z < 0 . As
before, we assume for technical reasons that t <  , where  is assumed to be arbitrarily large.
  The equilibrium with taxes/subsidies on public spending is such that (i) the tax schedule is
given by Equations (28)-(29); (ii) the union chooses t through majority voting; and (iii) each
government chooses g ( ) so as to maximize U ( ) .
  We can now write the utility of country  as follows:

                U ( ) = f ( - g ) + t ·  · f ( - g ) · [g - g ( )] +  · ln g ( ) .               (30)

Thus, for a given tax/subsidy t , we now have that:

                                       
                                           = t ·  · f  - gU ,                                    (31)
                                  gU   ( )
                                                                                  H
where g U ( ) is again the equilibrium fiscal policy under the union, and g U =   L
                                                                                      g U ( ) · dF ( )
. Equation (31) says that country  chooses public spending so that the marginal utility of

                                                  18
public goods equals the after-tax interest rate. Equation (31) implies the following distribution
of spending:
                                                               A
                                        gU · f  - gU =            ,                                      (32)
                                                               t·
                                                        
                                            g U ( ) =     · gU .                                         (33)
                                                        A
The comparative statics are essentially the same as those of the decentralized equilibrium,
except that now we have an additional variable which is the tax/subsidy t .21 An increase
in t raises the cost of borrowing and reduces public spending in all countries proportionally.
Thus, there is a one-to-one mapping between g U and t and, as a result, also between g U ( )
and t .
  Equations (32)-(33) determine the equilibrium fiscal policy for a given tax/subsidy t . If
the union somehow chose t = -1 , it would implement a Pareto optimum.22 Whether this
happens is unclear, though.
  Let us start again by describing the policy preferences of country  . That is, we want to
know how U ( ) changes with t , under the restriction that the distribution of public spending
is given by Equations (32)-(33). A bit of straightforward algebra shows that country  has
                                                                                      A -1
preferences over t that exhibit an inverted-U shape with a maximum given when t =       ·
                                                                                       
.23 This implies that the optimal tax/subsidy for country  is such that g U ( ) = g U .
  The union chooses the tax/subsidy by majority vote. Since preferences are single-peaked
and the policy-space is unidimensional, the median voter theorem applies. Thus, the equilib-
rium tax rate is the bliss point of the median country

                                                   A
                                              t=     · -1 .                                              (34)
                                                   M

The equilibrium tax achieves a Pareto optimum if and only if M = A . Generically, there is
no reason to expect this to happen. If the median country has a strong taste for public goods,

  21
     To see this, compare Equations (32)-(33) to Equations (13)-(14).
  22
     To see this, simply note that, as t  -1 , Equations (32)-(33) converge to Equations (16)-(17).
  23
     To see this, use Equations (32)-(33) to rewrite the utility function in Equation (30) as follows:

                                                                      
                              U ( ) = f  - g U + A -  +  · ln           · gU    .
                                                                      A

Thus, U ( ) is increasing in g U when g U is low, but decreasing when g U is large. The maximum or peak is
given by:
                                                             
                                              f  - gU = U .
                                                            g
                                                                          A
Equation (32) shows that the tax rate that delivers this outcome is t =       · -1 .

                                                     19
then the equilibrium tax is too low and it can even be a subsidy. If the median country has a
weak taste for public goods, then the tax is too high.


3.3    Discussion
All of our results so far have been derived assuming that countries are heterogeneous only in
their taste for public goods. This dimension of heterogeneity is important because it allows us
to consider the issue of policy uniformity. A natural question is whether other dimensions of
heterogeneity might lead to different results. Assume, for instance, that countries differ only
in their wealth or savings: in particular, wealth   [L , H ] , and A denotes the average
level of wealth.
  It can be shown that, in this case, all countries have the same equilibrium level of public
spending and investment. However, since they have different levels of wealth some countries
are creditors (those with  > A ) and others are debtors (those with  < A ). Still, none of
our main results change. Relative to the constrained optimum, equilibrium public spending
is too high. A union with fiscal powers, moreover, has a hard time restoring constrained
efficiency. To see this, consider first the case of spending limits. Let M denote the wealth
of the median country. If M < A , the median country is a debtor and spending limits
lead to extreme austerity. Tight spending limits benefit the median country both by reducing
the crowding-out effect of public spending and by lowering the equilibrium interest rate. If
M > A , these two effects go in opposite directions and, once the median country becomes
a large enough creditor, the spending limits will become irrelevant. Thus, the same two
equilibria arise.
  Consider next the case of a union tax on public spending. This tax will in general be
inefficient. The reason is that, if the median country is a debtor (i.e., M < A ), it will prefer
a suboptimally high tax to benefit from the lower equilibrium interest rate. Conversely, if the
median country is a creditor (i.e., M > A ), it will prefer a suboptimally low tax.
  The key takeaway is that endowing the union with the power to tax public spending is likely
to work if the median country is not too far from the average one. Is this result robust though?
It seems to rely heavily on the observation that, in our environment, a single or common tax to
public spending is the right solution to the overspending problem. And this, in turn, seems to
be a direct consequence of assuming that a unit of spending by any government reduces private
investment by exactly the same amount. But this need not be the case if some governments
have access to financial markets outside of the union. We show this next.



                                               20
4      Domestic and foreign debt
Let us consider the effects of financial integration between the union and the rest of the world.
To simplify the analysis, we adopt the classic small-economy assumption and take the world
interest rate as given. This approach allows us to analyze the effects of alternative institutional
arrangements for union welfare, but not for the rest of the world. In this regard, our welfare
analysis should be considered only as partial.
    Financial integration has one key benefit for the union: namely, it allows it to "export"
some of the crowding out effects of public spending. When the union is in a regime of financial
autarky, as in the previous sections, all the resources needed to finance public spending must
come from within the union, i.e. by issuing "domestic" debt. Under financial integration,
however, some of the resources to finance public spending can be imported from the rest of
the world, i.e., by issuing "foreign" debt.
    By enabling the union to (at least partially) finance its public spending through foreign debt,
financial integration mitigates the crowding-out effect of public spending and the associated
externality. This clearly enhances welfare in the decentralized equilibrium. But the ability to
issue foreign debt may be unevenly distributed across countries in the union. Some countries
may have substantial access to the rest of the world's financial markets, whereas others may
have none at all. This difference among countries may exacerbate their heterogeneity in
preferences, in turn, which may severely distort their collective decision making under a fiscal
union. Ultimately, there are potentially two reasons why financial integration reduces the
benefits of providing the union with fiscal tools: it mitigates the overspending externality and
it distorts the union's decision-making process.


4.1      Financial integration
The effects of financial integration depend on the assumptions we make about international
financial frictions. We have assumed so far that these frictions are so severe that the union
cannot trade with the rest of the world. If we went to the other extreme and made these
frictions negligible, the overspending externality would disappear at once. To see this, note
that we would simply have to replace Equation (6) with

                                              R = R ,                                         (35)

where R is the interest rate in the rest of the world. It is straightforward to check that, in this
case, the capital stock of the union is independent of public spending. All the crowding-out

                                                 21
effects are exported to the rest of the world. There is no fiscal policy problem (at least from
the union's perspective), and there is therefore no need to endow the union with any fiscal
power.24
  But this extreme case is not realistic either. In earlier research, we have argued that contract
enforcement tends to discriminate against foreigners (see Broner and others (2014)). For
instance, courts might discriminate against foreigners when enforcing debt contracts. In this
case, workers could only pledge a fraction  of the marginal product of capital to foreigners,
with  <  . As a result, there is a range of inaction in which firms do not borrow from
foreign savers, while union savers do not lend to the rest of the world. This range is given by

                                         · f (k ) < R <  · f (k ) ,                                          (36)

where k is the equilibrium capital in the union.25 Since we are interested in the crowding-out
effects of public spending, we focus throughout on equilibria that satisfy Equation (36).26
  Financial integration offers governments around the union the opportunity to borrow from
the rest of the world at an interest rate that is below that of the union. All governments
would want to take advantage of this opportunity. The question is, of course, whether they
can. After all, courts also discriminate against foreigners when enforcing public debt con-
tracts. We assume that there is a fraction 1 -  of governments that have built a reputation
and can credibly commit to repay their debts without resorting to courts. These "credible"
governments can borrow from the rest of the world at the low interest rate R , and they
naturally choose to do so. The remaining fraction  of union governments are not credible
and cannot borrow from the rest of the world. To denote country types, we use the indicator
variable   {0, 1} , and set  = 1 to indicate a country with a credible government and  = 0
otherwise. Thus, countries are now defined by the pair (,  ) .



   24
       If the union were large relative to the world, all the effects we discussed in previous sections would still
apply. Spending would crowd out union capital, although less than one-to-one. Part of the crowding-out
effect would be exported outside of the union. Also, the union would import crowding-out effects from the
rest of the world. To determine the welfare effects of these "exports" and "imports" we would need to take a
stand on how strong financial frictions are outside the union, and how policymaking is conducted there. These
dimensions of the problem are certainly interesting and worth studying in future research.
    25
       Sufficient conditions for Equation (36) to hold are that (i) R <  · f ( ) ; and (ii)  be low enough.
    26
       If R lies outside of this range, public spending does not crowd out union investment. To see this, note
that there are only two possibilities in any such equilibrium. First, R =  · f (k ) , in which case union firms
borrow from the rest of the world at the margin. Second, R =  · f (k ) , in which case union savers lend
to the rest of the world at the margin. In either case, the capital stock in the union is independent of public
spending in the union.

                                                        22
4.2     Decentralized equilibrium
In a decentralized equilibrium, each government chooses g (,  ) so as to maximize

               U (,  ) = f ( - g0 ) +  · f ( - g0 ) · g0                                                 (37)
                         - [(1 -  ) ·  · f ( - g0 ) +  · R ] · g (,  ) +  · ln g (,  ) ,

                                                                  H
where g0 denotes spending by "non-credible" countries, i.e., g0 =  L
                                                                     g (, 0) · dF (, 0) , where
F (,  ) is the joint cdf over  and  . The share of countries that are not credible is given by
   H
 =  L
      dF (, 0) .
  Letting g D (,  ) denote public spending in the decentralized equilibrium, it follows from
maximization of Equation (37) that

                                                         D
                                                 · f  - g0          if  = 0,
                                D
                                       =                    
                                                                                                         (38)
                               g (,  )                  R           if  = 1,

       D   H D
where g0 =  L
              g (, 0) · dF (, 0) . Equation (38) says that, in the decentralized equilibrium,
governments equalize the marginal utility of public goods to the interest rate paid on public
debt. In this regard, financial integration changes nothing.27 But now the relevant interest
rate differs across countries: for credible countries that borrow from the rest of the world (i.e.,
 = 1 ), the relevant interest rate is R ; for non-credible countries that issue debt inside the
                                                            D
union (i.e.,  = 0 ), the relevant interest rate is  · f  - g0 .
  Equation (38) defines g D (, 0) as a function of g0
                                                    D
                                                      . To find the latter, note that

                                        D         D             · A,0
                                       g0 · f  - g0 =                 ,                                  (39)
                                                                  
                                                                         H
where A,0 is the average  among non-credible countries, i.e. A,0 =  -1 · L
                                                                            · dF (, 0) .
      D
Once g0 has been found, it follows from Equations (38)-(39) that
                                                     D
                                                     
                                                    g0
                                                  ·    if  = 0,
                                               
                                  g D (,  ) =  A,0                                                       (40)
                                                  
                                                       if  = 1.
                                              
                                                 R

In both credible and non-credible countries, public spending is increasing in  . In non-credible
countries, moreover, spending depends on the union interest rate and thus on the equilibrium
  27
     From our discussion in Section (2.3), it makes no difference whether non-credible countries finance their
spending through taxes or through domestic debt. To simplify the exposition, we assume throughout that
they resort fully to domestic debt.

                                                     23
within the union. In particular, public spending in these countries is increasing in  , which
expands the supply of savings and reduces the union interest rate; it is also decreasing in A,0
and  , since both raise total public spending by non-credible countries thereby increasing the
union interest rate. For credible countries, instead, the union interest rate is irrelevant and
spending depends only on the international interest rate R .


4.3    Foreign versus domestic debt and overspending
From the perspective of each individual country, the cost of public spending is the interest rate
on public debt. From the perspective of the union, this cost is accurate for credible countries
that finance their public spending with foreign debt. But it is not accurate for non-credible
countries that issue domestic or union debt: due to the crowding-out effect, their social cost
of public spending equals the marginal product of capital.
  To see this, consider once again the subset of Pareto optima with positive consumption of
private goods for all countries. In all of them, it is straightforward to show that the following
condition holds:
                                                    P
                                              f  - g0            if  = 0,
                                        =                                                       (41)
                              g P (,  )              R           if  = 1,
                                                                         H P
where g P (,  ) the Pareto efficient provision of public goods, and g0
                                                                     P
                                                                       =  L
                                                                            g (, 0) · dF (, 0)
. Equation (41) says that, in a Pareto efficient allocation, the marginal utility of public goods
must be equal to the international interest rate in credible countries, and to the marginal
product of capital in non-credible countries.
  Again, Equation (41) defines g P (, 0) as a function of g0
                                                           P
                                                             . The latter is given by

                                     P         P
                                    g0 · f  - g0 =  · A,0 .                                     (42)

Comparing equations (39) and (42) we can verify that, relative to the Pareto efficient alloca-
tion, spending in the decentralized equilibrium is efficient in credible countries but it is too
                                      D    P
high in non-credible countries, i.e. g0 > g0 . Moreover, since

                                                                P
                                                               g0
                                       g P (, 0) =         ·      ,                             (43)
                                                     A,0        

it follows that public spending is too high in all non-credible countries, i.e. g D (, 0) > g P (, 0)
for all  .
  The intuition for this result is by now familiar. The financial friction depresses the equi-


                                                 24
librium interest rate of the union. This creates an overspending externality, but only for
non-credible countries that finance their spending with domestic debt. From the perspective
of these countries, the cost of an additional unit of spending equals the union interest rate
 · f ( - g0 ) . From a union perspective, however, an additional unit of public spending by
these countries reduces the union's capital stock by one unit, which in turn reduces union's
output by f ( - g0 ) units. For credible countries, on the other hand, there is no overspend-
ing externality because they finance their spending with foreign debt: from the perspective of
both, these countries and the union, the cost of a unit of public spending is the interest rate
paid to the rest of the world, R .


4.4    Implications for a fiscal union
It is straightforward to show that, relative to autarky, financial integration raises aggregate
welfare in both the decentralized equilibrium and Pareto efficient allocations. It also has
natural implications for the design of a fiscal union. Namely, the need to control public
spending varies across union members depending on whether they finance their public spending
with domestic or foreign debt. In principle, the union should tax the share of public spending
that is financed through domestic debt. In practice, this amounts to taxing public spending by
non-credible countries, since credible countries are able (and willing) to finance their spending
fully through foreign debt.
  In light of this, let us consider a differentiated tax/subsidy system that depends both on
public spending and on  ,

                                       -z + t · R · g (,  ) if  = 0,
                          t (,  ) =                                                         (44)
                                               -z              if = 1

where z is a lump-sum transfer that balances the union's budget,

                                      z = (t - 1) · R · g0 .                                (45)

  It is clear that this differentiated spending tax is enough for the union to implement a
Pareto efficient allocation. By setting t = -1 , the union can induce non-credible countries
to fully internalize the externality that their spending generates to the rest of the union, and
it does so without distorting spending by credible countries.
  But would the union choose such a tax in equilibrium? The equilibrium with taxes/subsidies
on public spending is such that (i) the tax is given by Equations (44)-(45); (ii) the union


                                               25
chooses t by majority voting; and (iii) each government chooses g (,  ) so as to maximize
U (,  ) .
  The preferences of country (,  ) can be written as:

                      f ( - g0 ) + t ·  · f ( - g0 ) · [g0 - g (,  )] +  · ln g (,  )           if  = 0,
 U (,  ) =                                                                                                   (46)
                     f ( - g0 ) + t ·  · f ( - g0 ) · g0 - R · g (,  ) +  · ln g (,  ) if  = 1.

Thus, for a given tax/subsidy t , we now have that

                                                               U
                                                  t ·  · f  - g0         if  = 0,
                                  U
                                         =                     
                                                                                                             (47)
                                 g (,  )                   R             if  = 1,

                                                                                                       H
where g U (,  ) is once again the equilibrium fiscal policy under the union, and g0
                                                                                  U
                                                                                    =                  L
                                                                                                           g U (, 0)·
dF (, 0) . As before, all countries set public spending so that the marginal utility of public
goods equals its marginal cost.
  To determine the equilibrium policy of the union, we begin once again by describing the
policy preferences of country (,  ) . That is, we want to know how U (,  ) changes with t ,
under the restriction that the distribution of public spending satisfies Equation (47). A little
bit of algebra delivers two results.
  First, credible countries maximize their welfare by setting an arbitrarily high value of t , i.e.,
t =  . By doing so, they minimize the crowding-out effect of public spending by non-credible
union members, but they do not have to pay taxes themselves. In other words, they capture
the benefits of taxation while fully avoiding its costs.28
  What about non-credible countries? Maximization of Equation (46) yields a preferred tax
rate of
                                                      · A,0 -1
                                                t=         · ,                                               (48)
                                                        
for country (, 0) .29 This result mirrors the tax rate of Section 3.2, with one key difference.
   28
        To see this, use Equations (47) to rewrite the utility function in Equation (46) as follows:

                             U (, 1) = f ( - g0 ) +  · A,0 - R g (, 1) +  · ln g (, 1).

Thus, U (, 1) is maximized by setting t as high as possible to minimize the crowding out effect of g0 . Some
readers may wonder why there are no terms-of-trade effects. In particular, credible countries are net creditors
in the union and they are hurt when taxes on public spending reduce the union interest rate. This terms-of-
trade effect, however, is offset by a positive redistribution effect, which arises because part of the union's tax
revenues is appropriated by credible countries.
   29
      To see this, use Equations (47) to rewrite the utility function in Equation (46) as follows:

                                                                             
                             U (, 0) = f ( - g0 ) +  · A,0 -  +  · ln          · gU    ,
                                                                            · A 0

                                                         26
The average preference for public spending among non-credible countries, A,0 , is "normal-
ized" by the measure of these countries  . The reason is that country (, 0) takes into account
that a fraction of tax revenues is being transferred to credible union members. When   1
this leakage is insignificant and we are back in the world of Section 3.2. Instead, when   0
this leakage is extreme and non-credible countries prefer to set taxes as low as possible.
  Whose preferences will be reflected in equilibrium? The union chooses the tax/subsidy by
majority vote and the median voter theorem applies. If the median country is credible, the tax
rate will never be Pareto optimal: it follows from our previous discussion that the union will
display an extreme austerity bias and the tax rate will be arbitrarily high. This is desirable
from the perspective of credible countries, who minimize the crowding-out effect of public
spending and transfer resources to themselves in the process. But it is undesirable from the
perspective of the union: taxation is in this case decided by a subset of countries that capture
its benefits without internalizing any of its costs.
  If the median country is instead non-credible, the union will set a tax rate

                                                  · A,0 -1
                                            t=         · ,                                   (49)
                                                  ^M

where ^M is implicitly defined by

                                             M , 0) =  - 0.5.
                                          F (^

  Equation (49) says that, when the median country is non-credible, there are two effects that
distort the union's tax rate relative to the one that would be set in autarky (see Equation
(34)). On the one hand, non-credible countries want low taxes to limit the transfers to credible
union members: this is captured by the presence of  in the numerator of Equation (49). On
the other hand, credible countries want taxes to be as high as possible and ­ even if the
median country is not credible ­ these preferences affect the voting outcome: this is captured
by ^M < M in the denominator of Equation (49). These two effects distort the equilibrium
tax rate in opposite directions, so that the latter achieves a Pareto optimum if and only if
^M =  · A,0 .

  The key takeaway of this discussion is that financial integration can further distort the
union's equilibrium tax rate. All else equal, the presence of credible countries introduces an
austerity bias and leads to inefficiently high tax rates. Since these countries can issue foreign
debt, they do not pay the tax themselves but they still benefit from setting it as high as

Thus, U (, 0) is maximized by setting t to satisfy Equation (48).

                                                     27
possible. This force is present regardless of whether the median country is credible or not.
If the median country is non-credible, moreover, there is an additional force that operates in
the opposite direction because these countries take into account that their taxes are partially
transferred to the rest of the union. Ultimately, financial integration raises welfare in the
decentralized equilibrium and reduces the need for a fiscal union in the first place. But it may
also hinder a fiscal union's ability to set policy efficiently.


4.5     A union stability mechanism
If some countries in the union are credible and others are not, is there any way in which the
former can "transfer" some of their credibility to the latter? Credible countries could, for
instance, act as intermediaries, borrowing from the rest of the world and then lending part
of these resources to the union's less credible members. We can think of this intermediation
as being carried out through a Union Stability Mechanism (USM) that is run by credible
members of the union: this institution borrows from the rest of the world and then lends to
some of the union's less credible members at the international interest rate R .30 Effectively,
the USM reduces the share of non-credible countries.
  As described, the benefits of such a USM are transparent. By raising the share of public
spending that can be financed with foreign debt, it reduces the crowding-out effects of public
spending and thus the strength of the overspending externality. In this sense, the establish-
ment of the USM is analogous to greater financial integration. Although such an institution
may seem like a theoretical contraption, it resonates with the recent experience of the euro
area.
  Prior to the financial crisis, all euro area countries had ample access to the rest of the
world and private financial markets worked well.31 Through the lens of our model,  = 0
, which resulted in high public spending but also in high investment because crowding out
was low. Between 2009 and 2012, however, countries in the euro area periphery lost access
to the rest of the world. Through the lens of our model,  increased, which led to a rise
in crowding out throughout the union and generated two types of policy responses. First,
there was a strong pressure for periphery countries to engage in fiscal consolidation. Second,
various mechanisms were put in place that de facto resulted in intermediation of funds by

  30
       Thus, we focus throughout on the case in which the USM makes zero profits. Nothing substantial would
change if the USM made profits by lending to non-credible governments at an interest rate R > R .
    31
       Even in this period, there is evidence of intermediation by banks located in credible euro area countries
(i.e., "core" countries) between international financial markets and borrowers located in the rest of the euro
area (i.e., "periphery" countries). See Hale and Obstfeld (2016).

                                                      28
countries with higher credibility. This started with bilateral agreements and IMF programs,
followed by loans from the European Financial Stability Facility and the European Stability
Mechanism. The same could be said, albeit less directly, of various measures taken by the
European Central Bank, such as the Securities Markets Program, the modification of collateral
rules, the Long-Term Repurchase Operations, and even the possibility of purchasing unlimited
amounts of sovereign securities through Outright Monetary Transactions. All these actions
reduced the cost of borrowing for periphery governments, which allowed them to soften their
fiscal consolidations.
    Without denying these benefits, our model also suggests that a word of caution may be
in order: namely, insofar as these intermediation schemes change the political equilibrium of
the union, they may also entail costs. To see this, suppose that by lending to a subset of
non-credible countries, the USM changes the identity of the union's median voter. After all,
membership in the USM de facto turns a non-credible country into a credible one. In this
case, we speculate that the USM's net effect on efficiency is ambiguous. On the one hand, it
eliminates the overspending externality in non-credible countries that are granted membership
to the scheme. On the other hand, it might lead to excessive austerity for the remainder of
non-credible countries. If this last effect dominates, the establishment of a USM may actually
reduce welfare in the union.


5      Liquidity traps
We have so far emphasized the role of financial frictions in generating public spending exter-
nalities in unions. In particular, we have shown that financial frictions depress market interest
rates relative to the marginal return to private investment. Since the cost of public spending
from the point of view of an individual country is the interest rate, financial frictions lead to
overspending by governments.
    The literature on fiscal spillovers has often emphasized an alternative view that relies on
aggregate demand externalities. According to this view, there is underspending because gov-
ernments do not fully internalize the beneficial value of their own spending on total demand
in the union. This perspective became popular in the wake of the recent financial crisis in the
euro area, which led to a large reduction in aggregate demand and an increase in "economic
slack."
    Are these two views compatible? Is there overspending or underspending? In this section,
we show that these views can be reconciled in our simple framework as long as there exists a


                                               29
lower bound on the real interest rate. When financial frictions are not too severe, the interest
rate remains above this lower bound and the analysis of the previous sections remains valid,
i.e. there is overspending. But if financial frictions become severe enough, private demand
becomes so low that the interest rate reaches its lower bound. Once this happens, output in
the union becomes demand-determined. As a result, the cost of public spending falls from the
marginal return to private investment, which is above the interest rate, to the marginal cost
of goods, which is below the interest rate. In this regime, there is underspending.
  To formalize this discussion, we extend the model by incorporating a lower bound on interest
rates. We analyze formally how the nature of spending externalities varies with the severity of
financial frictions. We describe both the optimal policy response and the policy that is likely
to arise in the union equilibrium. Finally, we use these results to provide some insights on the
euro area financial crisis.


5.1     Zero lower bound on real interest rates
Let us return to the baseline model in which the union is in financial autarky. We introduce
two key modifications. First, at t = 0 , instead of receiving an exogenous endowment  , savers
in each country have the ability to produce up to ¯ units of output by exerting a positive but
very small per-unit effort. In other words, the endowment is now endogenous and given by
  [0, ¯ ] . Second, following many recent papers in the New Keynesian tradition, we assume
that there is a zero lower bound on the real interest rate, i.e. R  1 .32              , 33

  To obtain the decentralized equilibrium, note that nothing changes regarding the choice of
public spending and capital accumulation. Namely, it is still true that in equilibrium both
the return to public spending and the pledgeable return to investment are equal to the union
interest rate,
                                               
                                   g D ( ) =     and  · f (k ( )) = R.                                      (50)
                                               R
  As for the market clearing condition, it is still true that total public spending plus investment


   32
       The lower bound on the real interest rate is typically justified as an implication of two assumptions. (i)
There is an upper bound on inflation that arises either from nominal rigidities or from the central bank's
commitment to price stability. As a result, there is an upper bound on the difference between nominal and
real interest rates. (ii) The central bank is the only producer of money, and it sets the nominal interest
rate by trading money for nominal bonds. As a result, the nominal interest rate cannot be negative, since
otherwise the demand for money would be infinite and the central bank would go bankrupt. (See Krugman
1998, Eggertsson and Woodford 2003, 2004).
    33
       The zero lower bound usually applies to the nominal interest rate. To save on notation, we assume that
inflation is zero so the zero lower bound applies to the real interest rate as well. Nothing would change if the
lower bound were different from zero.

                                                       30
must equal union-wide resources  ,

                                                 k + gD = ,                                                 (51)

where k denotes the stock of capital in every country. The key difference is that now  is
endogenous and may be below its potential level.
  In particular, the decentralized equilibrium can be in one of two regimes. There is an
unconstrained regime in which R  1 , k + g D =  = ¯ and the equilibrium is as in Section 2.
This happens when the total demand for goods by governments and firms is high enough, so
that the interest rate that clears the market with  = ¯ lies above the zero lower bound. But
there is also a constrained regime, or liquidity trap, in which R = 1 and k + g D =  < ¯ . This
happens when the total demand for goods by governments and firms is insufficient, so that the
interest rate that would clear the market with  = ¯ lies below the zero lower bound. Since
the interest rate cannot fall below zero, however, market clearing is instead attained through
a reduction in output below potential, i.e.,  < ¯ .34 Formally, the equilibrium satisfies,

                              R  1,   ¯ and (R - 1) · ( - ¯ ) = 0.                                          (52)

Equations (50)-(52) characterize the decentralized equilibrium.
  From the perspective of each country, the cost of public spending is equal to the interest
rate. From the perspective of the union, however, the cost of public spending depends on
whether the zero lower bound is binding or not. To see this, we construct the set of Pareto
optima as before. A Pareto optimal allocation satisfies,

                                                      A
                                     g P = max                 ,g
                                                                ^ () ,                                      (53)
                                                   f ( - g P )

where
                                          g
                                          ^ () = ¯ - f -1 -1 ,                                              (54)

and
                                                          
                                              g P ( ) =     · gP .                                          (55)
                                                          A
  Equation (53) says that the Pareto optimal allocation can be in one of two regimes. In the
unconstrained regime everything is as in the baseline model, and Pareto optimality requires
   34
      During liquidity traps there is rationing since, at prevailing prices, all savers would like to produce and
sell all their potential output ¯ . We focus throughout on symmetric equilibria in which all savers in the union
produce and sell the same fraction of potential output  /    ¯ .

                                                       31
equalizing the marginal benefit of spending in all countries to the marginal product of capital
in the union. But there is also a liquidity-trap regime, in which the zero lower bound on the
interest rate is binding and output is below potential. Instead of equalizing the return to
spending to the marginal product of capital, Pareto optimality in this case requires raising
public spending up to the level g
                                ^ to eliminate slack. The reason is that, as long as g < g
                                                                                         ^,
there is no crowding out of investment and the marginal cost of public spending is effectively
zero from the perspective of the union.
  By comparing the decentralized equilibrium with the constrained optimal allocation, it is
immediate that the former can entail too much or too little public spending depending on the
regime. If the decentralized equilibrium is in the unconstrained regime, there is overspending
and the analysis of Section 2 applies. If instead the decentralized equilibrium is in a liquidity
trap, there is underspending.


5.2     Implications for a fiscal union
Whether the economy lies in the unconstrained regime or in a liquidity trap depends on
parameter values. A key parameter in the model is the level of pledgeability  , which
determines the severity of financial frictions. A reduction in  decreases investment demand
and thus makes liquidity traps more likely. There are two critical values,     ^ D and  ^P ,
which respectively determine whether the decentralized equilibrium and the Pareto optimal
allocation lie in a liquidity trap. These critical values are defined implicitly by

                                     ^ 
                                 A = g ^D         and ^ P · A = g
                                                                ^ ^P ,


      ^(·) is as in Equation (54).35
where g
  If     ^ P , the decentralized equilibrium entails overspending and the analysis of Section 2
applies. To restore optimality, the union would need to set a tax on public spending of t = -1
. If      ^D , ^ P , the decentralized equilibrium still entails overspending but the optimal tax
is smaller, t  (1, -1 ) . The reason is that, if the union tried to equalize the marginal benefit
of public spending to the marginal product of capital by setting a spending tax equal to -1
, it would push the economy into a liquidity trap. For  <  ^ D , the decentralized equilibrium
entails underspending and the tax turns into a subsidy, t < 1 . Formally, the optimal tax is

  35
     These critical values are obtained by combining the decentralized equilibrium condition A / g      ^ = ·
   -g
f (¯   ^) and the optimality condition A / g^ = f (¯-g  ^) with the zero lower bound condition  · f (¯ -g   ^) =
R = 1 . Since g^ () is decreasing in  , g
                                        ^ (0) = ¯ , and g
                                                        ^ (1) =  ¯ - f -1 (1) , there is exactly one solution to
both equations if ¯  A , A + f -1 (1) .

                                                      32
given by
                                                             A
                                          tP = min               , -1 .
                                                            g
                                                            ^ ()
  Does the union set the tax on public spending at this level in equilibrium? As the analysis
of the previous sections indicates, the answer to this question is unclear. One thing that is
certain is that the union will never find itself strictly inside the liquidity trap. All countries,
regardless of  , prefer a low enough tax (or a high enough subsidy) to ensure that public
spending does not fall below g
                             ^ . The reason is that, even though all countries must pay the
subsidy to raise spending to g
                             ^ , they also benefit from the ensuing reduction in inefficient
slack.36 Outside of the liquidity trap, however, spending may be too high or too low due to
the biases described in Section 3.2, i.e., insofar as the preferences of the median country may
differ from the average. Formally, the tax adopted by the union is given by

                                                          A A
                                       tU = min              ,  · -1 .                                     (56)
                                                         g
                                                         ^ () M

  Relative to the Pareto optimum, the union may thus set taxes that are too high or too low
depending on whether M is lower than or greater than A . But it will never set taxes so
high so as to push the economy inside the liquidity trap.37


5.3       Austerity during liquidity traps
We can use this simple extension of our baseline model to provide an interpretation of some
salient features of the recent European experience. Before the crisis, financial markets worked
relatively well and  >    ^ P . Thus, there was a tendency for governments to overspend. To
address this externality, the euro area adopted a set of rules to constrain the fiscal policy of
  36
       To show this, note that when the economy is in a liquidity trap, welfare can be expressed as

                                                -1                         
                                 U ( ) = f (f        (1)) + A -  +  · ln     ·g ,
                                                                           A

which is monotonically increasing in g . So all countries, regardless of  , benefit from an increase in g in
liquidity traps. So no country would favor a tax that is so high (or a subsidy that is so low) that g < g ^.
   37
      To derive Equation (56), simply note that the analysis is exactly as in section 3.2 when the economy is
outside the liquidity trap. Hence, the equilibrium tax is as in Equation (34). When the economy is inside
the liquidity trap, the capital stock is fixed at f -1 (-1 ) . Thus, the welfare of an individual country can be
expressed as
                                                                          
                                U ( ) = f (f -1 (-1 )) + A -  +  · ln        ·g .
                                                                          A
The welfare of all countries, including the median, is thus monotonically increasing in g when the economy
                                                                                           A
is in a liquidity trap. The median country will thus never choose a tax rate higher than g^() , as this would
imply that g < g ^.

                                                           33
its members. These rules had the same underlying goal as the taxation scheme analyzed in
Section 3.2; namely, to coerce its members into adopting a more austere fiscal stance.
    The crisis was associated with a loss of trust in the enforcement of financial contracts, which
can be interpreted as a fall in  . As a consequence, investment demand fell throughout the
union, leading to a decline in the interest rate. In fact, the crisis was so severe that the
euro area was pushed into a liquidity trap. Aggregate demand was insufficient and output fell
below potential. Individual governments had insufficient incentives to increase public spending
because they did not internalize its effect on union demand. At this point it would have been
beneficial to remove fiscal constrains and possibly incentivize public spending. Instead, most
constraining rules remained in place, at least during the first years of the crisis. According to
this narrative, the resulting austerity contributed to deepening the crisis.
    One clear implication of this discussion is that, ideally, fiscal rules should be flexible and
contingent on economic conditions. Rules designed to contain overspending are beneficial
during "normal" times, but they may backfire during liquidity traps.


6      Concluding remarks
We build on three stylized facts of the global economy over the last few decades: (i) there has
been large and sustained decline in the interest rates at which many governments borrow; (ii)
yet the return to capital has remained fairly constant; (iii) against the backdrop of growing
financial integration, especially within economic unions such as the euro area. We have shown
that, jointly considered, these features of the world economy may lead to excessive public
spending. Moreover, this excessive spending is hard to correct, even for economic unions that
can limit the behavior of their members.
    These results have important implications for how we think of fiscal policy in an integrated
world. First, whereas most of the literature has emphasized the positive spillover effects of
public spending through trade linkages, we show that there are also negative spillovers through
financial linkages. These have been largely ignored but may be increasingly relevant. Second,
most of the supra-national efforts to constrain national fiscal policies have so far focused
on public deficits. We show that this exclusive emphasis on deficits may be misplaced, as
sometimes public spending may itself be the source of the problem.
    Our results have been derived under a set of stylized assumptions to keep the analysis simple
and transparent. A crucial assumption is that compliance with union decisions is compulsory,
i.e. there are no opt-out clauses for member countries. This assumption is clearly not realistic,


                                                 34
as has been recently demonstrated by Brexit. Relaxing it would lead to a theory of endogenous
unions, in which gains from trade and similarity in preferences are likely to play an important
role. Understanding the endogenous formation of unions is an exciting research avenue going
forward.


7    References
Auerbach, A.J. and Y. Gorodnichenko, 2013, "Output Spillovers from Fiscal Policy," Vol.
103, No. 3, pp. 141­46.


Beetsma, R. and M. Giuliodori, 2010, "The Macroeconomic Costs and Benefits of the EMU
and Other Monetary Unions: An Overview of Recent Research," Journal of Economics Liter-
ature, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 603­41.


Beetsma R., M. Giuliodori and F. Klaassen, 2006, "Trade Spill-Overs of Fiscal Policy in the
European Union: A Panel Analysis," Economic Policy, Vol. 21, No. 48, pp. 639­87.


Besley, T. and S. Coate, 2003, "Centralized versus Decentralized Provision of Local Public
Goods: A Political Economy Approach," Journal of Public Economicsm, Vol. 87, No. 12, pp.
2611­37.


Blagrave, P., G. Ho, K. Koloskova and E. Vesperoni, 2017, "Fiscal Spillovers - The Importance
of Macroeconomic and Policy Conditions in Transmission," IMF Spillover Note 11.


Blagrave, P., G. Ho, K. Koloskova and E. Vesperoni, 2018, "Cross-Border Transmission of
Fiscal Shocks: The Role of Monetary Conditions," IMF Working Paper 18/103 (Washington,
D.C., International Monetary Fund).


Blanchard, O., 2019, "Public Debt and Low Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper No. 25621
(Cambridge, Massachusetts, National Bureau of Economic Research).


Broner, F., A. Erce, A. Martin, and J. Ventura, 2014, "Sovereign Debt Markets in Turbulent
Times: Creditor Discrimination and Crowding-Out Effects," Journal of Monetary Economics,
Vol. 61, pp. 114­42.


                                              35
Broner, F., D. Clancy, A. Erce, and A. Martin, 2019, "Fiscal Multipliers and Foreign Hold-
ings of Public Debt," mimeo CREi (Barcelona, Catalonia, Centre de Recerca en Economia
Internacional).


Caballero, R., E. Farhi, and P. Gourinchas, 2017, "Rents, Technical Change, and Risk Pre-
mia: Accounting for Secular Trends in Interest Rates, Returns on Capital, Earning Yields,
and Factor Shares," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 107(5), 614­20.


Canzoneri, M. and B. Diba, 1991, "Fiscal Deficits, Financial Integration, and a Central Bank
for Europe," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, Vol. 5, pp. 381­403.


Chang, R., 1990, "International Coordination of Fiscal Deficits," Journal of Monetary Eco-
nomics, Vol. 25, pp. 347­66.


Chari, V. and P. Kehoe, 1990, "International Coordination of Fiscal Policy in Limiting
Economies," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, No. 3, pp. 617­36.


Eggertsson, G. and M. Woodford, 2003, "The Zero Interest-Rate Bound and Optimal Mone-
tary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2003, No.1, pp. 139­211.


Eggertsson, G. and M. Woodford, 2004, "Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a Liquidity
Trap," NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics (2004), pp. 75­144.


Eggertsson, G., J. Robbins, and E. Wold, 2018, "Kaldor and Piketty's Facts: The Risk of
Monopoly Power in the United States," NBER Working Paper No. 24287 (Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, National Bureau of Economic Research).


Epifani, P. and G. Gancia, 2009, "Openness, Government Size and the Terms of Trade," Re-
view of Economic Studies, Vol. 76, No.2, pp. 629­68.


Faltermeier, J., 2019, "Why Has the Return to Capital Not Declined with Interest Rates?"
mimeo Universitat Pompeu Fabra.




                                            36
Faini, R., 2006, "Fiscal Policy and Interest Rates in Europe," Economic Policy, Vol. 21, No.
47, pp. 443­89.


Farhi, E. and F. Gourio, 2019, "Accounting for Macro-Finance Trends: Market Power, Intan-
gibles, and Risk Premia," NBER Working Paper 25282 (Cambridge, Massachusetts, National
Bureau of Economic Research).


Gourinchas, P., P. Martin, and T. Messer, 2018, "The Economics of Sovereign Debt, Bailouts
and the Eurozone Crisis," mimeo University of California, Berkeley.


Hale, G. and M. Obstfeld, 2016, "The Euro and the Geography of International Debt Flows,"
Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 14, No.1, pp. 115­44.

Hettig, G. and G. M¨
                   uller, 2018, "Fiscal policy coordination in currency unions at the effective
lower bound," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 115, pp. 80­98.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S., E. Papaioannou and J. L. Peydr´
                                                 o , 2010, "What Lies Beneath the Euro's
Effect on Financial Integration? Currency Risk, Legal Harmonization, or Trade," Journal of
International Economics, Vol. 81, No.1, pp. 75­88.


Krugman, P., 1998, "It's Baaack: Japan's Slump and the Return to Liquidity Trap," Brook-
ings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2, 137­205.


Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti, 2017, "International Financial Integration in the Aftermath
of the Global Financial Crisis," IMF Working Paper 17/115 (Washington, D.C., International
Monetary Fund).


Lockwood, B., 2002, "Distributive Politics and the Costs of Centralization," Review of Eco-
nomic Studies, Vol. 69, No.2, pp. 313­37.


Marx, M., B. Mojon, and F. Velde, 2019, "Why Have Interest Rates Fallen Far Below the
Return on Capital?" BIS Working Paper 794 (Basel, Switzerland, Bank of International Set-
tlements).


Oates, W. E., 1972, Fiscal Federalism (New York, NY, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich).



                                              37
Oates, W. E., 1999, "An Essay on Fiscal Federalism," Journal of Economic Literature, Vol.
37, No.3, pp. 1120­49.


Ventura, J., 2019, "Sharing a Government," Journal of the European Economic Association,
Vol. 17, No.6, pp. 1723­52.




                                           38
