                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MEASURING PROPERTY RIGHTS INSTITUTIONS

                                         Simeon Djankov
                                        Edward L. Glaeser
                                          Valeria Perotti
                                          Andrei Shleifer

                                       Working Paper 27839
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27839


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2020




We are deeply grateful to Lawrence Jia for outstanding assistance with this research, and to
Elodie Bataille, Marie Lily Delion, Gary Hufbauer, Spencer Kwon, Nick Lore-Edwards, Robbie
Minton, Rita Ramalho, Judith Trasancos, and Aigerim Zhanibekova for helpful comments. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors.
They do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or
those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27839.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Simeon Djankov, Edward L. Glaeser, Valeria Perotti, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Property Rights Institutions
Simeon Djankov, Edward L. Glaeser, Valeria Perotti, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 27839
September 2020
JEL No. O17,O18,O43,R14,R21

                                           ABSTRACT

How do the different elements in the standard bundle of property rights ­ such as the right of
possession or the right of transfer ­ differentially impact outcomes, such as urban development?
This paper incorporates insecure property rights into a standard model of urban land prices and
density, and makes predictions about investment in land and property, informality, and the
efficiency of land use. Our empirical analysis links data on institutions related to land titling and
transfer with multiple urban outcomes, from 190 countries. The evidence is generally consistent
with the model's predictions, and more broadly with the Demsetz's (1967) approach to property
rights institutions. Indeed, we document world-wide improvements in the quality of institutions
facilitating property transfer over time.

Simeon Djankov                                    Valeria Perotti
London School of Economics                        The World Bank Group
and Political Science                             1818 H Street NW
Houghton Street                                   Washington, DC 20433
London WC2A 2AE                                   USA
United Kingdom                                    vperotti@worldbank.org
s.djankov@lse.ac.uk
                                                  Andrei Shleifer
Edward L. Glaeser                                 Department of Economics
Department of Economics                           Harvard University
315A Littauer Center                              Littauer Center M-9
Harvard University                                Cambridge, MA 02138
Cambridge, MA 02138                               and NBER
and NBER                                          ashleifer@harvard.edu
eglaeser@harvard.edu
Introduction


Ownership can confer a bundle of property rights, including the right to possess, to transfer, and to alter

(Ellickson 1993, Alchian 2008). 2 As stressed in the pioneering work of Demsetz (1967), the protection of

any of these rights is never free, and varies greatly across jurisdictions. In the developing world, many of

these rights are quite ephemeral, as possession is not guaranteed, sale is difficult, and alteration is

highly regulated. Still, in a world of limited public capacity, one can ask: which rules and institutions that

protect property rights have the largest impacts on economic activity? In this paper, we address this

question empirically using a cross-section of 190 countries, and focus specifically on the distinction

between the right of possession and the right of transfer in the context of urban land.


        The most basic element in this Blackstonian bundle of property rights is possession ­ the right to

exclude others from taking or invading the property. This right is typically secured by the government,

but occasionally by other means, such as self-defense. The state, of course, can also be the taker or

invader of property. Writers including Montesquieu (1748), Smith (1776), Olson (1965), North (1981),

Barro (1990), DeLong and Shleifer (1993), and Acemoglu et al. (2001) recognized entitlement to the

undisturbed use of one's property as essential for protecting investment and economic development. In

the context of urban development, the right of possession is central to the quality of the housing stock.

When title is insecure, residents invest less in land and housing, and urban density rises.


        The right to transfer was less central to classical economists than the right of possession, but

more recent authors have stressed how transfer can enable property to be sold or rented to more




2
  The right to transfer includes the right to rent (temporary transfer) and the right to mortgage (conditional
transfer). Ellickson (1993) describes a complete "Blackstonian" bundle of property rights, which include the right
to "exclude," in the sense that we use possession, and "use and abuse," which to us is synonymous with alter. He
defines transfers more thoroughly, but we intend our meaning to be the same. Ellickson also specifies the time
frame of ownership (perpetual), its physical boundaries (limited in two dimensions, but stretching "downward to
the depths of the earth and upward to the heavens"), and resting in a single proprietor.

                                                         2
efficient users or owners with access to capital (Barzel 1982, Ellickson 1993, Alchian 2008). DeSoto

(2000) emphasizes the role of urban land as potential collateral for entrepreneurs, and mortgages hinge

on the conditional transfer of land in case of default. The rights of possession and transfer are not only

conceptually distinct, but sometimes at odds with one another. When legal transfer is easier, it can also

be easier to expropriate property illegally, as when the strong force the weak to sell them their land.


        In a modern society, the protection of property rights, including both possession and transfer, is

typically delivered not only by courts and police, but also by administrative institutions, such as deed

registration offices. Empirically, much attention has been devoted to the effectiveness of courts and

regulators in protecting private property, including in cross-country contexts (e.g., Djankov et al. 2003,

La Porta et al. 2004, Behrer et al. 2020). Less is known about the role of administrative institutions that

keep track of ownership and its transfer.


        Title is the central legal instrument that both secures possession and enables the transfer of

property. Documenting formal title is usually a prerequisite for using legal authority to protect one's

land and dwellings, and that is done through administrative tools, like cadasters and deeds. Without

formal title, residents must rely on self-protection to assure unhindered enjoyment of their residence

and land (Field 2005, 2007), and have a limited incentive to invest in such informally owned property

(De Soto 1989, Besley 1995). Only secure title can in principle provide protection against expropriation

by armed bandits, powerful neighbors, and the grabbing hand of the state (Olson 1993, Shleifer and

Vishny 1998, De Soto 2000, Behrer et al., 2020).


        The institutions that track and enable the transfer of title ensure the legal recognition and

sanction of the permanent transfer of property ownership. 3 In many of the word's informal urban


3
  We will not focus on the temporary transfer of property through rental arrangements, for these are typically
limited more by rent control rules than by title. Glaeser and Luttmer (2003) empirically quantify the misallocation
of apartments due to rent control.

                                                         3
communities, residents are relatively safe against expropriation and eviction, but without legal sale they

lack the means to trade their property for cash, move closer to work, or borrow money through a

mortgage (De Soto 2000). Even with title, the time and money cost of a legal sale may stymie mobility

and leave residents rooted in place. That stasis may explain the long commutes between informal

communities and formal work in many developing world cities, like Kigali (Collier and Venables 2014). 4


        In this paper, we investigate the distinction between the right of possession and the right of

transfer, and the distinctive effects that the institutions protecting these rights have on urban

development. To this end, we analyze a large cross-country data set assembled by the World Bank Doing

Business (DB) project over the last 16 years. The data set contains information on institutions securing

property title, as well as the institutions governing the transfer of ownership, for 190 countries.


        We seek to accomplish three goals. First, we describe the relevant data sets, and show how

property rights institutions covering both the titling of property and its transfer can be objectively

measured. Second, we present new evidence that these institutions have a substantial impact on

economic outcomes, especially in the context of the allocation of urban land. Third, we present some

evidence that, unlike many institutions that previous research has shown to be fairly sticky, the

institutions we describe here show dramatic improvement over the 16 years of the data.


        Our first goal is to describe the institutions of titling and transferring property from the DB

database. A large literature uses measures of security of property rights obtained in surveys of investors,

experts, and households. La Porta et al. (1999) provide a summary of many of these measures; Chong et

al. (2014) present related findings from the World Justice Project (WJP) database. These survey

measures are outputs of a system of securing property rights, and hence are extremely highly correlated



4
 A third element of the property rights bundle, which we do not focus on here, is the right to develop or improve
one's land and property, which is often restricted by zoning.

                                                        4
with multiple inputs including not just legal and regulatory rules and infrastructure but also human

capital (e.g., Glaeser et al. 2004). Here instead we use administrative rules governing titling and transfer

of property, and analyze the impact of these rules holding constant the level of human capital or

economic development. A further advantage of measuring specific rules rather than survey outcomes is

that rules are subject to modification, reform, and improvement over horizons shorter than the general

growth of government effectiveness and human capital.


        The database contains two types of variables. First, it contains data on the titling process,

including the reliability of title infrastructure, the transparency of title information, the geographic

coverage of titling, and the mechanisms of resolving title disputes. These indicators are aggregated into

a Title index, which describes the quality of legal and regulatory infrastructure that administers the

titling process. Second, the database contains ­ over a period of 16 years ­ data on rules governing the

transfer of urban property, including the number of steps it takes to transfer a piece of property, the

cost of doing so, and the time it takes in a typical case. In Section 2, we describe how these data are

constructed both from hard information on rules and procedures, and from the surveys of professionals

involved in the process of titling and the transfer of property.


        We also establish three preliminary findings. First, there is tremendous disparity in the quality of

institutions of titling and transferring property across countries, but they are generally much better in

more developed (or higher human capital) countries. The finding is not surprising, since human capital

of a country and its level of economic development are typically closely associated with all measures of

government effectiveness (see La Porta et al. 1999, Glaeser et al. 2004). Second, perhaps more

surprisingly, although the data on titling and transfer institutions are collected in very different ways,

there is a high correlation between the quality of the two types of institutions, even controlling for the

level of economic development. And third, several of the determinants of the quality of institutions



                                                      5
identified in previous research, such as human capital, the level of development, and government

effectiveness, matter here as well, while others, such as legal origin, do not.


        In Section 3, we present a theoretical model of a city using the Alonso-Muth-Mills framework

(Brueckner, 1987) in which formal jobs are located in city center, while residents live and work

informally if they don't have formal jobs, away from the center. The model allows one to study the size

of the city, its residential density, commute times, and patterns of land ownership. We add to this

standard framework a cost of protecting one's property, as well as limitations on property transfer.


        These alterations to the standard model yield several predictions, but we focus on two. First,

limitations on the right of possession lead to reduced consumption of urban land. Residents must either

invest in self-protection or risk losing their property, and both the costs and the risk scale up with

investment. Consequently, residents invest less, consume lower quality housing, and urban density

levels are higher. Limitations on the right to transfer imply that people remain stuck in place even if they

have to commute to work far from home. These limitations lead to greater traffic congestion. In Section

4, we test these key predictions of our model that weak possession rights lead to high density and poor

structures and that weak transfer rights lead to a spatial mismatch between residences and workplaces.

We use urban data on density, slum presence, and traffic congestion to evaluate our hypotheses.


        For our housing structure and density outcomes, we use the percentage of urban population

living in slums (which are typically informal), residential density, and the average size of formal and

informal plot sizes. We use four aspects of titling quality to measure right of possession, as well as an

index aggregating them. We typically control for the logarithm of per capita gross domestic product.

Three of the four measures and the overall index all show that better right of possession is associated

with a smaller share of residents living in slums. The index is also significantly negatively correlated with




                                                      6
density and positively associated with informal lot size. Transfer rights are not correlated with any of

these outcomes, just as the model predicts.


        We then test whether weak transfer rights are associated with more traffic congestion and we

find that is the case as well. Housing always has two critical qualities: location and physical structure.

The model predicts that right of possession is associated with better structure and that right of transfer

is associated with better location. Both predictions find support in the data.


        Finally, we examine the prevalence of home-related lending across countries, which should be

influenced by both title and transfer institutions (Badev et. al 2014). A mortgage loan relies both on a

valid title, and on the ability to repossess and sell (transfer) the property if the borrower defaults. While

both title and transfer measures correlate with the prevalence of mortgages, the number of transfer

procedures influences the penetration of housing loans, even controlling for both title and the per

capita income. This result shows the key role of the right of transfer for financial development.


        In Section 5, we describe the evolution of institutions governing property transfer over the

relatively short period of our sample. We have the transfer variables over 16 years, but we only have the

title variables for a few years. For many institutions, particularly those tied to legal traditions of

countries, the data show a great deal of persistence (La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, and Shleifer 2008), but

here we find something different. Over a 16-year period, many countries sharply improved their

institutions for transferring property. The timeframe is too short to allow us to test whether these

institutional changes translate to reduced commute lengths, or other improvements in urban form.


        The mechanisms behind such improvement largely result from the pervasive introduction of

information technology. We found little evidence that suggested that these changes were politically-

motivated, but rather that they were efficiency driven. As cities grow, it becomes increasingly efficient

to invest in better procedures for formalizing the transfer of property. Many cities have accommodated

                                                       7
that demand. As Demsetz (1967) argued over half a century ago, the creation and improvement of

property rights institutions follows, at least in part, the needs of economic efficiency.


2. Data and Initial Findings


We build two sets of variables pertaining to the measurement of property rights, using data from the DB

project: a Title index comprising five subindices and a Transfer of title set of three variables on the

number of procedures, time and cost of transferring property title between private parties (Table 1).

The World Bank collected the data by reviewing the relevant laws and regulations, and using surveys

filled out by property lawyers, notaries, and administrators in land and cadastral registries. Data are

collected for the main business city in 190 economies. 5 The data collection process is described in

greater detail at the DB webpage; Online Appendix A describes the variable construction procedures,

including our institutional measures, in detail.


Title


        In addition to police protection, several administrative processes make the title more secure.

First, authorities can make transparent and easily accessible all the information pertaining to

encumbrances on the property in question. Second, they can make this access universal: for any

property and from anywhere. And third, they can establish a straight-forward resolution process should

challenges to the title arise. This resolution process can be court supervised or part of the administrative

protection of title. Different countries approach the security of title differently. While France makes




5
  For 11 economies, the data are also collected for the second largest business city. Four economies (Libya, the
Marshall Islands, Micronesia and Timor-Leste) where private sector entities were unable to register property
transfer are excluded from the sample. The data and methodology for data collection are available at
https://www.doingbusiness.org/en/data/exploretopics/registering-property.

                                                         8
geographic access universal, Australia does not. While the United Kingdom has an expedient resolution

process, Greece has a lengthy process to challenge title infringements.


        The Title index measures the security of title. It is comprised of five subindices: reliability of title

infrastructure, transparency of title information, geographic coverage of titling, title dispute resolution,

and gender equality in rights to title. The gender equality subindex is not used separately in this study as

it shows very limited variation across the sample. Data for the Title index are available for five years,

2015 to 2019. We use 2015 in the analysis.


        The first subindex for the Title variable, reliability of title infrastructure, captures the consistency

and dependability of recordkeeping systems in a country's property management system. This subindex

records whether title and cadastral records are electronic, stored in a reliable database, and are

consistently maintained between governmental agencies. This index ranges from 0 to 8. In Turkey, for

example, titles and cadastral maps are fully electronic and databases about land ownership are linked.

Turkey receives a perfect score of 8 on the subindex. Oman, where land title certificates are kept in

paper format at the immovable property registry, receives a 5 while Afghanistan, with paper-based and

separate databases at the immovable property registry and the cadastral agency, receives a 0.


        The second subindex for the Title variable, transparency of information, captures the availability

of property information to the general public. This subindex records whether cadastral plans, fee

schedules, required documents, and complaint systems are made easily available to the public. This

index ranges from 0 to 6. In the Netherlands, for example, an online title database, a required document

list, a fee schedule, and a complaint mechanism are all available using the Kadaster website, which gives

it a perfect score of 6. Montenegro, with neither public statistics about transactions nor an independent

complaint mechanism, receives a 3; Sudan, where only intermediaries and interested parties can obtain

title information ­ and fee schedules are only available in person ­ receives a 0.


                                                       9
        The third subindex for the Title variable, geographic coverage of titling information, captures the

completeness of information at the land registry and mapping agency. This subindex ranges from 0 to 8.

For instance, in the Republic of Korea, all land plots are registered and mapped at the local and national

level, giving Korea a perfect score of 8. Portugal, where all land plots are formally registered or mapped,

but only at the local level, receives a 4, while Senegal, where land is not fully registered or mapped even

in the main business city, receives a 0.


        The fourth subindex for the Title variable, dispute resolution, captures the effectiveness and

efficiency of the legal system regarding property disputes. The subindex records whether there are

formal compensation mechanisms, legal verification and guarantee systems, fair legal rules, and

efficient court systems. The title dispute resolution subindex ranges from 0 to 8. In the United Kingdom,

all property sales are guaranteed by government, lawyers are required to verify legal documents with a

national database, and the court system rules quickly, giving it a perfect score of 8. Peru, where there is

no out-of-court compensation mechanism and a land dispute can take 2 to 3 years to resolve, receives a

5 on the subindex, while Sri Lanka, where there are no guarantees on property registration and no

databases for verifying identity documents, receives a 1.


Transfer of Title


        The DB database contains three Transfer of Title variables measuring this process in the

country's largest business city. These include the number of procedures, the time, and the cost to

purchase and transfer a property title from a private seller to a private buyer. Transferring title begins

with obtaining necessary documents, such as a copy of the seller's title, and is considered complete

when the buyer can use the newly-acquired property. Every procedure required by law or necessary in

practice is included, whether it is the responsibility of the seller or the buyer or a third party on their

behalf. Data for the Transfer of Title variables are available for 16 years, from 2004 to 2019.


                                                      10
         Several assumptions are made for comparability across countries. These assumptions also

simplify the case, as they take away the most likely ways in which the transfer of title can be

complicated. The buyer and the seller are assumed to be limited liability companies, located in the peri-

urban area of the economy's largest business city, 100% domestically and privately owned, and to

perform general commercial activities. The property is assumed to have a value 50 times per capita

income, be fully owned by the seller for the past 10 years with no mortgage, registered in the land

registry, free of title disputes, located in a peri-urban commercial zone, not be subject to renovations

after purchase, be used for general commercial purpose, have no occupants, and have no other party

with a legal interest in it.


         The transfer of title Procedures variable captures the interactions between the buyer, the seller,

or their agents with external parties, including government agencies, inspectors, notaries, and

surveyors. The fastest legal procedure required for transferring title is measured when more than one

procedure exists. There is significant difference in how many procedures are required by law to transfer

title. For example, a transfer of title in Managua, Nicaragua in 2013 legally required 9 separate

procedures whereas it required 5 separate procedures in Riga, Latvia and 2 in Manama, Bahrain.


         The transfer of title Time variable captures, in days, the median duration that property lawyers,

notaries, or registry officials indicate is necessary to complete a title transfer. The fastest legal

procedure required for transferring title is recorded. For instance, a transfer of property in Port-au-

Prince, Haiti in 2013 required 319 days to complete whereas it required only 4 days in Toronto, Canada.


         The transfer of title Cost variable captures the official costs required by law as a percentage of

the property value (assumed to be 50 times income per capita). These costs include fees, transfer taxes,

stamp duties, and other payments to the title registry, notaries, public agencies or lawyers. For instance,




                                                      11
a transfer of title in Douala, Cameroon in 2013 cost 19.1% of the property value, whereas in Quito,

Ecuador it cost 1.9% of the property value.


        We also construct an overall index of title transfer efficiency as the sum of the z-scores of the

procedures, time, and cost variables.


Outcome Data


        The United Nations Human Settlement Programme (UN Habitat) provides the number of people

living in slums as a percentage of the urban population for 83 economies also covered by DB. For

instance, in 2018, 38% of the urban population in the Philippines and 23% of the urban population in

South Africa lived in slums.


        The Lincoln Land Institute's Atlas of Urban Expansion provides data on cross-country land

outcomes using satellite imagery and is comprised of two sets: 1) Blocks and Roads and 2) Areas and

Densities. These data are available for up to 76 economies covered by DB. First, the Blocks and Roads

dataset measures the configuration of cities. Image analysts divided individual city blocks into "plots", or

individual parcels of land that would likely be identified as separate properties in a cadaster. The dataset

distinguishes between informal land subdivisions and formal land subdivisions. Informal land

subdivisions are areas that are "subdivided for urban use but lack visible conformity to land subdivision

regulations such as regular plot dimensions, paved roads, or sidewalks." Formal land subdivisions are

"similar in layout to informal layouts, but exhibit a higher level of regularity, a higher level of provision of

infrastructure, and better connections to existing roads."


        Variables in this dataset include measures of average plot size in formal and informal land

subdivisions. For instance, the average plot size in formal and informal land divisions in El Salvador were




                                                      12
157 and 77 square meters respectively in 2015. These variables are constructed from satellite imagery

for areas developed between the years 1990 and 2015.


        The Areas and Densities dataset measures compactness of the urban area. Each pixel of satellite

images was classified as built-up areas (human-constructed, impervious surfaces), open space, or water.

The built-up area density variable was then calculated by taking total population of the city and dividing

by its built-up area. For example, the built-up area density in El Salvador was 100 people per hectare.

These data are available for years 1990, 2000, and circa 2013. We use values from circa 2013.


        TomTom's public database measures city-level traffic congestion in 56 economies covered in our

data. The index uses real traffic data from 600 million drivers to calculate the excess travel time during

rush hour as a percentage of off-peak travel time. In 2019, an average trip during rush hour took 18%

more time than in baseline traffic in Iceland, but 60% longer in India.


        Finally, the percentage of adult population with an outstanding loan to purchase a home,

obtained from the World Bank's Global Findex database (Demirgüç-Kunt et al. 2018), is used as a

measure of housing loan penetration (Badev et al. 2014). We use the data for 2017.


Control variables


        The World Development Indicators contain annual per capita GDP which we use as a control for

185 economies. The World Governance Indicators project provides an index on government

effectiveness, capturing perceptions on quality of public services and quality of civil services for 189

economies. The indicator ranges from -2.5 (weak governance) to 2.5 (strong governance). The World

Bank's Human Capital index is constructed from measures of child survival rates, expected years of

school, and childhood health factors and is available for 154 economies. The index ranges from 0 (low

human capital) to 1 (high human capital).


                                                     13
Preliminary Findings


         The security of Title index is highly variable, with a mean of 14.26 in our sample of countries,

and a standard deviation of 7.49. As a first step, we check whether this index is correlated with a closely

related survey measure of the quality of property rights protection from the WJP database, namely a

measure of the risk of expropriation of property by the government without due compensation. Figure 1

shows the .55 correlation between our index of security of Title and the WJP expropriation risk. Even

when controlling for per capita income, there is a statistically significant correlation between the two

variables. 6 When we run a regression of the WJP index on Title controlling for per capita income, we find

that the partial correlation coefficient remains statistically significant.


         Of course, the Title index generally has higher values in more developed countries. When we

split the sample into quintiles by per capita income, countries in the top quintile score nearly three

times higher than countries in the bottom quintile (Figure 2). Table 2 presents these results more

formally. We regress the Title index and the four subindices, as well as the four transfer variables,

separately on per capita income, human capital, and government effectiveness. We uniformly find

positive and significant correlations. This result is not surprising since the quality of government

institutions across the board rises with human capital (La Porta et al. 1999, Chong et al. 2014). 7


         There is a strong correlation between the Title index and subindices and the Transfer of Title

variables. This is somewhat surprising because the Title index is created with a different methodology

than the Transfer of Title variables (procedures, time, cost). Even when controlling for per capita

income, the correlation between Title and Transfer of Title remains strong (Table 3 and Figure 3). This


6
  When we regression the expropriation risk on security of title and log of per capital G.D.P, we estimate a
coefficient of .0042 on title (standard error of .0020) and a coefficient of .0616 of G.D.P (standard error of .0104).
The r-squared in that regression is .473.
7
  We have looked at several other determinants of the quality of government from previous research, such as legal
origins and ethnic fractionalization, but did not find consistent results.

                                                         14
result suggests that the security of title is associated with the efficiency of title transfer, and we should

be careful in disentangling the effects of the two sets of rules and institutions.


3. A Model of Urban Land Allocation


We consider a simple Alonso-Muth-Mills model (Brueckner, 1987). A mass M of consumers/residents

locate along a line. A fraction of consumers "q" works in the city center, denoted by 0, and the

remainder work from home. We can think of city center employment as formal, and employment at

home as informal. All individuals earn incomes of W in the city center, but only  working from home,

where  is sufficiently low that anyone who has an opportunity to work in the city center will do so.

Individuals who work in the center pay commuting costs of t times d, where d is the distance of daily

commute. The only housing consumed is land, and utility is given by  ln() +  , where L represents

land and C reflects consumption of a composite commodity with a price normalized to one. A

consumer's Income minus Commuting Costs must be equal to the sum of consumption  and rent, so

absent any expenditure on protecting one's property,  -  =  + (), where p(i) represents the

rent on land at location i. Those who work from home have an arbitrarily small preference to be closer

to the city center, which ensures that they live on the urban edge instead of the middle of countryside.

Land has a rental value of  when it is not occupied by city residents.


        We assume that the density of land is one at every location, and that in the urbanized areas all

of that land is used by residents. In the land market equilibrium, land supply equals land demand. This

means that for any segment of the line of length "s", the total supply of land "s" must equal the number

of consumers who live along that land times the average land demanded by each of them. If we denote

by D(i) the density of consumers living at location "i" and by L(i) as the land demanded by the average
                                                                                         
consumer at that location, then for any two locations x and y, where x>y,  -  = =
                                                                                  ( ) ( ) .




                                                      15
             The optimization decisions of consumers in this model deliver two choices that shape the city.

Consumers must choose their location optimally, which implies  ( )( ) = -, for i>0, because

commuting costs rise with distance from the city center and must be exactly offset by declining rents.

Consumers must also choose their land consumption optimally, which implies ( ) =  /( ), so rent

times land consumption is constant. The last equation is a product of our functional form (which the

spatial optimization equation is not), but land consumption always increases as rents fall, because in a

spatial equilibrium rent declines are compensated changes.


             We next introduce insecure title into this standard model. To do so, we assume that the after

the property is bought or rented, it must be protected from expropriation or invasion. For simplicity, we

assume that the cost of protecting one's land is "k" times its value. We also assume that both

commuters and people working from home must pay this cost, so we do not model the Field (2005)

effect of families staying at home and not going to work or school in order to protect it.


             We are particularly interested in the link between security of title and urban density and land

rents, and in how security of title differs from the ease of transferring title. In Proposition 1 we focus

entirely on the security of title. Comparing these results with Proposition 2, which focuses on the cost of

transfer, shows how the title and its transfer exert different impacts of urban form. Proposition 1

describes an equilibrium where individuals buy and consume land after they know their workplace

location, and have imperfect security of tenure (all proofs are collected in the Online Appendix B).


                                                              
Proposition 1 (Insecurity of Title): If | | <  1 +                  , then rent equals ( ) =
                                                          2(1+ )

                                                    
     ||                                                | |         (1+)                             (1- )
 -                    +   and density is given by  -           +          . If  1 +            +             >
             2(1+ )                                        2                          2(1+ )       2 (1+ )

                         
| | >  1 +                     , then rent equals  and density is given by (1 +  ) /. Over the entire city,
                       2(1+)




                                                         16
                 2                           (1- )
density equals        1 +               +            , which is declining with k, and the average commute
                               2(1+ )        (1+ )

                            2 (1+ )            
distance equals         -              1 +             , which is also declining with k.
                               2             2 (1+ )



        Proposition 1 pairs the most canonical of all urban models with the need to protect one's

property. The split of the population into commuters and non-commuters leads to a two-sector urban

model. Land close to the city center is occupied by commuters, who live at particularly high density

levels close to formal work and pay proportionately higher rents. Rents decline exponentially with

distance from the city and density falls alongside the rent.


        Insecure property fits naturally into this model of urban equilibrium. In the non-commuting

zone, rent is tied down by the value of land in agricultural use. The cost of city living then scales up with

the cost of protecting one's title. As a consequence, larger properties become more expensive to

maintain when title protection is weak. Higher effective housing costs then lead city dwellers to

consume less land, which leads to higher density levels and lower welfare. A simple extension of the

model would allow residents to invest in physical structures. If these were also subject to expropriation,

structures would be smaller and cheaper structures when the right to possession is weak.


        Within the commuting zone, rents always fall when title is less secure. Density also rises, and the

city's overall footprint shrinks. Commute distances actually fall when title is insecure because the city as

a whole gets smaller. Proposition 1 implies that the shape of the city depends on the property title

regime. With weak property rights, people crowd more and consume less land.


        Figure 4 shows a calibration of the model when k=0 and k=.25. We assume that the city

population (M) is fixed at 100,000, q=.5,  = 20,  = 100,000 and t=4, which implies that when title is

secure (k=0), 50,000 people work in the city center, and the price of land at the city center is twice the

price at the edge of the city. The two curves both show how density levels peak at the city center and


                                                          17
then decline. At the urban edge, land price equals the price of agricultural land and density is flat

because those residents are not commuting into the city center. The high curve shows the impact of

insecure property rights, which raise density levels and make the city more compact. As the cost of

defending property rises, the amount of property consumed falls and the city becomes more crowded.


        Our cross-sectional data provides information on the share of the urban population living in a

"slum." In our model, we define "slum conditions" as living at a density level greater than a threshold

 . We recognize that there are millions of densely populated apartments that are not actually slums,

which provide living space with significant physical capital investment. As our model has no investment

in physical capital, we identify slum living ­ in the model ­ with high density.


                           -             -.5-
        Corollary 1: If         >  >                 , then the urbanites who live less than the distance
                                             

       +2 (1+)
                    from the city center live in slums, and the share of the population living in slums
          2

                                                                                           -
increases from 0 to q as the protection of property rights gets weaker (k rises). If  >            , then all of
                                                                                             

                                         -.5-
the urbanites live in slums and if  <                , then none of the urbanites live in slums.
                                             



        Corollary 1 describes the connection between property rights and the prevalence of slums in our

model. At the intermediate level of property rights, people living close to the city center live at higher

than slum level densities. As property right become weaker, density levels increase and the physical

footprint of slums rises as well. The share of the population living in slums falls as the protection of

property rights improves, because the urbanites invest in more housing consumption.


        This model predicts that slums are more prevalent near to the city center, but that might not be

the case if we extended the model to include income heterogeneity. If we allowed for rich and poor

urbanites, then those who could afford it will live closer to the city center to avoid commuting costs and

will be less likely to live in slums. This pattern of income sorting can explain why developing world

                                                     18
cities often have slums on the urban edge. A second explanation for decentralized slums is that

property rights were more poorly protected on the urban edge, making squatting easier.


         Densification could actually cause traffic to get better when title becomes less secure. In

contrast, an inability to trade property ­ perhaps because the institutions of transferring it are

ineffective -- will cause commuting distances to increase, which should presumably make traffic worse.

To capture this cost, we assume that people must choose their location before they learn whether they

will work in the city center or from home. The current model can be interpreted as one in which people

buy housing at time zero, before they have learn their employment location, and then move after they

learn where they will work at zero moving cost. Limits on the right transfer make this cost positive.


         At the extreme, we now consider what happens when people cannot move after learning their

employment status at time zero. This implies that some people who live far from city center end up with

a long commute, and others live close to the city center without a formal job and work from home.

Everyone is assumed to have a probability "q" of receiving a job at the city center, but then being stuck

in place. Consumers are risk neutral over consumption, as suggested by our functional forms. With these

assumptions Proposition 2 follows:

                                                                                              
                                                                                                 | |       
Proposition 2 (Inability to Transfer): If | | <        1 +           , rent equals ( ) =  -                       +  
                                                             2(1+)                                        2(1+)

                       
                          | |         (1+ )                                            
and density equals  -             +           . The city ends where | | =       1 +           , and density is
                              2                                                       2(1+)

                                               2       2(1+ ) +
zero. Over the entire city, density equals                        , which is declining with k, and the
                                                        2(1+)

                                             2 (1+ )                                          
average commute distance equals -                       1 +            which is higher than        -
                                               2              2 (1+ )                         

2 (1+ )              
           1 +              .
    2              2 (1+ )




                                                        19
        Proposition 2 tells us that rents and density at the city center are the same regardless of the

possibility of land transfer, but both decline more slowly with distance to the city center when there is

no ability to transfer property. The city as a whole becomes larger and density lower, because the

willingness to pay declines more slowly. The rent and density at the city center are not impacted

because the flatter slope of rents and densities is offset by the longer distance to the city's edge.


        Figure 5 shows the impact of inability to transfer on density levels. The two graphs use the same

parameter values as Figure 4, and k=0 for both. The lower curve is identical to the curve with strong title

protection in Figure 4; the higher curve shows the equilibrium density levels when there is no ability to

transfer title. The city's boundaries shrink. With a more compact city, density is also higher everywhere

that the city is inhabited. This densification works to reduce, but not to eliminate, the longer average

commutes created by the spatial mismatch.


        Commute distances become longer because of two related effects. First, there are people who

live close to the city center but are still working at home because they cannot move further out. They

are pushing out people who would love to live closer but cannot readjust their location after getting jobs

in the city center. Second, the city has gotten larger because willingness to pay declines more slowly

with distance from the city center.


        These two propositions shape our empirical work on property title, property transfer, and urban

form. The first proposition generates the prediction that insecurity of title should lead to higher density

levels, or equivalently smaller lot sizes.


         We also identify this prediction with the proportion of people living in slums, which are defined

by the U.N. as residences that lack "sufficient living space" or "durable housing of a permanent nature."

In our model, lot size determines living space, and weak possession right therefore implies that living

space may be insufficient. If we enriched the model to allow structures, and if those structures were also

                                                     20
subject to expropriation, then a limited right to possession would also imply less durable housing as

well. 8 Weak title protection may also deter the creation of apartment buildings, because developers also

fear for the loss of their property.


         Insecure title does not lead to longer commutes or more congestion. Proposition 2 generates

the prediction that inability to transfer property leads to a greater mismatch between people and jobs.

Because we do not have consistent data on commute time and distance, we measure excess driving

with the level of congestion, which should be greater if spatial mismatch is more severe.


4. Title, Transfer and Urban Structure


We next turn to the correlation between our property variables and urban outcomes. As discussed

above, security of title and ease of transfer ­ or title and transfer for short ­ should have different

impacts on two vital aspects of urban life. Security of title should impact the incentive to invest in

housing quality. Ability to transfer should impact the allocation of space to its most efficient users. We

begin with our measures of housing quality and then turn to the allocation of space within cities.


Residential Quality, Security of Title and Transfer


         According to Proposition 1, insecurity of title leads to higher urban density and more slums. We

start with our preferred measure of housing quality: the share of the population living in a slum as

measured by the United Nations. The United Nations "defines a slum household as a group of

individuals living under the same roof in an urban area who lack one or more of the following: 1. Durable

housing of a permanent nature that protects against extreme climate conditions. 2. Sufficient living




8
 For example, if it cost f(H) to provide housing that deliver the utility equivalent of H units of the consumption
good, where f(H) is increasing and convex and if it cost kH to defend that housing, then the first order condition for
housing would be 1-k=f'(H). The convex costs imply that the optimal level of H is falling with the need for self-
protection.

                                                         21
space which means not more than three people sharing the same room. 3. Easy access to safe water in

sufficient amounts at an affordable price. 4. Access to adequate sanitation in the form of a private or

public toilet shared by a reasonable number of people. 5. Security of tenure that prevents forced

evictions." 9 The first four conditions listed in this definition relate to the physical nature of the structure.

The fifth condition echoes the title security measures that we use as dependent variables, and for this

reason, we also use other outcomes that are not potentially biased by this overlap.


          The first column of Table 4 relates this variable to our measures of title security. The column

presents five regressions (all of which control for the logarithm of per capita GDP), and shows the

coefficients on both the index of quality of title and GDP. The coefficient on GDP is always strongly

negative, ranging from about -12 to -15. The value of -13 implies that as its level increases by one log

point (or approximately 170 percent), the share of the population living in a slum falls by 13 percent.


          In the top regression, the coefficient on the overall Title index is -1.45. As the standard deviation

of this variable is 7.5, a one standard deviation improvement in Title is associated with a 10.88 percent

reduction in the share of the population living in slums. If we use the -12.26 coefficient on GDP in this

regression, these coefficients imply that a one standard deviation improvement in Title is associated

with the same improvement in housing conditions as a 143 percent increase in income. The t-statistic on

this coefficient is 3.83, suggesting that its magnitude is both statistically and economically meaningful.


          We next consider individual subindices. The second regression shows our results for reliability of

property title infrastructure. This variable captures the accessibility of property titles, including

electronic access and centralized location. The coefficient is -2.64 and the standard error is .88, so again

it is statistically different from zero. The third regression turns to the transparency of information about

property title. The statistical relationship between this transparency measure and slums is even


9
    https://mirror.unhabitat.org/documents/media_centre/sowcr2006/SOWCR%205.pdf

                                                       22
stronger. The coefficient is -5.272, with a t-statistic of 3.78. A one standard deviation increase in this

variable is associated with a 7.48 percentage point fall in the share of people living in slums.


        The fourth regression focuses on the geographic coverage of land titling information. This

measure refers to the share of land that is formally registered and mapped. This variable is less strongly

correlated with the slum share outcome. The coefficient is -2.12 and the t-statistic is just slightly over

two. The final regression looks at the dispute resolution subindex. While effective dispute resolution

looms large in the desiderata for any property title system, the components in this index may not

determine the quality of dispute resolution on the ground. For example, the availability of the number

of title disputes may not actually matter for a slum dweller who is trying to protect his home against

expropriation. The coefficient is negative, but it is statistically indistinct from zero and small.


        Overall, the title variables correlate strongly with slum share even when controlling for income.

These correlations do not prove a causal link, but they are consistent with the predictions of Proposition

1.


        Columns (2)-(4) look at density and average property size. Column (2) shows that overall

population density is negatively correlated with the overall index and all four subindices, as predicted by

Proposition 1. In three cases, the correlation is statistically significant at conventional levels. A one

standard deviation increase in the overall title index is associated with .23 log point (or about 25

percent) decrease in urban density, which is quite meaningful. A one standard deviation increase in the

reliability of title infrastructure is associated with a fall of density of about 30 percent.


        In columns (3) and (4), we turn to average plot size for the Urban Atlas. The Atlas presents the

plot size variables for formal and informal plots in the city. The title system would presumably be

irrelevant for informal settlements if these areas had no formal title whatsoever, however informal

settlements often have formal title but the occupants are squatting, or they are "unplanned settlements

                                                       23
and areas where housing is not in compliance with current planning and building regulations." 10 To the

extent that the owners of informal housing are also protected by the title system, the model's

implication that weak title system leads to smaller lot size stands. The poorer owners of these lots are

particularly vulnerable to expropriation, so weaker title reduces their willingness to invest the most. 11


         The title index is positively associated with both formal and informal lot size, and the coefficient

is statistically significant in the informal lot size regression at the 10% level. The component of the index

with the strongest relationship with lot size is the quality dispute resolution. This measure is statistically

significant in both regressions. Overall, these results provide some evidence, in line with Proposition 1,

connecting housing quality (our measure of investment) with the strength of the title.


         Table 5 shows the same basic patterns with our measures of transfer, including financial costs,

time costs, and the number of procedures involved in transferring property. Our model predicts that

these transfer variables should not be helpful in predicting housing quality, and that is indeed what we

find. Only transfer cost is associated with slum share, as shown in the first column. All three variables

are correlated with the density of the built-up area, but as we show in regression (6), these correlations

disappear when we control for the Title index. Regression (5) shows that Title is significantly correlated

with the slum share in all specifications, but the transfer variables generally do not predict slum share

once we control for Title.


         Our model predicts that the right to possess and the right to transfer should have different

implications for plot size, or the physical quality of housing. Just as the model predicts, weak title




10
  https://stats.oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=1351.
11
  The largest informal lot sizes in our data occur the cities of formal socialist republics, including Warsaw and Kiev.
The informal lots in these areas are not the lawless slums of the world's poorest countries, but former public
housing spaces that have not yet been fully formalized.

                                                          24
protection is associated with higher density and greater prevalence of slums. Stronger transfer rights are

not associated with any of these outcomes, once we control for Title.


Spatial Mismatch, Security of Title and Transfer


        We next turn to our spatial mismatch variable, which according to Proposition 2 is more likely to

be correlated with Transfer costs than with the security of Title. The inability to buy and sell homes

means that as people's economic conditions change, they find it difficult to relocate. We should expect

to see longer commutes when the transfer of property becomes more difficult. Ideally, we would

identify longer commutes with the physical distance between work and home. Unfortunately, we do not

have that data for a sufficiently large sample of our cities, and instead use the TomTom data on

congestion. The extra driving that comes from an inability to adapt residential location leads to more

congestion as long as road infrastructure construction does not improve to match new travel demand.


        Table 6 has four columns. The outcome is the TomTom congestion measure defined as the extra

time added by traffic on a basic car trip. In the first column, we show the there is a significant correlation

between the number of procedures needed to change title and the congestion index. A one standard

deviation increase in this variable (2.19 extra procedures) is associated with a 3.3 percent increase in

congestion. In columns (2) and (3), we show our results using the logarithm of time to transfer property

and the financial cost of transferring property. Neither of these variables are statistically significant at

conventional levels, but both coefficients are positive and more than one standard error greater than

zero. The coefficient on transfer time, for example, suggests that a 1 log point increase in transfer time is

associated with a 1.7 percentage point increase in travel times, which is still economically meaningful.

Finally, in the last regression, we show the results using the index of title transfer, which simple sums

the z-scores of our three measures of barriers. The coefficient is .016. The standard deviation of this




                                                      25
index measure is 2.14, which means that a one standard deviation increase in the difficulties of

transferring title increases travel time by 3.4 percent.


        In all specifications, the coefficient of the title variable is zero. In our model, better Title could

even reduce travel times, because density increases. We do not find that negative impact, but we do

find support for the Proposition 2 prediction that difficulty of transfer, but not the security of title,

increases the spatial mismatch between work and home. Travel congestion falls with log GDP, which

may be because richer countries are building high rises close to city centers, or spending more on the

infrastructure which can reduce travel times.


        Our final test, which falls outside the predictions of the model, considers the penetration of

housing loans in a country. Theoretically, mortgage lending relies both on reliable title, since the lender

requires valid collateral, and reliable transfer procedures, since the lender must be able to repossess

and sell collateral should the borrower default. Figures 6 and 7 present the relationships between our

measure of security of title and our measure of transfer procedures, respectively, and housing loan

penetration. The results are consistent with the obvious theoretical prediction, namely that both

possession and transfer rights are associated with greater housing loan penetration. At the same time,

these graphs do not control for per capita income, and housing loan penetration is extremely low in

poor countries across the quality of property rights institutions. In the regressions, we take these

concerns into account.


        Table 7 presents the regressions controlling for log GDP per capita. The first three columns show

that, in the full sample, controlling for per capita income, housing loan penetration is significantly

affected by both Title and the number of Transfer procedures, although only the latter variable survives

when both are included in the regression. Column (4) shows that this result also holds if we focus only

on the subsample of richer countries, where we see most variation in housing loan penetration. Column


                                                      26
(5) shows interestingly that the same result on the central role of transfer institutions holds also for rural

housing loan penetration, which has not been the focus of our analysis.


        Tables 5, 6, and 7 together illustrate how different elements in the bundle of property rights

have different impacts on urban form. As the model predicted, stronger protection of possession is

correlated with more land per person and better quality of physical housing. Easier land transfer is not

correlated with these outcomes, but is negatively correlated with the congestion times. These findings

suggest that the efficiency of land allocation depends on the ability to transfer property, but the quality

of living space depends on the ability to possess it. In addition, Table 7 shows that the penetration of

housing loans depends on both the security of title and on the number of transfer procedures, but

especially on the latter. This is a significant result since, as we have noted, most economic research has

focused on the benefits of title rather than transfer institutions for economic outcomes.


5. The evolution of Title and Transfer over time.


        We have focused on the effect of Title and Transfer rules on urban form, and showed that poor

property rights protection is often associated with inefficient urban outcomes, such as slums and traffic

congestion, as well as with stunted mortgage markets. These findings raise the question of whether

these rules are getting better or worse over time. Many legal institutions in the world, including the

inefficient ones, persist for decades and even centuries and can be driven by their intimate connection

to a country's legal tradition (La Porta et al 2008, Balas et al 2009). But there are other institutions, such

as the regulation of entry, that have been improving dramatically over time (Djankov 2009).


        The rules of Title and Transfer are not related to legal traditions, but do they change? Increased

urban growth is likely to increase the costs of weak possession rights and of ineffective property

transfers. An optimistic hypothesis, inspired by Demsetz (1967), is that these increased costs will lead

polities to invest in the fixed costs needed to reform their institutions. A related view holds that

                                                      27
technological change makes it easier to register and transfer title electronically and thus effectively

lowers the cost of securing property rights. A pessimistic view might maintain, in contrast, that

economic and political changes empower interest groups to impose new limitations on transfer or

create more risk of expropriation.


        Figure 8 supports for the more optimistic view. We have only limited time series data on Title

institutions between 2015 and 2019, but the evidence in Panel A shows that our composite measure of

the security of Title has been improving in countries in all income groups. In contrast, we have 16 years

of data on Transfer rules, and find for procedures, time, and cost a dramatic improvement for countries

of all income levels. Panel B shows a decline in the number of transfer procedures, particularly in

countries in the bottom two income quintiles. Panels C and D show large reductions for Transfer time

and Transfer cost, again present at all income levels, but particularly dramatic for the poor countries.


        We examined a number of country-specific case studies about reform and found that much of

this improvement is apolitical and technocratic. In many cases, new technologies, especially electronic

record keeping, drive the reduction in time and cost. In other cases, procedures fell because of a

bureaucratic push towards simplification. These findings support Demsetz's (1967) observation that ­ at

least some ­ institutions evolve toward lower transaction costs and a more efficient form.


6. Conclusion


The Blackstonian bundle of property rights is not merely a theoretical construct. The strength of the

different rights that are associated with land ownership can be measured. They can be analyzed as

distinct, but related forces that shape economic and urban development.


        We have focused on rights related to possession of title and related to ease of transfer in 190

countries. These institutions differ significantly across cities and countries. Some places make it


                                                     28
extremely difficult to transfer property, while others offer limited protection of possession. As policy-

reformers have limited capacity to reform institutions, scholars must develop a richer understanding of

the value of the different types of property rights.


        The work in this paper suggests that both theoretically and empirically, the right to possession

and the right to transfer have different impacts on urban form. Weak possession rights reduce the

incentives to build better housing or own more land. The empirical link between limited title and urban

slums is in line with our theory. Limited ability to transfer property makes it difficult to match workplace

with home location. The empirical link between the number of procedures needed to transfer property

and traffic congestion is also consistent with our model. Finally, we also showed that the development

of housing loan finance relies on both title and transfer institutions, but especially the latter.


        While many countries provide only weak protection of title and pose many barriers to transfer,

the good news is that these institutions are improving in most countries, and particularly in the

developing world. In line with Demsetz (1967), protection of property rights is costly, but still, over time,

the world appears to be moving toward more efficient outcomes. As Demsetz (1967) predicted, as

technology lowers the cost of improving property rights, those rights eventually improve.




                                                       29
                                               References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson. 2001. The Colonial Origins of Comparative
      Development: An Empirical Investigation. American Economic Review 91(5): 13691401.

Alchian, Armen. 2008. Property Rights. The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics.

Badev, Anton, Thorsten Beck, Ligia Vado and Simon Walley. 2014. Housing Finance Across Countries:
        New Data and Analysis. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6756.

Balas, Aron, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer. 2009. The Divergence of
        Legal Procedures. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1(2): 138-162.

Barro, Robert J. 1990. Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics
        106(2): 407443.

Barzel, Yoram. 1982. Measurement Cost and the Organization of Markets. Journal of Law and Economics
         25(1): 27-48.

Behrer, A. Patrick, Edward Glaeser, Giacomo Ponzetto and Andrei Shleifer. 2020. Security property
        rights. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Besley, Timothy J. 1995. Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence from Ghana.
        Journal of Political Economy 103(5): 903937.

Brueckner, Jan. 1987. The Structure of Urban Equilibria: A Unified Treatment of the Muth-Mills Model.
       Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics 2: 821-845.

Chong, Alberto, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer. 2014. Letter Grading
       Government Efficiency. Journal of the European Economic Association 12(2): 277-299.

Collier, Paul and Anthony Venables. 2014. Closing Coal: Economic and Moral Incentives. Oxford Review
         of Economic Policy 30(3): 492-512.

De Long, J. Bradford, and Andrei Shleifer. 1993. Princes and Merchants: European City Growth Before
       the Industrial Revolution. Journal of Law and Economics 36(2): 671­702.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Leora Klapper, Dorothe Singer, Saniya Ansar, and Jake Hess. 2018. The Global
       Findex Database 2017: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution. World Bank:
       Washington, DC.

Demsetz, Harold. 1967. Towards a Theory of Property Rights. American Economic Review 57: 347-59.

De Soto, Hernando. 1989. The Other Path: The Invisible Revolution in the Third World. New York, NY:
       Harper and Row.

De Soto, Hernando. 2000. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
       Everywhere Else. New York, NY: Basic Books.

Djankov, Simeon. 2009. The Regulation of Entry: A Survey. The World Bank Research Observer 24(2):
       183-2013.


                                                   30
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. Courts. The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2): 453-517.

Ellickson, Robert. 1993. Property in Land. Yale Law Journal 102: 1315-1400.

Field, Erica M. 2005. Property Rights and Investment in Urban Slums. Journal of the European Economic
         Association 3(2-3): 279­290.

Field, Erica M. 2007. Entitled to Work: Urban Tenure Security and the Labor Supply in Peru. Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 122(4): 1561­1602.

Glaeser, Edward, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer. 2004. Do Institutions
        Cause Growth. Journal of Economic Growth 9: 271-303.

Glaeser, Edward and Erzo Luttmer. 2003. The misallocation of housing under rent control. American
        Economic Review 93(4): 1027-1046.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio LópezdeSilanes, Cristian PopEleches, and Andrei Shleifer. 2004. Judicial
        Checks and Balances. Journal of Political Economy 112(2): 445-470.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. The Economic Consequences of
        Legal Origins. Journal of Economic Literature 46(2): 285-332.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny. 1999. The quality of
        government. The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15(1): 222-279.

Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat, baron de. 1748. De l'esprit des lois. Geneva: Barrillot et fils.

North, Douglass C. 1981. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: Norton.

Olson, Mancur. 1965. The logic of collective action: public goods and the theory of groups. Cambridge,
        Mass: Harvard University Press.

Olson, Mancur. 1993. Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development. American Political Science Review 87
        (3): 567-76.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. 1998. The Grabbing Hand. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University
         Press.

Smith, Adam. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. London: W. Strahan
        and T. Cadell.




                                                    31
                                Table 1: Variable Descriptions

Variable                          Label                                                  Level
Title                             Security of Title (0-30) in 2015                       City
Reliability of Infrastructure     Reliability of Infrastructure Index (0-8) in 2015      City
Transparency of Information       Transparency of Information Index (0-6) in 2015        City
Geographic Coverage               Geographic Coverage Index (0-8) in 2015                City
Land Dispute Resolution           Land Dispute Resolution Index (0-8) in 2015            City
Transfer                          Property transfer efficiency index in 2019             City
Transfer procedures               Procedures to transfer property (number)               City
Transfer time                     Time to transfer property (days)                       City
Transfer cost                     Cost to transfer property (% of property value)        City
UN Slum Share                     UN HABITAT, Population living in slums (% of urban     Country
                                  pop) in 2014
Log(Built Up Area Density)        UA2, Built-up Area Density (persons/ha) (circa 2013)   City
Log(Formal Lot Size)              UA1, Average Plot Size in Formal Land Subdivisions     City
                                  in 2015
Log(Informal Lot Size)            UA1, Average Plot Size in Informal Land Subdivisions   City
                                  in 2015
Log(GDP)                          WDI, log of GDP                                        Country
Government effectiveness          WB, WGI Government effectiveness (-2.5 - 2.5)          Country
Human Capital                     WB, Human Capital Index (2017) (0-1)                   Country
TomTom congestion level           Congestion (% more travel time than in baseline        City
                                  traffic)
Expropriation with adequate       WJP, The government does not expropriate without       Country
compensation                      lawful process and adequate compensation (0-1)
Housing Loan Penetration          WB, Percentage of adult population with an             Country
                                  outstanding loan to purchase a home




                                             32
                                                 Table 2: The Improvement of Title and Transfer Rules with Economic Development

                Title          Reliability               Transparency         Geographic            Dispute        Transfer procedures    Transfer cost   Transfer time   Transfer
                                                                               Coverage            Resolution
Log(GDP per     3.393***             1.255***             0.3888***           1.3130***            0.4005***             -0.2336**        -0.7901***       -0.3005***     -0.539***
  capita)
                 (0.2858)             (0.1143)             (0.0658)            (0.1294)             (0.0688)              (0.1100)          (0.2155)        (0.0497)       (0.0997)
  Human         39.648***           14.572***             5.1440***           14.2826***           5.2665***             -3.9290***       -11.5078***      -3.6276***     -7.411***
capital index
                 (2.3786)             (1.011)              (0.6342)            (1.2465)             (0.6350)              (1.126)           (2.057)         (0.5016)       (0.970)
Government      5.511***            1.9527***             0.7674***           2.0937***            0.6261***             -0.6130***       -1.3493***       -0.5114***     -1.015***
effectiveness
                 (0.3937)             (0.1626)             (0.0918)            (0.1808)             (0.1029)              (0.1613)          (0.3415)        (0.0725)       (0.144)

Standard errors in parentheses
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                    Table 3 - Partial correlations Title and Transfer Indices and Subindices Holding Per capita Income Constant

                                                  Title        Procedures   Time            Cost           Reliability     Transparency    Coverage
                               Procedure          -0.296***
                               Time               -0.319***    0.206*
                               Cost               -0.377***    0.130*        0.157**
                               Reliability        0.849***     -0.280***     -0.317*** -0.412***
                               Transparency       0.581***     -0.144*       -0.271*** -0.243**            0.473***
                               Coverage           0.770***     -0.192***     -0.114       -0.189**         0.453***        0.167**
                               Resolution         0.706***     -0.286***     -0.308*** -0.238**            0.520***        0.328***        0.405***
                                                                  * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                                                           33
                        Table 4 ­ Urban Land Outcomes and Title.

                                 UN Slum          Log(Built Up    Log(Formal   Log
                                 Share            Area Density)   Lot Size)    (Informal
                                                                               Lot Size)
Title                            -1.449***        -0.0304***      0.0207       0.0402*
                                 (0.378)          (0.0114)        (0.0170)     (0.0222)
Log(GDP per capita)              -12.26***        -0.144**        0.116        0.0537
                                 (1.937)          (0.0612)        (0.0931)     (0.127)
Reliability of Infrastructure    -2.640***        -0.104***       0.0229       0.128**
                                 (0.884)          (0.0281)        (0.0441)     (0.0514)
Log(GDP per capita)              -12.92***        -0.117**        0.171*       0.0157
                                 (2.012)          (0.0564)        (0.0906)     (0.119)
Transparency of Information      -5.272***        -0.0572         0.0190       -0.0384
                                 (1.395)          (0.0550)        (0.0682)     (0.104)
Log(GDP per capita)              -13.79***        -0.237***       0.201***     0.236**
                                 (1.777)          (0.0502)        (0.0609)     (0.111)
Geographic Coverage              -2.119**         -0.0219         0.0341       0.0196
                                 (1.042)          (0.0268)        (0.0377)     (0.0528)
Log(GDP per capita)              -14.80***        -0.227***       0.143        0.189
                                 (1.875)          (0.0612)        (0.0906)     (0.118)
Land Dispute Resolution          -2.006           -0.101**        0.112*       0.171**
                                 (1.626)          (0.0456)        (0.0620)     (0.0754)
Log(GDP per capita)              -15.10***        -0.214***       0.153**      0.125
                                 (1.946)          (0.0482)        (0.0613)     (0.0973)
N                                80               65              52           40
Standard errors in parentheses
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                             34
                                    Table 5 ­ Urban Land Outcomes and Transfer.


                       UN Slum        Log(Built Up   Log(Formal    Log             UN Slum      Log(Built Up
                       Share          Area           Lot Size)     (Informal Lot   Share        Area Density)
                                      Density)                     Size)

Transfer_procedures    -0.199         0.0599**       -0.00328      0.00536         -0.640       0.0415
                       (1.005)        (0.0281)       (0.0368)      (0.0491)        (0.931)      (0.0286)
Title                                                                              -1.481***    -0.0252**
                                                                                   (0.382)      (0.0119)
Log(GDP per capita)    -15.93***      -0.236***      0.206***      0.217**         -11.99***    -0.147**
                       (1.852)        (0.0449)       (0.0596)      (0.0972)        (0.931)      (0.0607)
Log(Transfer_time)     -0.4839        0.1323**       0.0267        -0.0964         -5.638**     0.0830
                       (2.467)        (0.0645)       (0.0846)      (0.1330)        (2.477)      (0.0673)
Title                                                                              -1.881***    -0.0250**
                                                                                   (0.414)      (0.0122)
Log(GDP per capita)    -16.110***     -0.2104***     0.219***      0.1881*         -12.623***   -0.133**
                       (1.939)        (0.0500)       (0.0651)      (0.101)         (1.894)      (0.0616)
Transfer_cost          1.036**        0.0330*        -0.00106      -0.0495         0.4861       0.0234
                       (0.413)        (0.0190)       (0.0222)      (0.0321)        (0.433)      (0.0188)
Title                                                                              -1.252***    -0.027**
                                                                                   (0.416)      (0.0117)
Log(GDP per capita)    -15.22***      -0.246***      0.208***      0.171*          -12.40***    -0.145**
                       (1.785)        (0.0448)       (0.0554)      (0.0962)        (1.938)      (0.061)
Transfer               1.3516         0.0827**       0.00286       -0.045          -0.896       0.598*
                       (1.157)        (0.0311)       (0.0398)      (0.0582)        (1.235)      (0.0331)
Title                                                                              -1.605***    -0.0219*
                                                                                   (0.4361)     (0.0122)
Log(GDP per capita)     -15.64***     -0.2093***     0.2102***     0.1866*         -12.081***   -0.139**
                        (1.836)       (0.0468)       (0.0621)      (0.101)         (1.958)      (0.0602)
N                       80            65             52            40              80           65
Standard errors in parentheses
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

                                                        35
                                 Table 6: Spatial Mismatch and Transfer.
                      Traffic congestion     Traffic congestion Traffic congestion   Traffic congestion
Transfer_procedures 0.0151**
                    (0.005919)
Log(Transfer_time)                           0.0175
                                             (0.01325)
Transfer_cost                                                   0.00698
                                                                (0.00437)
Transfer                                                                             0.01578**
                                                                                     (0.00653)
Title                  0.00120                -0.001178         -0.00155             0.000258
                       (0.00295)              (0.00288)         (0.00281)            (0.00286)
Log(GDP per capita) -0.06696***               -0.07097***       -0.0764***           -0.0692***
                       (0.0156)               (0.0162)          (0.0159)             (0.01554)
N                      56                     56                56                   56
Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 ***p<0.01.




                                                   36
                                              Table 7: Housing Loan Penetration, Title, and Transfer Procedures.

                                              Housing Loan    Housing Loan         Housing Loan     Housing Loan   Housing Loan
                                              Penetration     Penetration          Penetration      Penetration,   Penetration,
                                                                                                    Upper income   rural
                                                                                                    countries
                       Title                  0.2591**                             0.1107           0.1264         0.0654
                                              (0.1223)                             (0.1236)         (0.1707)       (0.1441)
                       Transfer_procedures                    -1.1498***           -1.066***        -1.1083***     -1.2160***
                                                              (0.2719)             (0.2876)         (0.3905)       (0.3355)
                       Log(GDP per capita)    4.403***        4.9562***            4.579***         9.887***       4.5446***
                                              (0.6132)        (0.4096)             (0.5881)         (1.2128)       (0.6860)
                       N                      138             138                  138              73             138
                       Adj R-squared          0.5497          0.5891               0.5885           0.6390         0.5024
                       Standard errors in parentheses.
                       * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01


Note: "Upper income countries" are defined as countries in the top 50% by per capita GDP in 2017.




                                                                              37
Figure 1 ­ Correlation between Security of Title and expropriation risk.




       Figure 2 ­ Security of Title, by log(GDP) quintiles in 2018.




                                   38
            Figure 3 ­ Security of Title and Transfer procedures.




Figure 4 ­ Security of title, population density and distance from city center.




                                      39
Figure 5 ­ Ability to transfer, population density and distance from city center.




                 Figure 6 ­ Housing Loan Penetration and Title




                                       40
Figure 7 ­ Housing Loan Penetration and Transfer procedures




                            41
          Figure 8 ­ Evolution of Title and Transfer over time, by 2004 quintiles of log(GDP per capita).

Panel A                                          Panel B




Panel C                                          Panel D




                                                        42
                                                      Online Appendix A


                               World Bank Doing Business (DB) - Registering Property Data

The World Bank records the full sequence of procedures necessary for a limited liability company (the buyer) to purchase
a property from another business (the seller) and to transfer the property title to the buyer's name so that the buyer can
use the property for expanding its business, as collateral in taking out new loans or, if necessary, to sell the property to
another business. It also measures the time (in calendar days) and cost (as a percentage of the property value) to complete
each of these procedures. DB also measures the quality of the land administration system in each economy. If private
sector entities were unable to register property transfers in a particular year, the economy receives a "no practice" mark
on the procedures, time and cost indicators. A "no practice" economy receives a score of 0 on the quality of land
administration index even if its legal framework includes provisions related to land administration. A more detailed
description of the data is available on the Doing Business website.

Efficiency of transferring property

As recorded by DB, the process of transferring property starts with obtaining the necessary documents, such as a recent
copy of the seller's title if necessary and conducting due diligence as required. The transaction is considered complete
when it is opposable to third parties and when the buyer can use the property for expanding his or her business, as
collateral for a bank loan or resell it. Every procedure required by law or necessary in practice is included, whether it is
the responsibility of the seller or the buyer or must be completed by a third party on their behalf. Local property lawyers,
notaries and property registries provide information on procedures as well as the time and cost to complete each of them.

To make the data comparable across economies, several assumptions about the parties to the transaction, the property
and the procedures are used.

The parties (buyer and seller):

    ·   Are limited liability companies (or their legal equivalent).
    ·   Are located in the periurban (that is, on the outskirts of the city but still within its official limits) area of the
        economy's largest business city. For 11 economies the data are also collected for the second largest business
        city.
    ·   Are 100% domestically and privately owned.
    ·   Perform general commercial activities.

The property:

    ·   Has a value of 50 times income per capita, which equals the sale price.
    ·   Is fully owned by the seller.
    ·   Has no mortgages attached and has been under the same ownership for the past 10 years.
    ·   Is registered in the land registry or cadastre, or both, and is free of title disputes.
    ·   Is located in a periurban commercial zone (that is, on the outskirts of the city but still within its official limits),
        and no rezoning is required.
    ·   Consists of land and a building. The land area is 557.4 square meters (6,000 square feet). A two-story warehouse
        of 929 square meters (10,000 square feet) is located on the land. The warehouse is 10 years old, is in good
        condition, has no heating system and complies with all safety standards, building codes and other legal
        requirements. The property, consisting of land and a building, will be transferred in its entirety.

                                                              43
    ·   Will not be subject to renovations or additional construction following the purchase.
    ·   Has no trees, natural water sources, natural reserves or historical monuments of any kind.
    ·   Will not be used for special purposes, and no special permits, such as for residential use, industrial plants, waste
        storage or certain types of agricultural activities, are required.
    ·   Has no occupants, and no other party holds a legal interest in it.

Quality of land administration

The quality of land administration index is composed of five other indices: the reliability of infrastructure, transparency of
information, geographic coverage, land dispute resolution and equal access to property rights. Data are collected for each
economy's largest business city. For 11 economies the data are also collected for the second largest business city.

The quality of land administration index is the sum of the scores on the five indices. The index ranges from 0 to 30 with
higher values indicating better quality of the land administration system.

Reliability of infrastructure index

The reliability of infrastructure index has six components:

    1. In what format land title certificates are kept at the immovable property registry of the largest business city of
       the economy. A score of 2 is assigned if the majority of land title certificates are fully digital; 1 if scanned; 0 if
       kept in paper format.
    2. Whether there is a comprehensive and functional electronic database for checking all encumbrances, caveats,
       charges or privileges affecting a registered property's encumbrances. A score of 1 is assigned if yes; 0 if no.
    3. In what format cadastral plans are kept at the mapping agency of the largest business city of the economy. A
       score of 2 is assigned if the majority of cadastral plans are fully digital; 1 if scanned; 0 if kept in paper format.
    4. Whether there is a geographic information system (a fully digital geographic representation of the land plot) --
       an electronic database for recording boundaries, checking plans and providing cadastral information. A score of
       1 is assigned if yes; 0 if no.
    5. Whether the land ownership registry and mapping agency are linked. A score of 1 is assigned if information
       about land ownership and maps is kept in a single database or in linked databases; 0 if there is no connection
       between different databases.
    6. How immovable property is identified. A score of 1 is assigned if both the immovable property registry and the
       mapping agency use the same identification number for properties; 0 if there are multiple identifiers.

Transparency of information index

The transparency of information index has 10 components:

    1. Whether information on land ownership is made publicly available. A score of 1 is assigned if information on
       land ownership is accessible by anyone; 0 if access is restricted.
    2. Whether the list of documents required for completing all types of property transactions is made easily available
       to the public. A score of 0.5 is assigned if the list of documents is easily accessible online or on a public board; 0
       if it is not made available to the public or if it can be obtained only in person.
    3. Whether the fee schedule for completing all types of property transactions is made easily available to the public.
       A score of 0.5 is assigned if the fee schedule is easily accessible online or on a public board free of charge; 0 if it
       is not made available to the public or if it can be obtained only in person.



                                                              44
    4. Whether the immovable property agency formally specifies the time frame to deliver a legally binding document
        proving property ownership. A score of 0.5 is assigned if such service standard is accessible online or on a public
        board; 0 if it is not made available to the public or if it can be obtained only in person.
    5. Whether there is a specific and independent mechanism for filing complaints about a problem that occurred at
        the agency in charge of immovable property registration. A score of 1 is assigned if there is a specific and
        independent mechanism for filing a complaint; 0 if there is only a general mechanism or no mechanism.
    6. Whether there are publicly available official statistics tracking the number of transactions at the immovable
        property registration agency in the largest business city. A score of 0.5 is assigned if statistics are published
        about property transfers in the largest business city in the past calendar year at the latest on May 1st of the
        following year; 0 if no such statistics are made publicly available.
    7. Whether maps of land plots are made publicly available. A score of 0.5 is assigned if cadastral plans are
        accessible by anyone; 0 if access is restricted.
    8. Whether the fee schedule for accessing cadastral plans is made easily available to the public. A score of 0.5 is
        assigned if the fee schedule is easily accessible online or on a public board free of charge; 0 if it is not made
        available to the public or if it can be obtained only in person.
    9. Whether the mapping agency formally specifies the time frame to deliver an updated cadastral plan. A score of
        0.5 is assigned if the service standard is accessible online or on a public board; 0 if it is not made available to the
        public or if it can be obtained only in person.
    10. Whether there is a specific and independent mechanism for filing complaints about a problem that occurred at
        the mapping agency. A score of 0.5 is assigned if there is a specific and independent mechanism for filing a
        complaint; 0 if there is only a general mechanism or no mechanism.

Geographic coverage index

The geographic coverage index has four components:

    1. How complete the coverage of the land registry is at the level of the largest business city. A score of 2 is assigned
       if all privately held land plots in the city are formally registered at the land registry; 0 if not.
    2. How complete the coverage of the land registry is at the level of the economy. A score of 2 is assigned if all
       privately held land plots in the economy are formally registered at the land registry; 0 if not.
    3. How complete the coverage of the mapping agency is at the level of the largest business city. A score of 2 is
       assigned if all privately held land plots in the city are mapped; 0 if not.
    4. How complete the coverage of the mapping agency is at the level of the economy. A score of 2 is assigned if all
       privately held land plots in the economy are mapped; 0 if not.

Land dispute resolution index

The land dispute resolution index assesses the legal framework for immovable property registration and the accessibility
of dispute resolution mechanisms. The index has eight components:

    1. Whether the law requires that all property sale transactions be registered at the immovable property registry to
       make them opposable to third parties. A score of 1.5 is assigned if yes; 0 if no.
    2. Whether the formal system of immovable property registration is subject to a guarantee. A score of 0.5 is
       assigned if either a state or private guarantee over immovable property registration is required by law; 0 if no
       such guarantee is required.
    3. Whether there is a specific, out-of-court compensation mechanism to cover for losses incurred by parties who
       engaged in good faith in a property transaction based on erroneous information certified by the immovable
       property registry. A score of 0.5 is assigned if yes; 0 if no.


                                                              45
    4. Whether the legal system requires verification of the legal validity of the documents (such as the sales, transfer
       or conveyance deed) necessary for a property transaction. A score of 0.5 is assigned if there is a review of legal
       validity, either by the registrar or by a professional (such as a notary or a lawyer); 0 if there is no review.
    5. Whether the legal system requires verification of the identity of the parties to a property transaction. A score of
       0.5 is assigned if there is verification of identity, either by the registrar or by a professional (such as a notary or a
       lawyer); 0 if there is no verification.
    6. Whether there is a national database to verify the accuracy of government-issued identity documents. A score
       of 1 is assigned if such a national database is available; 0 if not.
    7. How much time it takes to obtain a decision from a court of first instance (without an appeal) in a standard land
       dispute between two local businesses over tenure rights worth 50 times income per capita and located in the
       largest business city. A score of 3 is assigned if it takes less than one year; 2 if it takes between one and two
       years; 1 if it takes between two and three years; 0 if it takes more than three years.
    8. Whether there are publicly available statistics on the number of land disputes at the economy level in the first
       instance court. For the 11 economies where the data are also collected for the second largest business city, city-
       level statistics are taken into account. A score of 0.5 is assigned if statistics are published about land disputes in
       the economy in the past calendar year; 0 if no such statistics are made publicly available.

Equal access to property rights index

The equal access to property rights index has two components:

    1. Whether unmarried men and unmarried women have equal ownership rights to property. A score of -1 is
       assigned if there are unequal ownership rights to property; 0 if there is equality.
    2. Whether married men and married women have equal ownership rights to property. A score of -1 is assigned if
       there are unequal ownership rights to property; 0 if there is equality.




                                                              46
                                                        Online Appendix B

Proofs:


Proof of Proposition 1: The model is symmetric, so exactly M/2 people will live in positive space and M/2 people will

live in negative space. The paper who work at home will live on the urban edge. The individuals who commute will

choose land to maximize:         -  - ( + 1)( ) +  ln(), so that (1 + )( ) =  .                           The non-commuters will

maximize  - ( + 1)( ) +  ln(), At the urban edge,  = ( ) and so density will equal 1/ or  (1 +  )/.


Individuals must be indifferent across locations, which implies that for commuters in positive space - = (1 +  )( ),

                                          ( )       
and the differential equation for p is:         =- .
                                          ( )       


                                                                                                                         
                                                                  ||                                                        ||
If , denotes the maximum price at i=0, then ( ) =  -  , land consumption satisfies ( ) =                              
                                                                                                                          and density
                                                                                                               (1+ )


                  (1+) -  | |
satisfies ( ) =          .
                    


                                                                                               
                                                                                                                      
At the border of the commuting zone, which we denote as point b (and -b),  =  -  or  =   .
                                                                                                                      



To close the model, we solve for , by noting that the quantity of commuters, qM, must live in the area bounded by b

                                     (1+) -            (1+ )                 
                                                                                          -
                                                                                                               
and -b, which implies        ==0
                                                   =            1 -  -  = (1 +  )                 , so that           +  =  and  =
                        2                                                                                     2(1+)

       2(1+) +                                                 2         2(1+ ) +         (1- )
                   .        The total expanse of the city is                         +             and so total density is
          2(1+)                                                             2(1+ )        (1+ )

2       2(1+ ) +             (1- )
                    +
          2(1+ )             (1+ )




The average commute length for commuters satisfies


          2(1 +  )  -   2(1 +  )                 2 (1 + )       
                      =           -  -  +  = 1 -           1 +          
                   =0                                          2 (1 + )




                                                                       47
The average commute length for the whole city is that quantity times q. Differentiation shows that this is declining with

k.




                                                                                                                      (1+)
Proof of Corollary 1: A slum dweller is defined as an individual living at a density level of  or higher. If                     >  or
                                                                                                                          

      -
 >           , then the residents of the city's edge (and everyone else as well) lives as slum level densities.
         



                                     (1+)                              -.5-
At the city center, density equals            +       and if  <                    , then density at the city center will lie below
                                                  2                        


slum levels and no one will live in a slum.


      -             -.5-                                                            +2 (1+ ) -  | |
If          >  >               , then people will live in slums if and only if                           >  , or
                                                                                     2

         +2 (1+)
                     > | |. The number of urbanities who live that close to the city center equals
            2

       +2 (1+)
                +2 (1+)               
                                                      2 - (1+)
                                    -  =  -
        2
2=0
                  
                                                                           . The share of urbanites living in slums equals  -
                           2                                  

2 - (1+)                                                                              -                              -.5-
                , which is monontonically increasing in k and equals q when                  =  and 0 when  =                        .
                                                                                                                              



Proof of Proposition 2: The model is symmetric, so exactly M/2 people will live in positive space and commute and M/2

people will live in negative space. Everyone has a probability "q" of commuting and 1-q of not commuting. At any

location, individuals will choose land to maximize:          ( + (1 -  ) ) -  - ( + 1)( ) +  ln(), so that (1 +

 )( ) =  .


Individuals must be indifferent across locations, which implies that for commuters in positive space - = (1 +

                                                      ( )        
 )( ), and the differential equation for p is:              =- .
                                                      ( )        


                                                                                                                     
                                                                 ||                                                     | |
If , denotes the maximum price at i=0, then ( ) =  -   , land consumption satisfies ( ) =                          
                                                                                                                              and density
                                                                                                             (1+)


                   (1+) -| |
satisfies ( ) =           .
                     




                                                                      48
                                                                              
                                                                                                 
At the border of the city, which we denote as point z (and -z),  =  -    or  =                 .
                                                                                                



To close the model, we solve for , by noting that the quantity of city residents, M, must live in the area bounded by z

                                  (1+ ) -            (1+ )                 
                                                                                          -
                                                                                                           
and -z, which implies       ==0
                                                 =                 1 -  -    = (1 + )         , so that            +  =  and  =
                        2                                                                                 2(1+ )

       2(1+ ) +                                                 2        2(1+ ) +
                   .        The total expanse of the city is                         and so total density is
        2(1+)                                                             2(1+ )

2       2(1+ ) +
                    
          2(1+ )



The average commute length for commuters satisfies

     2(1 +  )  -   2(1 +  )                   2 (1 + )       
                 =           -  -    +  = 1 -           1 +          
              =0                                            2 (1 +  )

This equals 1/q times average commute in Proposition 1.




                                                                    49
