                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              FIFTY SHADES OF QE:
                  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN ECONOMIC RESEARCH

                                          Brian Fabo
                                       Martina Jancoková
                                       Elisabeth Kempf
                                         ubos Pástor

                                      Working Paper 27849
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27849


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




The views in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the views of the European
Central Bank, the National Bank of Slovakia, any other institution, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Pástor is a member of the bank board of the National Bank of Slovakia. We
are grateful for comments from Wenxin Du, Mara Faccio, Pavel Gertler, Sujit Kapadia, Anil
Kashyap, Luc Laeven, Ludovít Ódor, Raghuram Rajan, Kasper Roszbach, and Martin Suster, as
well as to seminar participants at the European Central Bank, National Bank of Slovakia, Purdue
University, Toulouse School of Economics, the University of Chicago, the University of Geneva,
and the University of Miami. We are also grateful to Livia Amato, Yuliia Kazmina, Fulin Li, Eva
Stulrajterová and, especially, Bianca He for excellent research assistance. This research was
funded in part by the Fama-Miller Center for Research in Finance at Chicago Booth.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Brian Fabo, Martina Jancoková, Elisabeth Kempf, and ubos Pástor. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fifty Shades of QE: Conflicts of Interest in Economic Research
Brian Fabo, Martina Jancoková, Elisabeth Kempf, and ubos
Pástor NBER Working Paper No. 27849
September 2020, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. A11,E52,E58,G28

                                         ABSTRACT

Central banks sometimes evaluate their own policies. To assess the inherent conflict of interest,
we compare the research findings of central bank researchers and academic economists regarding
the macroeconomic effects of quantitative easing (QE). We find that central bank papers report
larger effects of QE on output and inflation. Central bankers are also more likely to report
significant effects of QE on output and to use more positive language in the abstract. Central
bankers who report larger QE effects on output experience more favorable career outcomes. A
survey of central banks re-veals substantial involvement of bank management in research
production.

Brian Fabo                                      Elisabeth Kempf
Narodna banka Slovenska                         Booth School of Business
Imricha Karvasa 1                               University of Chicago
Bratislava 81325                                5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Slovakia                                        Chicago, IL 60637
brian.fabo@nbs.sk                               elisabeth.kempf@chicagobooth.edu

Martina Jancoková                               ubos Pástor
European Central Bank                           University of Chicago
Sonnemannstraße 20 Frankfurt                    Booth School of Business
am Main 60314 Germany                           5807 South Woodlawn Ave
martina.jancokova@gmail.com                     Chicago, IL 60637
                                                and NBER
                                                lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu
1.     Introduction
Accurate information is important in achieving efficient outcomes. However, some suppliers
of information have other incentives besides accuracy. For example, financial analysts trade
off incentives to provide accurate information to investors against incentives to earn rev-
enue from the companies they evaluate.1 Similarly, information produced by media outlets
may be tainted by their incentives to generate ad revenue (Reuter and Zitzewitz (2006)),
advance political interests (Groseclose and Milyo (2005)), or conform with consumers' prior
expectations (Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005), and Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010)).
    Like journalists and financial analysts, scientists have incentives that could potentially
bias their research output. For example, scientists sponsored by industry may act in the
interests of their sponsors. This conflict of interest has been extensively documented in
biomedical research, where financial relationships between researchers and the pharmaceuti-
cal industry are widespread. Many studies find that industry-sponsored biomedical research
tends to draw conclusions favorable to the sponsor.2 Mechanisms through which this pro-
sponsor bias operates range from drug companies' influence over research design to their
suppression of adverse research results, all the way to intimidating researchers and threat-
ening legal action (e.g., Collier and Iheanacho (2002); Sage (2007)).
    We know far less about conflicts of interest in economics, but they do exist. Economists
working in industry have an incentive to publish research advancing the interests of their
employers. So do academic economists moonlighting as industry consultants. Academics
do not always disclose their private financial affiliations (Carrick-Hagenbarth and Epstein
(2012)). Zingales (2013) discusses how academic research could be corrupted by economists'
outside employment opportunities or their desire to gain access to proprietary data.
    In this paper, we highlight a conflict of interests that has received little attention: that
of central bank economists conducting research that evaluates central bank policies. Such
research is common and widely cited.3 The problem is that a central bank economist may
have an incentive to find central bank policies to be effective, for several reasons.
   1
     There is a large literature on the conflicts of interest leading to biases in equity analysts' earnings
forecasts and stock recommendations (e.g., Michaely and Womack (1999); Malmendier and Shanthikumar
(2007), and Hong and Kacperczyk (2010)). Many studies also analyze the conflicts of interest faced by credit
rating agencies, which get paid by the companies they evaluate (e.g., Mathis et al. (2009); Bolton et al.
(2012); Griffin and Tang (2012), and Jiang et al. (2012)).
   2
     See, for example, Bekelman et al. (2003); Lexchin et al. (2003); Sismondo (2008).
   3
     For example: "The good news is that, by most accounts, QE appears to have succeeded at boosting
growth and lifting inflation. Martin Weale, a member of the BoE's interest-rate setting Monetary Policy
Committee, found asset purchases worth 1% of national income boosted UK gross domestic product by about
0.18% and inflation by 0.3%. A study by John Williams, president of the San Francisco Federal Reserve,
concluded that asset purchases had reduced the US unemployment rate by 1.5 percentage points by late
2012 and helped the economy avoid deflation." The Financial Times (2015).


                                                     1
    First, the economist may worry that the nature of her findings could affect her em-
ployment status or rank. Is she less likely to get promoted if her findings dent the bank's
reputation? Could she get fired? We are not aware of any evidence of central banks punishing
their employees in this manner. Yet this career concern is relevant even if it is completely un-
founded as long as the economist assigns a nonzero probability to such a threat. This channel
could operate at multiple levels because not only researchers but also their superiors want to
get promoted. A head of research eyeing a promotion, or fearing a demotion, may be reluc-
tant to defend a subordinate's inconvenient findings in front of the bank's board. The head
may find it easier to suggest to the subordinate that a different econometric specification, or
at least a differently-worded abstract, would make the paper stronger.
    Second, the economist may be unsure whether her research will see the light of day. Bank
management could in principle block the release of studies that find the bank's own policy to
be ineffective, or to have undesirable side effects. A recent example, albeit from a different
public institution, is the controversial release of Andersen et al. (2020). That study finds that
World Bank payouts of foreign aid are followed by jumps in the recipient countries' deposits
in financial havens, suggesting leaks to the pockets of the countries' elites. According to
media reports, after the study passed an internal peer review at the World Bank, it was
"blocked by higher officials."4 After a substantial delay, the study was eventually released in
February 2020. Its release occurred within days of the departure of the World Bank's chief
economist, an academic, after only 15 months in the job.
    Third, the economist may believe a priori that the bank's policies are effective, and she
may favor evidence supporting her prior. In principle, researchers who believe in the power of
policy interventions could self-select into policy institutions such as central banks. Moreover,
their priors could be reinforced during the research process, either through the well known
confirmation bias (Nickerson (1998)) or through the feedback researchers receive from their
central bank colleagues, whose priors may be similar.
    Fourth, the economist may care about the bank's reputation. She may dislike conclusions
that could be perceived as damaging, preferring conclusions that validate the bank's actions.
Finally, the economist may care about her own reputation if she is senior enough to have
participated in the formation of the bank's policy. For example, in his presidential address
to the American Economic Association, Bernanke (2020) offers a strong endorsement of
   4
     See "The World Bank loses another chief economist", The Economist (2020). Years earlier, in their
broad evaluation of World Bank research, Banerjee et al. (2006) argue: "Internal research that was favorable
to Bank positions was given great prominence, and unfavorable research ignored... there was a serious failure
of the checks and balances that should separate advocacy and research. The panel endorses the right of the
Bank to strongly defend and advocate its own policies. But when the Bank leadership selectively appeals to
relatively new and untested research as hard evidence that its preferred policies work, it lends unwarranted
confidence to the Banks' prescriptions. Placing fragile selected new research results on a pedestal invites
later recrimination that undermines the credibility and usefulness of all Bank research."

                                                     2
unconventional monetary policy tools. Given his unique experience as an academic-turned-
top-policymaker, Ben Bernanke is exceptionally qualified to provide an accurate assessment
of the effectiveness of these tools. At the same time, these tools are an important part of his
legacy as they were adopted while he was Fed Chair.
    Each of these five reasons could in principle induce a bias akin to the pro-sponsor bias in
biomedical research. In fact, the bias could be even more severe for central bankers. While
academic medical researchers are merely sponsored by industry, central bank economists are
directly employed by central banks. Central banks evaluating their own policies is not unlike
pharmaceutical firms evaluating their own drugs. Both have skin in the game. The conflict of
interest is particularly acute for central banks that view their research output regarding their
own policy as part of the policy itself, because by releasing a study supportive of this policy,
they could potentially enhance the policy's effectiveness. On the other hand, alleviating this
conflict is the strong desire of central banks to produce objective research.
    Academic economists who evaluate central bank policies do not have skin in the game,
but they have their own incentive to find strong results because they face the pressure to
publish. Academics' career concerns are commonly summarized as "publish or perish." These
concerns seem weaker for central bankers, who can often substitute policy work for journal
publications. The need to publish creates a pressure for academics to find significant results
because of the well-known publication bias: journals are more likely to publish positive
results than negative ones (e.g., Fanelli (2010a)). Both central bankers and academics thus
have their own incentives to find significant effects when evaluating bank policy. Whose
incentives are stronger is ultimately an empirical question.
    In this paper, we compare the findings of central bank researchers and academics re-
garding the effectiveness of unconventional monetary policy. In the aftermath of the 2008
financial crisis, central banks around the world have deployed new policy tools to address the
challenges posed by the crisis. These policy tools include quantitative easing (QE), which
represents large-scale purchases of longer-term financial assets such as government debt, as
well as policies such as forward guidance and long-term refinancing operations. The effec-
tiveness of these tools has been a subject of intense debate in both academic and policy
circles, with a significant part of the literature originating in central banks (Martin and
Milas (2012)). The debate has become even more salient since the arrival of the COVID-19
pandemic, which has spawned renewed interest in these tools among policymakers.
    We construct a dataset comprising 54 studies that analyze the effects of unconventional
monetary policy ("QE" for short) on output or inflation in the U.S., UK, and the euro area.
For each study, we record its baseline estimates of the effects of QE on the level of GDP
and the price level, along with their significance. We also collect a variety of other study-


                                               3
specific information, such as publication status and methodology used, as well as detailed
biographical information of the 116 different authors. We then compare the findings of
studies written by central bankers with those written by academics.
    We find that central bank papers report systematically larger effects of QE on both output
and inflation. Central bank papers are also more likely to report QE effects on output that
are significant, both statistically and economically. For example, while all of the central
bank papers report a statistically significant QE effect on output, only half of the academic
papers do. Central bank papers are more likely to not disclose the width of the confidence
interval, and also to use dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models rather than
vector autoregression (VAR) models in their estimation. In addition, central bank papers
use more favorable language in their abstracts: they use more positive adjectives and, to a
lesser extent, fewer negative adjectives compared to academic papers. Overall, central bank
papers find QE to be more effective than academic papers do.
    To see whether this result could be driven by career concerns, we relate the research find-
ings of central bank economists to their subsequent career outcomes. We collect employment
histories for all central bank authors and convert their job titles to numerical ranks on a six-
point scale. For each author-paper pair, we measure the author's subsequent career outcome
by the first change in the author's rank following the paper's first public release. We find
that authors whose papers report larger effects of QE on output experience more favorable
career outcomes. A one standard deviation increase in the estimated effect is associated
with a career improvement of about half a rank, such as moving halfway from Economist to
Senior Economist. This evidence is consistent with career concerns.
    These concerns appear to be stronger for senior central bank economists because for them,
the relation between career outcomes and the estimated QE effects is stronger. Motivated
by this finding, we look whether our main result--a gap between the findings of central
bankers and academics regarding the effectiveness of QE--is larger for papers whose authors
are more senior. We find that it is, though the relation is only marginally significant. Our
results are consistent with the hypothesis that senior central bankers report larger effects of
QE because they are more incentivized to do so.
    Not all central bankers face the same incentives. Top management of the German Bun-
desbank has taken a critical view of QE, especially in the context of the European Central
Bank (ECB). Former Bundesbank officials Axel Weber and J¨          urgen Stark reportedly quit
their ECB positions in protest over QE, and the current Bundesbank president, Jens Weid-
mann, has also publicly opposed it. Mindful of their bosses' views, Bundesbank researchers
could potentially face career concerns very different from those of their colleagues at other
central banks. Indeed, we show that studies co-authored by Bundesbank employees find QE


                                               4
to be less effective at raising output compared to academic studies. While this evidence is
weak statistically, it is consistent with managerial influence on research outcomes.
    To shed more light on this influence, we survey heads of research at the world's lead-
ing central banks. We have received responses from 24 central banks employing over 750
research economists in total. These responses reveal heterogeneous but substantial involve-
ment of bank management in research production. In most banks, management participates
in the selection of research topics, typically by negotiating with the researcher. Direct topic
assignments occur "sometimes" ("often") in 50% (21%) of the responding banks. In most
banks, research papers are reviewed by management prior to public distribution; such re-
views happen "always" ("often") in 38% (21%) of the responding banks. Management also
approves papers for public distribution: typically by the head of research ("always" in 67%
of the banks), but sometimes also by the bank board (at least "sometimes" in 33% of the
banks). This evidence reveals substantial managerial involvement in research production.
This involvement surely includes helpful guidance, and possibly more. Unlike central bankers,
academics face little if any managerial interference in their research.
    A by-product of our analysis is a meta-analysis of the macroeconomic effects of QE.
Averaging across all 54 studies and standardizing each QE shock to 1% of the country's pre-
QE GDP, QE increases the level of output (the price level) by 0.24% (0.19%) at the peak.
The average cumulative effect on output (prices) is 58% (63%) of the peak effect. About
88% (84%) of studies estimate effects on output (prices) that are statistically significant.
Across the three regions studied, QE is the most effective in the U.S., in terms of raising
both output and the price level.
    Our study is related to the literature inspecting the credibility of scientific research (e.g.,
Ioannidis (2005); Fanelli (2009), and Fanelli et al. (2017)). Economic research has not es-
caped this scrutiny. In an early critique, Leamer (1983) argues that empirical economics
is vulnerable to biases and produces fragile results. The publication bias mentioned ear-
lier seems particularly strong in economics (e.g., De Long and Lang (1992); Fanelli (2010b,
2012); Doucouliagos and Stanley (2013)). Some authors do not submit null findings (Franco,
Malhotra and Simonovits (2014)); others inflate the values of just-rejected tests by choosing
"significant" specifications (Brodeur et al. (2016)). Ioannidis et al. (2017) argue that many
results reported in the economic literature are exaggerated. Other problems include scientific
misconduct (Bailey et al. (2001); List et al. (2001)) and the lack of a reproducibility cul-
ture, with the associated inability to replicate economic findings (Ioannidis and Doucouliagos
(2013), and Christensen and Miguel (2018)). It also seems problematic that reported esti-
mates of policy-relevant parameters, such as fiscal multipliers, reflect the authors' national
backgrounds and political orientation (Asatryan et al. (2020); Jelveh et al. (2018)).


                                                5
    Also related is the literature on career concerns, which finds evidence of such concerns for
both private- and public-sector workers.5 In contrast, there is little work on the incentives
of central bankers. That work focuses mostly on the voting members of a central bank's
monetary policy committee (e.g., Sibert (2003); Besley et al. (2008); Gerlach-Kristen (2009);
Meade and Stasavage (2008); Hansen et al. (2018)). We are not aware of any work on the
incentives or biases of central bank research economists.


2.      Data
We construct a dataset comprising studies of the effects of unconventional monetary policy
on two key macroeconomic variables: output and inflation. We aim to cover all articles,
published and unpublished, that analyze the policy effects for at least one of three economies:
the United States (US), the United Kingdom (UK), and the euro area (EA). For ease of
exposition, we refer to these economies, including EA, as "countries." We focus on articles
containing a quantitative analysis, either model-based or fully empirical, of the effects on
output, inflation, or both. We do not consider papers focusing on the effects of policy on
asset prices unless they also analyze its effects on output or inflation.
    To identify the papers, we manually search for 40 relevant terms in the Google Scholar
and Repec IDEAS databases. All search terms are listed in the Internet Appendix, which
is available on the authors' websites. Our search covers not only QE but also other uncon-
ventional monetary policy tools that operate through central bank balance sheets, such as
long-term refinancing operations. Since about 80% of the papers in our sample study QE,
we refer to all papers as "QE" studies, for brevity. We conducted the search in July and
August of 2019, covering all articles publicly distributed prior to July 2018. For each search
term, we examine the first ten pages of search results in both portals as well as all references
in the resulting articles. Next, we screen all documents listed in Google Scholar as citing
one of the articles obtained in the first step, as well as references therein. Finally, we screen
all articles citing the articles added in the second step. We exclude studies not written in
English, as well as Master's and Bachelor's theses. We include all other types of articles:
journal publications, working papers, book chapters, and policy papers. We always use the
published version of the article if it is available at the time of our search, and otherwise the
most recent version of the article available online. Our final sample consists of 54 papers
written by 137 authors, 116 of whom are unique. All 54 papers are listed in the Internet
   5
    These workers include corporate executives (Warner et al. (1988), and Weisbach (1988)), equity analysts
(Hong et al. (2000), and Hong and Kubik (2003)), credit analysts (Cornaggia et al. (2016), and Kempf
(2020)), professional investors (Chevalier and Ellison (1999)), sales workers (Benson et al. (2019)), banking
regulators (Lucca et al. (2014)) and federal government employees (Blanes i Vidal et al. (2012)).


                                                     6
Appendix.
    For each article, we collect information on the year of first public distribution, year of
journal publication (if any), publication outlet, authors' names, and the methodology used
(e.g., a DSGE or VAR model). We obtain impact factors and article influence scores from
Clarivate Analytics Web of Science for the year of the article's publication. We record the
effects of QE on the level of GDP and the price level as implied by the authors' baseline
model. We distinguish four estimated effects: (i) the peak effect of the QE program stud-
ied (Total Peak Effect ); (ii) the cumulative effect of QE, defined as the effect at the end
of the time period studied by the authors (Total Cumulative Effect ); (iii) the peak effect
after standardizing the QE shock size to 1% of GDP (Standardized Peak Effect ); and (iv)
the cumulative effect after the same standardization (Standardized Cumulative Effect ). We
describe the construction of all four variables in more detail in Section 2.2.
    We also record the authors' assessments of the statistical and economic significance of
their estimated effects of QE on output and inflation. Whenever available, we use the
authors' own verbal assessment of statistical significance. If unavailable, we infer statistical
significance from confidence intervals reported in the corresponding figure or table, using
the peak effect. We also record the confidence level used by authors to assess significance
(95%, 90%, or 68%). When statistical significance is not discussed and no standard errors or
p-values are reported, we set the variable to missing. For economic significance, we always
use the authors' own verbal assessment. For example, if a study states the effect of QE is
"negligible", we code economic significance as zero; if the effect is "sizable", we code economic
significance as one. For all ambiguous cases, we code economic significance as 0.5. Examples
include studies stating that the effect of QE is positive upon impact but disappears quickly,
or that it is positive but very sensitive to model specification. When economic significance
is not discussed, we set it to missing.
    To analyze a paper's tone, we focus on the paper's abstract and conclusion, which tend to
summarize the main findings in a non-technical manner. As we are not aware of any lexical
sentiment model trained on the economic research literature, we create our own lexicon. We
consider adjectives such as "significant," "sizable," and "large" as positive, conveying the
message that QE is effective, and adjectives such as "small," "negligible," and "weak" as
negative, conveying the opposite message. The full list of positive and negative adjectives is
in Table A.1. We compute the shares of positive and negative adjectives out of all adjectives,
for both the abstract and the conclusion. We also compute a "sentiment score" as the share
of positive adjectives minus the share of negative adjectives.
    Finally, we manually collect information on the employment history, job titles, and ed-
ucational background for the 116 authors by using online searches and information from


                                               7
public LinkedIn pages. To determine author affiliation, we use the author's main employer
at the time of the paper's first public distribution, as determined by our search in the sum-
mer of 2019. We categorize all authors whose primary affiliation is a central bank as "central
bankers." We classify authors from the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) as 0.5 cen-
tral bankers due to the close ties between the BIS and the central banking community.6 We
refer to all other authors simply as "academics." We disclose our full paper-level dataset in
the Internet Appendix.


2.1     Summary Statistics
Figure 1 plots selected summary statistics at the paper level, by year and country studied.
The papers in our sample appear in each year between 2010 and 2018. They do not have to
contain estimates for both output and inflation, but about 90% of them do. The share of
central-bank-affiliated authors averages a little above one half. All variables are distributed
fairly evenly across countries, with the euro area receiving a bit more attention.
    Figure 2 focuses on the authors. Central banks employing the largest numbers of authors
in our sample are the Bank of England, national central banks in the euro area, the ECB,
and the Federal Reserve. Academics are employed mostly at universities in Europe (18), UK
(10), and the U.S. (9). Most of the authors have earned their PhD degrees at prestigious
universities in the U.S. and UK.
    Figure 3 reports the number of articles by QE program studied, separately for articles
with and without at least one central bank author. We observe substantial sorting of central
bankers and academics into different QE programs studied. For example, whereas QE1 in
the UK is commonly studied by both central bankers and academics, APP in the euro area
and LSAP1 in the U.S. are predominantly studied by central bankers.
    Table 1 provides additional descriptive statistics at both the paper level (Panel A) and
the author-paper level (Panel B). The average article in our sample is written by 2.5 authors
and it studies the effects of QE in 1.3 countries. More than 57% of the articles are published
in peer-reviewed journals. The average impact factor of those journals at the time of the
respective paper's publication is 1.42. 35% of the papers use DSGE models. 60% of the
authors in our sample are primarily affiliated with a central bank. 17% of the authors are
women and 89% hold a PhD degree. The average author experience (i.e., the number of
years since obtaining the highest educational degree) is 11 years. At the time of the paper's
first public distribution, the average number of years since the author's last career update
   6
    In the Internet Appendix, we show that our main results are robust to classifying BIS authors as full
central bankers. They are also robust to classifying researchers at the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank as 0.5 central bankers, although such an alternative classification seems harder to justify.



                                                    8
(i.e., employment or job title change) is 3.9 years.


2.2      The Effects of QE on Output and Inflation
For each paper and country studied, we record the estimated effects of QE on output (i.e.,
real GDP or industrial production) and inflation (i.e., CPI) based on the authors' baseline
specification. As a rule, we record the effects on the level --the level of output and the
price level. Letting Y denote the actual level of the outcome variable (i.e., with QE) and
Y^ denote its counterfactual level (i.e., without QE), we are interested in the percentage
difference, (Y - Y^ )/Y
                      ^ . If the paper reports the effect of QE on the level of output or prices,
we record the peak and cumulative effects as displayed in Figure 4. If the paper reports only
the effects on the growth rate, we sum up the individual growth estimates to determine the
impact on the level. We describe the details of this conversion and list the estimated effects
for each paper-country pair in our sample in the Internet Appendix.
    We focus on the effect most prominently advertised in the paper, ignoring estimates from
robustness checks, alternative specifications, and extensions. We standardize the effects to
a common shock size equal to 1% of the respective country's GDP around the time QE was
first introduced. For the U.S. and UK, we use 1% of the annualized 2009 Q1 GDP, consistent
with Weale and Wieladek (2016). For the euro area, whose asset purchase programs started
in 2015 Q1, we use 1% of the annualized 2015 Q1 GDP. We obtain GDP estimates from the
FRED database. Performing the standardization also requires the size of aggregate asset
purchases for each QE program. We report our estimates of these sizes in the Internet
Appendix. Following Weale and Wieladek (2016), we include Treasury purchases for the
U.S. programs, and all securities purchased under the Asset Purchasing Facility for the UK
programs. For the euro area, program size includes all securities purchased under the Asset
Purchase Program, because asset-backed securities are a small fraction of the overall program
size.7
    Table 2 reports the means, medians, and standard deviations of the estimated effects of
QE on the levels of output and prices, for the full sample as well as by country. For the
full sample, the average (median) article in our sample estimates that QE increases output
by 1.57% (1.25%) at the peak. Standardized to a QE shock equivalent to 1% of GDP, the
average (median) peak effect on output is 0.24% (0.16%). Still focusing on standardized
effects, the average cumulative effect on output corresponds to 58% of the average peak
effect, indicating that a substantial part of the peak effect vanishes by the end of the period
studied. The standard deviation of the within-country estimates is large, comparable to the
mean. There is also substantial heterogeneity in the effectiveness of QE across the three
  7
      See https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/implement/omt/html/index.en.html.


                                               9
countries. Focusing on the standardized effects, which are easier to compare across countries
due to differences in QE program sizes, QE is most effective at raising output in the U.S.,
followed by the EA and UK.
    As for inflation, the average (median) study finds that QE raises the price level by 1.42%
(0.93%) at the peak. Standardized to a QE shock size of 1% of GDP, the average (me-
dian) effect on the price level is 0.19% (0.11%). The cumulative effect is again considerably
smaller. Across the three countries, QE is again most effective in the U.S. Finally, the vast
majority of studies conclude that the estimated effects on output and inflation are positive
and statistically significant.
    Overall, Table 2 shows that the consensus of the existing literature is that QE has a
positive and significant effect on both output and prices. This finding is consistent with prior
reviews of this literature (e.g., Dell'Ariccia et al. (2018)). However, the table also reveals
substantial heterogeneity in point estimates for both outcome variables. Understanding
whether some of this heterogeneity is systematically related to the institutional environment
in which authors operate is the goal of the following sections.


3.     Research Outcomes and Central Bank Affiliation
This section provides a systematic comparison of the research findings of central bankers and
academics regarding the effectiveness of QE. These findings include the estimated effects of
QE on output and inflation, the statistical and economic significance of these effects, and
the tone of the language used to summarize the paper's results.


3.1     The Effect of QE on Output
Figure 5 reports histograms for the estimated effects of QE on the output level, separately
for studies with at least one central bank author ("CB") and those with no such authors
("Not CB"). The four panels correspond to the four measures introduced previously. For all
of them, the distributions of central bank papers are shifted visibly to the right, indicating
that such papers find systematically larger effects of QE on output.
    The same result follows from Panel A of Table 3, which compares the means and medians
of the estimated effects of QE on output across papers with and without at least one central
bank author. Both types of papers find QE to be successful at raising output, on average,
but central bank papers find substantially larger effects. This is true based on both means
and medians, indicating that the gap is not driven by outliers.8
   8
     The outliers in Figure 5 do not seem to be low-quality papers, at least judging by their publication
success. In fact, among the five papers finding the largest effects on output, the publication rate is 100%.


                                                    10
    Table 4 confirms the result based on regression evidence. We regress the estimated output
effect on the share of central bank authors, CB Affiliation, defined as the share of authors
who are affiliated with a central bank at the time of the paper's first public distribution.
In the strictest specifications, shown in columns (3) and (6), we also include country fixed
effects and controls for the number of authors and average author experience:

                             yij = j +  [CB Affiliation]i +  Xi +             ij   ,                        (1)

where yij is the effect of QE on output estimated by study i for country j 's QE, j is a fixed
effect for the country in which QE takes place, and Xi are the two controls.9 All variables
are defined in Table A.2.
    Columns (3) and (6) show that changing the share of central bank authors from zero to
100% is associated with a 0.723 percentage points larger peak effect and a 0.512 percentage
points larger cumulative effect on output (Panel A). These are sizable magnitudes relative to
the unconditional means of 1.57% and 0.87%, respectively, from Table 2. The results based
on standardized effects, reported in Panel B, are also economically large. Going from zero to
100% central bank authors corresponds to a 0.152 percentage points larger standardized peak
effect: an increase by two thirds of the unconditional mean. For the standardized cumulative
effect, the difference is 0.122 percentage points, equivalent to 87% of the unconditional mean.
These results show that the differences in research findings observed in Panel A are not due
to central bankers studying larger QE programs.
    To assess the statistical significance of these results, we report t-statistics based on stan-
dard errors clustered at the paper level. A potential concern about inference based on
cluster-robust standard errors is that the cluster-robust variance estimator converges to the
true value as the number of clusters tends to infinity, but we have at most 54 clusters. We
thus follow Cameron and Miller (2015) and Cameron et al. (2008) in implementing a wild
cluster bootstrap procedure. We report the resulting p-values in square brackets.10 We
generally use these p-values, which tend to be more conservative than t-statistics, to assess
statistical significance. In Panel A of Table 4, the coefficient on CB Affiliation is significant
at the 10% or 5% level for the peak effect, but it is insignificant for the cumulative effect. In
Panel B, the coefficient is significant at the 5% level in all specifications except for column
(3), where it is significant at the 10% level.
   9
     Our control for author experience is log(3 + average author experience). We add three because the
minimum value of author experience in our sample is -2 (for an author who wrote their paper two years
prior to earning a Ph.D.). This way, the log is defined for all observations with non-missing author experience.
  10
     Davidson and MacKinnon (2010) and MacKinnon and Webb (2017) show that tests based on wild cluster
bootstraps often perform well. We obtain wild bootstrap p-values using the post-estimation command boottest
developed by Roodman et al. (2019), using Webb weights, assuming the null hypothesis, and using 10,000
replications.

                                                      11
3.2    The Effect of QE on Inflation
Figure 6 reports histograms for the estimated effects of QE on the price level, analogous to
the histograms for output plotted in Figure 5. Just like for output, the distributions of central
bank papers are shifted to the right relative to academic papers, indicating that central bank
papers tend to find QE to be more effective at raising prices. The same conclusion follows
from Panel B of Table 3, which compares the means and medians of the estimated effects of
QE on inflation across papers with and without central bank authors.
    In Table 5 we repeat the analysis from Table 4, but with a different dependent variable:
yij in equation (1) is now the estimated effect on inflation rather than output. According
to Panel A, columns (3) and (6), changing the share of central bank authors from zero to
100% corresponds to a 1.279 percentage points larger peak effect and a 1.394 percentage
points larger cumulative effect on prices. These effects are large relative to the unconditional
means of 1.42% and 0.89%, respectively, from Table 2. In Panel B, the coefficients on CB
Affiliation are 0.201 percentage points for the peak effect and 0.190 percentage points for the
cumulative effect. These coefficients are even larger than the corresponding unconditional
means. All of the coefficients in Table 5 are statistically significant at the 5% level.


3.3    Significance
Next, we examine the statistical and economic significance of the effects of QE on output and
inflation. Our main interest is in whether studies by central bankers and academics differ
in their assessments of this significance. One advantage of looking at significance is that it
is directly comparable across studies with no need for any standardization or conversion in
the construction of the peak and cumulative effects of QE.
    Panel A of Figure 7 plots the shares of studies that find a statistically significant effect of
QE on output, separately for central bankers and academics. The difference is striking: while
half of the academic papers find a significant effect, all of the central bank papers do. The
difference in the assessments of economic significance, reported in Panel B, is also visually
prominent. Panels C and D show similar, though less pronounced, patterns for inflation.
    Table 6 shows the extent to which these differences are statistically significant and robust
to the inclusion of control variables. We estimate the regression specification in equation
(1), with yij redefined to denote either statistical or economic significance, for the effects of
QE on either output or inflation. For output (Panel A), the coefficient on CB Affiliation is
always positive and significant at the 5% level, whether the dependent variable is statistical
or economic significance. The magnitude of the effect is also large: the estimate in Panel
A, column (3), implies that increasing the share of central bank authors from zero to 100%


                                                12
corresponds to a 36.6 percentage points higher likelihood of the study finding a statistically
significant effect of QE on output. The magnitude is even larger, 39.9 percentage points,
for economic significance of the QE effect on output. For inflation (Panel B), we also find
economically large effects, but they are not statistically significant.


3.4    Alternative Specifications
We consider various modifications of our baseline regression (1), as analyzed in Sections 3.1
through 3.3. We summarize the results here but report them in the Internet Appendix.
    Recall that the main independent variable in regression (1), CB Affiliation, is the fraction
of the paper's authors who are affiliated with a central bank. Our results in Tables 4 through
6 hold also when we replace this granular measure by an indicator we call Discrete, which is
equal to one if at least one of the authors is affiliated with a central bank or the BIS, and zero
otherwise. In addition, we replace CB Affiliation by two zero/one indicators: Mixed, which
is equal to one if the share of central-bank-affiliated authors is strictly between zero and one,
and Pure CB, which equals one if all of the authors are central bankers. We find positive
point estimates of the coefficients on both indicators in all 36 specifications considered in
Tables 4 through 6. Moreover, the estimated slope on Pure CB exceeds that on Mixed in
33 of the 36 specifications, suggesting that central bankers tend to find larger effects of QE
when they have no academic coauthors.
    Different central banks may have different research-vetting policies. Motivated by this
possibility, we separate central bank authors by the country of the central bank they work
for. We replace CB Affiliation in equation (1) by four zero/one indicators: EA CB is equal
to one if at least one of the authors is affiliated with the ECB or a national central bank in
the euro area, UK CB equals one if at least one author is affiliated with the Bank of England,
US CB equals one if at least one author is affiliated with the Federal Reserve Board or a
regional Fed, and Other CB equals one if at least one author is affiliated with another central
bank or the BIS. The omitted group is academics. We find positive point estimates of the
coefficients on all four indicators, suggesting that our results in Tables 4 to 6 are not driven
by authors from any single country. Fed researchers tend to find the largest effects of QE
on output, whereas Bank of England researchers tend to find the largest effects on inflation.
Euro area central bankers find relatively weak QE effects by central bank standards, largely
due to the weaker effects reported by Bundesbank researchers (Section 4.3.1). However, the
differences across central banks are not statistically significant.
    Taking a different country-by-country perspective, we focus on the country in which QE
takes place. We observe that the point estimates of  in equation (1) are generally positive
for all three countries, though their statistical significance is mixed. Looking at the effects of

                                               13
QE on output, the  estimate is the largest, and significant, for QE conducted in the U.S. In
other words, the gap between the output effects reported by central bankers and academics
is largest when they analyze U.S. QE. For the effects of QE on inflation, the  estimates are
large, and typically significant, in both the U.S. and UK.
    Motivated by the strong results we find for the U.S., we dig deeper into them by con-
sidering the three main QE programs in the U.S. separately. The point estimates of  are
positive and large for all three programs, but they are often insignificant because of small
sample sizes: we have 12 studies of the output effects of QE1, 12 studies for QE2, and only
4 studies for QE3. The estimates are similar across the three programs, indicating that our
results are not driven by any individual U.S. program.
    More broadly, we do not control for the specific QE program in our baseline regressions.
The choice of which QE program to study is made by the authors so, being endogenous,
it is a potential outcome variable of interest. For example, if U.S. QE1 is perceived as
being more effective than QE2 or QE3, an author aiming to report stronger QE effects can
choose to analyze the first round of QE rather than its later rounds. Nevertheless, we also
report results when controlling for QE program dummies, thereby comparing central bankers
and academics analyzing the same QE program. For papers studying more than one QE
program, more than one dummy is switched on at the same time. We find that adding QE
program dummies tends to reduce the statistical significance of the results: the estimate of
 is significant in 17 specifications at the 5% level, and in 22 specifications at the 10% level,
out of all 36 specifications considered in Tables 4 through 6 (for comparison, in those tables,
the  estimate is significant in 25 specifications at the 5% level, and in 28 specifications at
the 10% level). The decline in statistical significance is unsurprising because we can only
consider QE programs studied by at least two papers. Nevertheless, even with QE program
dummies, the point estimates have the same signs as their counterparts in Tables 4 through
6 in all specifications, and their magnitudes are economically significant.
    Our baseline regressions do not control for the model chosen by the authors because
model choice is endogenous, just like the choice of the QE program to study. However,
our main results are largely unaffected if we control for the model chosen (DSGE, VAR,
or other). Out of the 36 specifications considered in Tables 4 through 6, we continue to
find statistical significance at the 5% (10%) level in 23 (29) specifications. Moreover, the
magnitudes of the estimated  coefficients become larger in 27 specifications and smaller
only in 9 specifications. Hence, although we prefer not to control for model choice, given its
endogeneity, our main results are robust to such controls.
    We further explore whether central bankers are more optimistic when they study QE by
their own central bank as opposed to some other central bank. To do so, we include paper


                                              14
fixed effects, thereby comparing the effects of QE in different countries as estimated by the
same paper. We do not find any noteworthy support for the hypothesis. Naturally, with
paper fixed effects, the power to find significant differences is limited because few papers
study multiple QE programs. Recall from Table 1 that the average (median) article in our
sample studies the effects of QE in 1.259 (1) countries.
    As noted earlier, our sample contains papers studying not only QE but also other un-
conventional monetary policy programs, such as long-term refinancing operations. When we
exclude those other programs from the analysis, keeping only QE narrowly defined, we find
results similar to those in Tables 4 through 6. We also find similar effects when we control
for the time gap between the QE program studied and the year of the paper's first release.
This alleviates concerns that the reported differences could be driven by differences in the
timing of studies by academics and central bankers. Finally, we look up whether central bank
authors work at a research department or a policy department of their central bank at the
time of their paper's first public distribution. In unreported results, we find no systematic
differences between the results of the two groups of authors.


3.5    Tone
We also compare the tone of the language that central bankers and academics use when
they summarize their assessments of QE. We focus on the most visible part of the paper:
its abstract. We measure the abstract's sentiment score, which equals the share of positive
adjectives minus the share of negative adjectives. Our dictionary of positive and negative
adjectives is in Table A.1. We estimate the following equation:

                       US   UK   EA
                  yi = i  + i  + i  +  [CB Affiliation]i +  Xi +         i   ,             (2)

                                                              US   UK         EA
where yi is the sentiment score for the abstract of study i; i   , i  , and i    are indicators
equal to one if the study analyzes QE in the U.S., UK, or EA, respectively, and zero otherwise;
and Xi are the same controls as in equation (1). If a paper studies QE in multiple countries,
then multiple indicators are switched on.
    Panel A of Table 7 shows that central bankers use more positive language than academics
when describing their results. Column (3) shows that a 100 percentage point increase in the
share of central bank authors is associated with an increase in the sentiment score of 0.056,
which is equivalent to 85% of one standard deviation of the sentiment score. The result
is significant at the 5% level. In Panels B and C, we decompose the sentiment score into
the shares of positive and negative adjectives, and we run the analysis separately for both
shares. We find that central bank studies use both more positive adjectives and fewer negative


                                              15
adjectives. The finding based on positive adjectives is economically larger and, unlike the
one based on negative adjectives, it is statistically significant.
    The evidence that central bankers use more favorable language is not surprising given our
results in Sections 3.1 through 3.3. Nonetheless, we find it reassuring that our main result
is robust to using a different type of measurement, one based on text rather than numbers.
Interestingly, the point estimates of  in equation (2) remain very similar when we add
controls for the magnitudes of the reported effects on output and inflation. Central bankers
thus use more favorable language than academics even when describing point estimates that
are equally large. However, the statistical significance of this result is weaker compared to
Table 7. Recall that the  estimate in column (3) of Panel A of Table 7 is easily significant
at the 5% level. The same estimate remains significant at the 5% level when we add controls
for output effects, standardized or not, but the p-value rises to about 0.1 when we control
for inflation effects. See the Internet Appendix for details.
    We also conduct a textual analysis of the papers' conclusions. The results are qualita-
tively similar to those based on the abstract--the point estimates of  are positive when
the left-hand side variable is either the sentiment score or the fraction of positive adjectives,
and they are negative for the fraction of negative adjectives--but these results are not sta-
tistically significant, as we show in the Internet Appendix. Compared to the abstract, the
conclusions usually contain more discussion unrelated to the paper's core contribution, such
as comparisons to prior literature and directions for future work.
    The Internet Appendix also reports results from the analysis that computes the abstract's
sentiment score based on two alternative dictionaries of positive and negative words: the Har-
vard IV4 semantic dictionary and the Loughran and McDonald (2011) financial dictionary.
We do not find significant differences between central bankers and academics based on these
alternative dictionaries. However, we find the results based on our simple dictionary far more
credible because we designed it specifically for economic research (see Table A.1). In contrast,
the Harvard IV4 dictionary is designed for use in a variety of contexts outside economics, and
the Loughran-McDonald dictionary is designed for the analysis of 10-K reports of publicly-
traded companies. The positive and negative labels assigned to words in these dictionaries
do not reflect the meaning of these words in the domain of the economics literature. As a
result, these dictionaries do not contain key adjectives that clearly indicate positive language
in our context, such as "significant," "large," and "considerable." Moreover, they do contain
many words that are irrelevant and potentially even misleading in our context. For example,
the words classified as negative in the Loughran and McDonald (2011) lexicon under "A"
include "abnormal," "absence," "against," "aftermath," "antitrust," "anomaly," and even
"argue" and "argument," thereby casting the whole economic literature in a rather negative


                                               16
light (incorrectly, we like to believe).


4.      Mechanism: Management Influence
This section explores potential reasons for why central bankers are more optimistic than
academics in their assessments of QE. Motivated by anecdotal evidence and the arguments
in the introduction, we posit that managerial influence at central banks could play a role.
In principle, bank management could make promotion decisions in a way that encourages
bank employees to report favourable assessments of the bank's policies. We examine this
hypothesis in Section 4.1. Bank management can also directly influence research outcomes at
various stages of the research production process, from the assignment of the research topic,
through the internal review process, to the approval for public distribution. We provide
evidence of this influence in Section 4.2. Finally, in Section 4.3, we compare Bundesbank
researchers with the rest and examine researchers' methodological choices. None of our evi-
dence proves that bank management causes the results presented in Section 3, but causality
seems inherently difficult to establish for such a thorny question. Our conclusion from this
section is more modest. Taken together, our results represent the strongest evidence to date
of a link between managerial influence and central bank research outcomes.


4.1     Career Concerns
To examine the potential for career concerns influencing central bank research, we relate
the research findings of central bankers to the bankers' subsequent career outcomes. After
manually collecting employment histories for the central bank authors in our sample, we
convert their job titles to numerical ranks. We create these ranks on a six-point scale for
central bankers, and a four-point scale for academics, by using the dictionary presented in
Table A.3. We restrict the analysis to authors who remain affiliated with a central bank
and experience at least one career update within five years following the article's first public
distribution. We impose the first filter because it is unclear whether transitions to academia
or other institutions should be treated as promotions or demotions, and whether they are
voluntary or involuntary. The purpose of the second filter is to reduce the noise induced by
stale CV information, since authors may not regularly update their job titles.11 These filters
result in a sample of 33 central bankers (27 of whom are unique) and 23 research papers. We
  11
     In the Internet Appendix, we report results obtained when we include authors with no career updates,
and when we treat departures to academia and the private sector as demotions. Treating departures as
demotions leads to similar conclusions. Including authors with no career update within five years of the
article's distribution leads to insignificant results, perhaps because of the inclusion of stale information.



                                                     17
then compute a new variable, career outcome, defined as the difference between the author's
rank after her first career update following the article's first distribution, and her rank at the
time of the article's first distribution. Out of these 33 authors, 19 experience a promotion,
4 experience a demotion, and 10 do not experience any change in rank.12
    Figure 8 plots the histograms of the estimated effects on output separately for two groups
of authors: those who subsequently experience a promotion, that is an increase in rank, and
those who subsequently experience either a demotion or no change in rank. We see that for
authors who are promoted, the distributions of output effects are clearly shifted to the right
compared to the remaining authors. These plots suggest that central bank researchers who
report larger effects of QE on output are more likely to get promoted.
    In Table 8, we test whether this result is statistically significant and robust to the inclusion
of country fixed effects and controls. We regress the author's subsequent career outcome on
the estimated effect on output, country fixed effects, and controls:

                                 yaij = j +  Effectij +  Xai +           aij   ,                            (3)

where yaij is the difference between author a's rank after her first career update following
the first release of study i examining QE in country j , and her rank at the time of first
release. Note that yaij does not vary across j for given values of a and i. In addition,
Effectij is the effect of QE on output estimated by study i for country j 's QE, j is a
fixed effect for the country in which QE takes place, and Xai are controls. The controls
include author experience and the number of authors, as before. In addition, we control for
the number of years since the author's most recent career update and for dummy variables
indicating the author's rank at the time of the paper's first release, because these variables
are important determinants of subsequent career outcomes. The dummy variables are six
             r          r
indicators ai  , where ai  = 1 if author a has rank r at the time of paper i's first release,
      r
and ai   = 0 otherwise, for r  {1, 2, . . . , 6}. Compared to including just one control for
the author's rank, including these six controls allows for non-linearities in the relationship
between author rank and promotion outcomes.
    In Panel A, we find that reporting larger peak and cumulative effects on output is asso-
ciated with more favorable career outcomes. The point estimate in column (3) implies that
a one standard deviation increase in the peak effect improves subsequent career outcomes
by 0.59 ranks (= 0.485 × 1.21). In column (6), a one standard deviation increase in the
  12
     We do not analyze the career outcomes of academics, for two reasons. First, it is unclear a priori why
these outcomes should be related to the strength of the academic's findings about QE. Second, the sample
size is even smaller than for central bankers. We have only 13 academic authors who remain in academia
and experience at least one career update within five years following their article's first public distribution.
Among these 13 academics, six experience a promotion and seven have no career change.


                                                      18
cumulative effect on output corresponds to a subsequent rank improvement of 0.57 ranks
(= 0.460 × 1.23). Both estimates are significant at the 5% level. As a reference point, a
one-unit change in rank is equivalent to moving, for example, from Economist to Senior
Economist, or from Deputy Director to Director.
    Panel B of Table 8 shows that the positive relation between career outcomes and esti-
mated effects on output holds also for standardized effects, with statistical significance at
the 5% level in column (6) and 10% level in column (3). Economically, the effect continues
to be large: a one standard deviation increase in the standardized peak effect on output
corresponds to an increase in author rank of 0.75 units (= 2.661 × 0.28).
    Of course, our finding of a positive association does not establish a causal link between
research outcomes and subsequent career outcomes. The outcomes could be correlated for
other reasons. For example, studies reporting larger output effects could be easier to publish.
Publications, in turn, could lead to promotions. To address this concern, we control for an
indicator equal to one if the article came out in a peer-reviewed journal and zero otherwise.
The results are similar to those in Table 8 (see the Internet Appendix). For another example,
employees who care so much about their employer that they are willing to distort their
research findings could show their affection also in other ways, such as by working hard, and
those other ways could bring about their promotion. This channel seems harder to control
for. Whether central bank research is biased by conflicts of interest is an important but
messy question for which clean identification seems inherently difficult to come by.
    Among the outcome variables analyzed in Section 3, career outcomes are most closely
related to estimated effects on output. For economic significance of output, we find an
economically strong relation once all control variables are included, but the relation is not
statistically significant. We do not relate career concerns to statistical significance of esti-
mated effects because there is no variation in the subset of central bank papers (recall that
they all find statistical significance). There is no significant relation between career outcomes
and estimated effects on inflation, as we show in the Internet Appendix.

4.1.1   Seniority

Are career concerns stronger for senior or junior central bankers? It is not obvious ex ante
for which group of researchers we should expect to see a stronger relation between research
findings and subsequent career outcomes. On the one hand, research output may be a more
important criterion in the promotions of junior researchers, who spend more time on research
and less time on managerial tasks. On the other hand, support from top management may
matter more for the career advancement of senior researchers. There may also be more
discretion in the promotion decisions at the senior level.


                                               19
    We address this question in Table 9. We repeat the analysis from Table 8, but now
interact Effectij from equation (3) with the author's career rank (Seniority ). To simplify
the interpretation of the results, we standardize Seniority to have zero mean and a standard
deviation of one. The interaction between the effect on output and author seniority is positive
and statistically significant at the 10% level or lower for all four output effects reported in
Panel A. In terms of magnitude, the point estimates imply that a one standard deviation
increase in author seniority increases the sensitivity of career outcomes to the estimated effect
on output by 45% (= 0.364/0.802) to 56% (= 4.108/7.380). In Panel B, columns (3) and
(4), we find a greater sensitivity of career outcomes to the standardized effect on inflation
for more-senior authors. Although the economic magnitude is even larger than for the effect
on output, the result is only marginally statistically significant. For the non-standardized
effect on inflation (columns (1) and (2)), there is no greater sensitivity for senior authors.
    The above results are consistent with career concerns being stronger for senior central
bank researchers. If that is the case, and if seniority does not play a similar role for academics
(it is not clear why it should), we should expect to see larger differences in research findings
between central bankers and academics when the authors on the team are more senior.
    We test this prediction in Table 10. We repeat the analysis from Tables 4 through 6,
except that we interact CB Affiliation with the rank of the most senior author on the team,
Max Seniority.13 We standardize Max Seniority to zero mean and unit standard deviation.
For each of the 12 outcome variables, the estimated coefficient on the interaction between CB
Affiliation and Max Seniority is positive, implying that central bankers and academics are
further apart in their findings if there is a more senior person on the team. The interaction
coefficient is statistically significant at the 5% level for two variables and at the 10% level
for five of the 12 variables. The point estimate in Panel A, column (1), implies that the
difference in the estimated peak effect on output between a study with zero central bankers
and 100% central bankers is 1.054 percentage points larger if the rank of the most senior
author increases by one standard deviation. For the peak effect on inflation, the effect
reported in Panel B, column (1), is even larger, 1.140 percentage points. Even when the
interaction coefficient is statistically insignificant, its magnitude is large. For example, the
estimates in Panel A, column (3), suggest that increasing Max Seniority by one standard
deviation increases the difference in the standardized peak effect on output between central
bank and academic studies by 0.152 percentage points. Relative to the average difference of
0.105 notches, this implies more than a doubling of the effect.
    In Panel C of Table 10, we turn to significance. For output, the differences in statistical
and economic significance between studies with and without central bankers are 71% (=
  13
    The results are weaker if we use the average author rank instead of the rank of the most senior author,
suggesting that the seniority of the most senior author matters more. See the Internet Appendix.

                                                    20
0.335/0.472) and 70% (= 0.337/0.483) larger, respectively, if Max Seniority increases by one
standard deviation. These effects are significant at the 10% and 5% level, respectively. For
inflation, the point estimates also indicate large effects, but they are statistically insignificant.
In sum, we find some support for the prediction that differences between the findings of
central bankers and academics are larger when there are more-senior authors on the team.
The promotion results from Table 9 offer a possible explanation: senior central bankers may
report larger QE effects because they are more incentivized to do so.


4.2     Survey of Central Banks
Independent of the potential promotion channel, bank management can influence research
outcomes in a number of ways. For example, management can assign a topic to a researcher,
implicitly signaling the topic's importance to the bank. Superiors can suggest methodologies,
data sources, and related literature. If they are not convinced by the paper's results, superiors
can return the paper with suggestions for improvement, or even block the paper's release.
Management influence is often beneficial to the researcher, providing helpful guidance and
valuable resources. Besides anecdotal evidence, the economics profession knows little about
the extent of management involvement in central bank research.
    To fill this gap, we conduct a survey of research practices at the world's leading central
banks. We organized the survey in cooperation with the National Bank of Slovakia.14 We
reached out to 54 heads of research, covering the central banks in all OECD countries and all
EU member states, including the ECB, the Federal Reserve Board, and 12 regional Feds. In
return for participating, we promised to share aggregated results with the respondents. We
assured them that no individual responses would be published, and that only anonymized
responses could be pooled and used for research purposes. We sent out the initial invitation
on July 3, 2020; a reminder went out ten days later.
    The survey contains four main questions, each containing three to six multiple-choice
subquestions, for a total of 18 questions. All questions are mandatory to answer. We also
asked for the number of research-active economists in full-time equivalents employed by the
bank, the bank's name, and an email address to which we can send summary results.
    We have received 24 responses, representing a response rate of 44.4%. Based on self-
reported estimates by the respective heads of research, these 24 central banks employ a total
of over 750 researchers.15
    Figure 9 presents the aggregated responses to the four main questions. In response to
  14                   
    We thank Martin Suster,   the bank's head of research, for his generous help throughout the process.
  15
    We originally received 25 responses but one respondent asked to withdraw from the survey after the first
public circulation of our paper. The main conclusion from the survey--that management is substantially
involved in research production--is unaffected by the exclusion of this respondent.


                                                    21
the first question, "How are research topics selected in your central bank?", 20 (15) cen-
tral banks indicate that research topics are at least sometimes (often) mutually agreed by
researchers and management, and 17 banks respond that topics are at least sometimes as-
signed by management. Responding to the second question, "How are draft research papers
reviewed/commented on in your institution, prior to their public distribution?", 21 (14) cen-
tral banks indicate that papers are reviewed at least sometimes (often) by management. In
9 banks, this review happens for all papers. The third question is, "How are your institu-
tion's draft research papers approved for public distribution?". Bank management and, most
commonly, the head of research, is frequently involved in approving papers for publication:
20 (18) banks respond that the head of research approves papers at least sometimes (often).
The bank board also gets involved in the approval process, at least sometimes, in eight banks.
Finally, when asked "What criteria can lead to the paper being rejected (i.e., not approved
for public distribution)?", most central banks list "substandard methodology, unreliable data,
deficient modeling approach", followed by "results not robust or not significant". The latter
criteria are used by 18 (10) banks at least sometimes (often).
    The results of the survey reveal substantial involvement by management in the research
process at most central banks. This involvement creates an opportunity for bank man-
agement to influence research outcomes, suggesting that our findings in Section 3 could
potentially be driven by managerial influence at central banks.
    This interpretation of the survey evidence is subject to numerous caveats. First and
foremost, the fact that management involvement exists does not imply that it affects research
outcomes as measured in our study. Management involvement is necessary but not sufficient
for research outcomes to be influenced by management; the survey evidence thus supports
only the necessary condition. The involvement can take different forms, many of which
help improve the quality of research output without introducing any bias. For example,
many research directors view their role largely as helping their staff write better papers.
The first two survey questions pool research directors and senior managers into a single
"management" category, masking the different roles of these two types of managers, as well
as their potentially different sensitivities to "undesirable" policy messages.
    Second, given the survey's brevity, the responses cannot reveal the full range of practices
across banks. For example, economists in many banks split their time between policy work
and their own research. Management is likely to be more involved in the selection of topics
for policy work than for individual research, yet the first survey question does not distinguish
between the two types of work. Of course, whether a study of the effectiveness of QE counts
as research or policy work may also differ across banks.
    Finally, the set of central banks in our survey sample differs from the set of banks whose


                                              22
economists are in our pool of authors. While the two sets overlap, the overlap is relatively
small because most banks do not employ staff who have written about the effectiveness of
QE in the U.S., UK, or EA. We do not know how similar the research processes in the two
sets of banks are. If they are substantially different, then our survey sheds little light on the
involvement of bank management in the production of studies on QE.


4.3     Additional Evidence
Besides analyzing career outcomes and survey responses, we explore several other topics to
offer additional evidence on the mechanism behind our main results: the research outcomes
of the employees of the German Bundesbank (Section 4.3.1), researchers' methodological
choices (Section 4.3.2), and the quality of research output (Section 4.3.3).

4.3.1   The Bundesbank

If central bankers' findings regarding QE are colored by the views of bank management, we
should see weaker QE effects reported by researchers at central banks whose management
has taken a critical stance towards QE. A prominent example is the German Bundesbank,
whose top management has publicly criticized the ECB for its bond-buying program. For
example, former Bundesbank president Axel Weber and vice president J¨   urgen Stark resigned
from their positions at the ECB, allegedly in protest over QE (Reuters (2011)). The current
Bundesbank president as of 2020, Jens Weidmann, has also publicly opposed QE (e.g., Der
Spiegel (2012)). It seems plausible to conjecture that these views of the bank's top brass
could be reflected in the writings of the bank's researchers.
    We test this hypothesis by repeating the analysis in Tables 4 through 6, replacing CB
Affiliation in regression (1) with three indicators: German CB is equal to one if at least one
of the authors is employed by the Bundesbank, Other EA CB is equal to one if at least one
author works at the ECB or a euro area national central bank other than the Bundesbank,
and Non-EA CB is equal to one if at least one author is from a central bank outside the
euro area or from the BIS. The omitted group are academics. If a paper has authors from
both the Bundesbank and the ECB or another euro area national central bank, then both
the German CB indicator and the Other EA CB indicator are equal to one.
    Panel A of Table 11 shows that Bundesbank authors find strikingly different results
regarding the effectiveness of QE in raising output. Bundesbank papers report smaller effects
of QE on output compared to academics, on average, whereas other central banks, both inside
and outside the euro area, find larger effects. This pattern holds for all four measures of
output. For example, the estimates in column (1) imply that the average estimated peak
effect on output for Bundesbank papers is 0.884 percentage points smaller than the average

                                               23
peak effect for academics. In contrast, other central banks in the euro area find effects that
are 0.444 percentage points larger, and banks outside the euro area find effects that are 0.688
percentage points larger, on average, compared to academics. The difference in the point
estimates for German CB and Other EA CB, unreported for brevity, is mostly statistically
significant based on cluster-robust standard errors but not based on bootstrapped p-values,
in part because there are only four Bundesbank papers in our sample. The small-sample
problem is inherent to this exercise because of the relatively short period over which papers on
QE could be written since the first QE program in our sample was conducted. Nevertheless,
the different signs and large magnitudes of the coefficients reinforce the managerial influence
interpretation of our main results.
    For the effect on inflation, reported in Panel B, the differences between Bundesbank
authors and other central bankers are much smaller. Moreover, unlike in Panel A, the
Bundesbank estimates of the QE effects exceed those of academics. The weaker results for
inflation make sense. German opposition to ECB's QE has been based largely on concerns
about redistribution within the euro area, not on concerns about QE being ineffective at
raising inflation. On the contrary, a popular view in Germany is that QE could well be too
effective in that regard. The view that printing money causes inflation is traditionally strong
in Germany, whose collective memory is still scarred by the hyperinflation that took place
in the Weimar Republic in the early 1920s.

4.3.2   Methodological Choices

Researchers analyzing the same phenomenon by using different methodologies can arrive at
different conclusions. We examine two methodological choices that authors make: which
model to use and how, if at all, to report statistical significance. We find differences between
central bankers and academics in both dimensions. These differences offer possible clues as
to why these groups report different results regarding the effectiveness of QE.
    First, we test whether central bankers and academics are equally likely to disclose the
width of the confidence interval (or, alternatively, the standard error) used to assess statistical
significance. We estimate a linear probability model that regresses an indicator equal to one
if the paper does not disclose the confidence interval, and zero if it does, on the share of
central-bank-affiliated authors. This matches the regression specification in equation (2),
with yi denoting an indicator for nondisclosure. We restrict the sample to studies that
comment on the statistical significance of either output or inflation.
    Panel A of Table 12 shows that central bankers are more likely to not disclose the width of
the confidence interval. Column (3), which reports results from the specification that includes
country fixed effects and controls, shows that papers with 100% central bank authors are


                                                24
44.9 percentage points more likely to not report the width of the confidence interval than
papers with no central bank authors. That is a very significant effect, both statistically and
economically. When the confidence interval is not disclosed, it is more difficult to corroborate
the author's verbal assessment of statistical significance.
    We also ask which studies assess significance by using unusually narrow confidence
intervals--ones constructed at the 68% confidence level, rather than the more typical 90%
or 95%. A study using a 68% confidence interval is more likely to find significance because
it effectively uses one standard deviation confidence bands instead of the more typical two-
standard-deviation bands. We redefine yij in equation (1) to be an indicator equal to one if
the study either uses a 68% confidence interval or does not disclose this interval at all, and
zero otherwise. The results are in Panel A of Table 12, columns (4) through (6). Column
(6), which imposes the strictest controls, shows that papers with 100% central bank authors
are 27.6 percentage points more likely to use a narrow or non-specified confidence interval
than papers with no central bank authors. The result is significant at the 5% level.16
    Second, we explore differences in model choice. The most commonly used models in our
sample, by far, are DSGE and VAR models. We redefine yij to be an indicator equal to one
if the study uses a DSGE model, and zero otherwise. We then regress yij on the share of
central bank authors, again using a linear probability model following equation (1). Panel
B of Table 12 shows that central bankers are more likely to use DSGE models. Column (3)
shows that papers with 100% central bank authors are 31.9 percentage points more likely to
use a DSGE model than papers with no central bank authors. Although this difference is
large economically, it is only marginally statistically significant.
    One weakness of DSGE models is the fragility of their parameter estimates across empir-
ical studies (e.g., Schorfheide (2013)). This fragility results in part from different structural
choices made by different users of these models. A user aiming for a particular outcome
can pull on a number of levers to get closer to that outcome. If DSGE models lead to a
greater dispersion in estimates across studies compared to VAR models, then the former
models could be the more natural choice for an author with a particular outcome in mind.
However, testing this hypothesis is difficult because we cannot observe the distribution of all
hypothetical research outcomes for each type of model. In the Internet Appendix, we report
the standard deviation of the realized research outcomes for the two types of models, and
find mixed results. While the dispersion in estimates is higher among DSGE models for the
effect on output, it is smaller for the effect on inflation.
  16
     The choice of a narrow confidence interval could, in principle, be related to the type of statistical
inference used (Bayesian versus frequentist). However, we find very similar results when we control for a
dummy variable indicating the Bayesian/frequentist approach. See the Internet Appendix.




                                                   25
4.3.3    Alternative Mechanisms

Besides managerial influence, other mechanisms could potentially contribute to the observed
differences between the findings of central bankers and academics. One such mechanism is
differences in priors. Researchers with different priors about the power of policy interventions
may self-select into different institutions. For example, if researchers optimistic about QE
self-select into central banks, or the pessimists select into academia, then this selection
could explain the differences in research outcomes between central bankers and academics.
Moreover, differences in priors can be subsequently reinforced during the research process,
both by the researcher herself (confirmation bias) and by the feedback she receives from her
like-minded peers inside her institution and her social networks.
    Another potential mechanism is reputation concerns. These could involve concerns about
the bank's reputation and, if the researcher is senior enough to have participated in the
formation of the policy, concerns about her own reputation. Unfortunately, disentangling
these alternative explanations from managerial influence is inherently difficult, as they share
multiple empirical predictions. While we cannot rule out these mechanisms, two other ex-
planations seem unlikely, as we explain next.
    One possibility is that papers on QE written by central bankers and academics are of
different quality. For example, if central bank papers were of higher quality and the effects of
QE were truly strong, then we would expect central bank papers to find stronger QE effects.
Given the management involvement documented earlier, it is indeed possible that central
banks have a more rigorous vetting process for new working papers compared to universities,
allowing central banks to discard lower-quality papers. Moreover, central bankers may simply
know more about QE than academics, given the nature of the subject.
    However, higher research quality at central banks seems unlikely to explain our results,
for three reasons. First, if central bank papers are of higher quality, they should be more
likely to report confidence intervals, and presumably also to use a higher threshold for sta-
tistical significance. Instead, we find the opposite in Table 12. Second, papers written by
central bankers and academics are of comparable quality, based on three measures of quality:
publication status, journal impact factor, and the article influence score. We show this in
the Internet Appendix.17 Finally, to explain the opposite results regarding output for Bun-
desbank authors, a story based on differential research quality would have to assume that
Bundesbank research is of different quality compared to other central banks.
    Another possible explanation for our results, communicated to us by a central banker, is
  17
    In the same Appendix, we also show that the difference in research findings between central bankers
and academics remains largely unchanged once we condition on published papers only, as well as once we
condition on papers published in journals whose impact factor is at least 1.0.



                                                  26
that academics have an incentive to seek sensational results--such as that vast amounts of
spending by central banks were ineffective in improving macroeconomic outcomes--to boost
their reputations. Two facts cast doubt on this explanation. First, academic reputation is
generally judged by the publication record. Finding a null result makes a paper substantially
harder, not easier, to publish (recall the publication bias discussed earlier). Consistent with
this view, we show in the Internet Appendix that finding larger effects of QE on output
increases the odds of publication in a peer-reviewed journal. Second, if the results were
driven by academics' career concerns, then we should see stronger results among junior
authors, who strive to earn tenure, than among senior authors. In contrast, recall from
Table 10 that differences between the findings of central bankers and academics are more
pronounced among senior researchers.


5.    Conclusion
We analyze the conflict of interest faced by central bank economists who conduct research
evaluating central bank policies. Comparing the findings of central bankers and academics
regarding the effectiveness of QE, we find that central bank studies report stronger effects
of QE on both output and inflation. Central bank studies are also more likely to report
QE effects on output that are significant, and their abstracts use more favorable language.
Overall, central bankers find QE to be more effective compared to academics.
    Of course, this evidence does not imply that central bank research is biased. Perhaps
academic research is biased toward insignificance. However, given the publication bias in
academic journals, academics have their own incentive to find significant effects. Moreover,
additional evidence suggests a role for career concerns. We find that central bankers whose
papers report larger effects of QE on output have better career outcomes. The somewhat
weaker effects found by Bundesbank researchers are also consistent with career concerns.
Finally, our survey reveals that in most central banks, management influences research top-
ics, reviews papers, and approves them for public distribution. The involvement of bank
management in the production of bank research extends far beyond that of university man-
agement in academic research. This involvement seems necessary, at least to some extent,
given the broader mission of a central bank. The extent to which this involvement affects
research outcomes remains unclear, creating opportunities for future research.
    Importantly, we do not argue that central bank research should be discounted. In many
ways, central banks are in an excellent position to provide accurate assessments of their own
policies. Like pharmaceutical firms studying their own drugs, central banks have superior
information about their own products, exceptionally strong expertise in the subject matter,


                                              27
and an intense desire to preserve their reputation. In addition, central banks are public
institutions whose integrity is generally held in very high esteem. They understand that the
effectiveness of their policy is predicated on their own credibility. We are not questioning
that credibility. We simply highlight a previously unexplored conflict of interest that has the
potential to influence a subset of bank research. We hope that our study will help central
banks think through the implications of this conflict for their research processes.




                                              28
References
Andersen, Jorgen Juel, Johannesen, Niels and Rijkers, Bob (2020), Elite capture of foreign
 aid: Evidence from offshore bank accounts, Technical Report WPS 9150, Policy Research
 working paper, World Bank Group.

Asatryan, Zareh, Havlik, Annika, Heinemann, Friedrich and Nover, Justus (2020), Biases in
  fiscal multiplier estimates, European Journal of Political Economy 63, 101861.

Bailey, Charles N., Hasselback, James R. and Karcher, Julia N. (2001), Research misconduct
  in accounting literature: A survey of the most prolific researchers' actions and beliefs,
  Abacus 37(1), 26­54.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., Deaton, Angus, Lustig, Nora, Rogoff, Kenneth and Hsu, Edward
  (2006), An evaluation of World Bank research, 1998-2005, Technical report, World Bank,
  Washington, DC.

Bekelman, Justin E., Li, Yan and Gross, Cary P. (2003), Scope and impact of financial
  conflicts of interest in biomedical research: A systematic review, Journal of the American
  Medical Association 289(4), 454­465.

Benson, Alan, Li, Danielle and Shue, Kelly (2019), Promotions and the Peter principle,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(4), 2085­2134.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2020), The new tools of monetary policy, American Economic Review
  110(4), 943­983.

Besley, Timothy, Meads, Neil and Surico, Paolo (2008), Insiders versus outsiders in monetary
  policymaking, American Economic Review 98(2), 218­223.

Blanes i Vidal, Jordi, Draca, Mirko and Fons-Rosen, Christian (2012), Revolving door lob-
  byists, American Economic Review 102(7), 3731­3748.

Bolton, Patrick, Freixas, Xavier and Shapiro, Joel (2012), The credit ratings game, Journal
  of Finance 67(1), 85­111.

Brodeur, Abel, L´e, Mathias, Sangnier, Marc and Zylberberg, Yanos (2016), Star wars: The
  empirics strike back, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(1), 1­32.

Cameron, A. Colin, Gelbach, Jonah B. and Miller, Douglas L. (2008), Bootstrap-based
  improvements for inference with clustered errors, Review of Economics and Statistics
  90(3), 414­427.

Cameron, A. Colin and Miller, Douglas L. (2015), A practitioner's guide to cluster-robust
  inference, Journal of Human Resources 50(2), 317­372.

Carrick-Hagenbarth, Jessica and Epstein, Gerald A. (2012), Dangerous interconnectedness:
  Economists' conflicts of interest, ideology and financial crisis, Cambridge Journal of Eco-
  nomics 36(1), 43­63.

                                             29
Chevalier, Judith and Ellison, Glenn (1999), Career concerns of mutual fund managers,
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(2), 389­432.

Christensen, Garret and Miguel, Edward (2018), Transparency, reproducibility, and the
 credibility of economics research, Journal of Economic Literature 56(3), 920­980.

Collier, Joe and Iheanacho, Ike (2002), The pharmaceutical industry as an informant, Lancet
  360(9343), 1405­1409.

Cornaggia, Jess, Cornaggia, Kimberly J. and Xia, Han (2016), Revolving doors on Wall
  Street, Journal of Financial Economics 120(2), 400­419.

Davidson, Russell and MacKinnon, James G. (2010), Wild bootstrap tests for IV regression,
  Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 28(1), 128­144.

De Long, J. Bradford and Lang, Kevin (1992), Are all economic hypotheses false?, Journal
  of Political Economy 100(6), 1257­1272.

Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Rabanal, Pau and Sandri, Damiano (2018), Unconventional mone-
  tary policies in the Euro Area, Japan, and the United Kingdom, Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 32(4), 147­172.

Der Spiegel (2012), Too close to state financing via the money press. Interview conducted
  by Georg Mascolo, Michael Sauga and Anne Seith. Translated from German by Paul
  Cohen. August 29. URL: https://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/spiegel-interview-
  with-bundesbank-president-jens-weidmann-a-852285.html.

Doucouliagos, Chris and Stanley, T. D. (2013), Are all economic facts greatly exaggerated?
 Theory competition and selectivity, Journal of Economic Surveys 27(2), 316­339.

Fanelli, Daniele (2009), How many scientists fabricate and falsify research? A systematic
  review and meta-analysis of surveydata, PLOS ONE 4(5), 1­11.

Fanelli, Daniele (2010a), Do pressures to publish increase scientists' bias? An empirical
  support from US states data, PLOS ONE 5(4), 1­7.

Fanelli, Daniele (2010b), "Positive" results increase down the hierarchy of the sciences, PLOS
  ONE 5(4), 1­10.

Fanelli, Daniele (2012), Negative results are disappearing from most disciplines and countries,
  Scientometrics 90(3), 891­904.

Fanelli, Daniele, Costas, Rodrigo and Ioannidis, John P. A. (2017), Meta-assessment of bias
  in science, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114(14), 3714­3719.

Franco, Annie, Malhotra, Neil and Simonovits, Gabor (2014), Publication bias in the social
  sciences: Unlocking the file drawer, Science 345(6203), 1502­1505.

Gentzkow, Matthew and Shapiro, Jesse M. (2010), What drives media slant? Evidence from
 U.S. daily newspapers, Econometrica 78(1), 35­71.

                                              30
Gerlach-Kristen, Petra (2009), Outsiders at the Bank of England's MPC, Journal of Money,
 Credit and Banking 41(6), 1099­1115.

Griffin, John M. and Tang, Dragon Yongjun (2012), Did subjectivity play a role in CDO
  credit ratings?, Journal of Finance 67(4), 1293­1328.

Groseclose, Tim and Milyo, Jeffrey (2005), A measure of media bias, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 120(4), 1191­1237.

Hansen, Stephen, McMahon, Michael and Prat, Andrea (2018), Transparency and delib-
  eration within the FOMC: A computational linguistics approach, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 133(2), 801­870.

Hong, Harrison and Kacperczyk, Marcin (2010), Competition and bias, Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 125(4), 1683­1725.

Hong, Harrison and Kubik, Jeffrey D. (2003), Analyzing the analysts: Career concerns and
  biased earnings forecasts, Journal of Finance 58(1), 313­351.

Hong, Harrison, Kubik, Jeffrey D. and Solomon, Amit (2000), Security analysts' career
  concerns and herding of earnings forecasts, RAND Journal of Economics 31(1), 121­144.

Ioannidis, John P. A. (2005), Why most published research findings are false, PLOS Medicine
  2(8), e124.

Ioannidis, John P. A. and Doucouliagos, Chris (2013), What's to know about the credibility
  of empirical economists?, Journal of Economic Surveys 27(5), 997­1004.

Ioannidis, John P. A., Stanley, T. D. and Doucouliagos, Chris (2017), The power of bias in
  economics research, Economic Journal 127(605), F236­F265.

Jelveh, Zubin, Kogut, Bruce and Naidu, Suresh (2018), Political language in economics,
  Technical Report 14­57, Research Paper, Columbia Business School.

Jiang, John (Xuefeng), Stanford, Mary Harris and Xie, Yuan (2012), Does it matter who pays
  for bond ratings? Historical evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 105(3), 607­621.

Kempf, Elisabeth (2020), The job rating game: Revolving doors and analyst incentives,
  Journal of Financial Economics 135(1), 41­67.

Leamer, Edward E. (1983), Let's take the con out of econometrics, American Economic
  Review 73(1), 31­43.

Lexchin, Joel, Bero, Lisa A., Djulbegovic, Benjamin and Clark, Otavio (2003), Pharmaceu-
  tical industry sponsorship and research outcome and quality: Systematic review, BMJ
  326(7400), 1167­1170.

List, John A., Bailey, Charles D., Euzent, Patricia J. and Martin, Thomas L. (2001), Aca-
  demic economists behaving badly? A survey on three areas of unethical behavior, Eco-
  nomic Inquiry 39(1), 162­170.

                                            31
Loughran, Tim and McDonald, Bill (2011), When is a liability not a liability? Textual
  analysis, dictionaries, and 10-ks, Journal of Finance 66(1), 35­65.

Lucca, David, Seru, Amit and Trebbi, Francesco (2014), The revolving door and worker flows
  in banking regulation, Journal of Monetary Economics 65, 17­32.

MacKinnon, James G. and Webb, Matthew D. (2017), Wild bootstrap inference for wildly
 different cluster sizes, Journal of Applied Econometrics 32(2), 233­254.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Shanthikumar, Devin (2007), Are small investors naive about in-
 centives?, Journal of Financial Economics 85(2), 457­489.

Martin, Christopher and Milas, Costas (2012), Quantitative easing: a sceptical survey, Ox-
 ford Review of Economic Policy 28(4), 750­764.

Mathis, J´
         er^
           ome, McAndrews, James and Rochet, Jean-Charles (2009), Rating the raters: Are
 reputation concerns powerful enough to discipline rating agencies?, Journal of Monetary
 Economics 56(5), 657­674.

Meade, Ellen E. and Stasavage, David (2008), Publicity of debate and the incentive to
 dissent: Evidence from the US Federal Reserve, Economic Journal 118(528), 695­717.

Michaely, Roni and Womack, Kent L. (1999), Conflict of interest and the credibility of
 underwriter analyst recommendations, Review of Financial Studies 12(4), 653­686.

Mullainathan, Sendhil and Shleifer, Andrei (2005), The market for news, American Economic
 Review 95(4), 1031­1053.

Nickerson, Raymond S. (1998), Confirmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises,
  Review of General Psychology 2(2), 175­220.

Reuter, Jonathan and Zitzewitz, Eric (2006), Do ads influence editors? Advertising and bias
  in the financial media, Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1), 197­227.

Reuters (2011), Top German quits ECB over bond-buying row. Author: Andreas Framke,
  September 9. URL: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-ecb-stark/top-german-quits-ecb-
  over-bond-buying-row-idUSTRE7883DF20110909.

Roodman, David, Ørregaard Nielsen, Morten, MacKinnon, James G. and Webb, Matthew D.
  (2019), Fast and wild: Bootstrap inference in Stata using boottest, Stata Journal 19(1), 4­
  60.

Sage, William M. (2007), Some principles require principals: Why banning conflicts of inter-
  est won't solve incentive problems in biomedical research, Texas Law Review 85, 1413­1463.

Schorfheide, Frank (2013), Estimation and evaluation of DSGE models: Progress and chal-
  lenges, in Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano and Eddie Dekel, eds, Advances in economics
  and econometrics: Tenth world congress, Vol. 3 of Econometric Society Monographs, Cam-
  bridge University Press, pp. 184­230.


                                             32
Sibert, Anne (2003), Monetary policy committees: Individual and collective reputations,
  Review of Economic Studies 70(3), 649­665.

Sismondo, Sergio (2008), Pharmaceutical company funding and its consequences: A quali-
  tative systematic review, Contemporary Clinical Trials 29(2), 109­113.

The Economist (2020), The World Bank loses another chief economist.          Febru-
 ary 13. URL: https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2020/02/13/the-world-
 bank-loses-another-chief-economist.

The Financial Times (2015), Four reasons why QE will be different in the eurozone. Au-
 thor: Ferdinando Giugliano, January 20. URL: https://www.ft.com/content/b4b64b96-
 9fe1-11e4-9a74-00144feab7de.

Warner, Jerold B., Watts, Ross L. and Wruck, Karen H. (1988), Stock prices and top man-
 agement changes, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 461­492.

Weale, Martin and Wieladek, Tomasz (2016), What are the macroeconomic effects of asset
 purchases?, Journal of Monetary Economics 79, 81­93.

Weisbach, Michael S. (1988), Outside directors and CEO turnover, Journal of Financial
 Economics 20, 431­460.

Zingales, Luigi (2013), Preventing economists' capture, in Daniel Carpenter and David A.
  Moss, eds, Preventing regulatory capture: Special interest influence and how to limit it,
  Cambridge University Press, pp. 124­151.




                                            33
                                     10                                                                                                            25



                                      8                                                                                                            20
    Number of research papers




                                                                                                                  Number of research papers
                                      6                                                                                                            15



                                      4                                                                                                            10



                                      2                                                                                                             5



                                      0                                                                                                             0
                                          2010   2011    2012   2013   2014   2015      2016   2017   2018                                                    UK                US            EA



                                                        (A) Papers by Year                                                                                 (B) Papers by Country Studied
                                     1                                                                                                             1



                                     .8                                                                                                            .8
    Share of CB-affiliated authors




                                                                                                                  Share of CB-affiliated authors
                                     .6                                                                                                            .6



                                     .4                                                                                                            .4



                                     .2                                                                                                            .2



                                     0                                                                                                             0
                                          2010   2011    2012   2013   2014   2015      2016   2017   2018                                                   UK                 US            EA



                                                 (C) CB Affiliation by Year                                                                             (D) CB Affiliation by Country Studied


                                     1                                                                                                             1



                                     .8                                                                                                            .8
    Share of research papers




                                                                                                                  Share of research papers




                                     .6                                                                                                            .6



                                     .4                                                                                                            .4



                                     .2                                                                                                            .2



                                     0                                                                                                             0
                                          2010   2011    2012   2013   2014   2015      2016   2017   2018                                                    UK                US            EA

                                                                 Output        Prices                                                                                  Output        Prices



                                            (E) Outcome Variables by Year                                                                          (F) Outcome Variables by Country Studied


Figure 1: Summary Statistics. The figure plots summary statistics at the paper level.
Panel A reports the number of research papers by calendar year of first circulation. Panel B
reports the number of research papers by country studied. Panels C and D show the average
share of central bank (CB)-affiliated authors by calendar year of first circulation and by
country studied, respectively. Panels E and F show the average share of papers that study
the effect of QE on output and prices by calendar year of first circulation and by country
studied, respectively.

                                                                                                             34
                  Bank of England

                 National CB (EA)

               University (Europe)

            European Central Bank

                  Federal Reserve

                      BIS/IMF/WB

                   University (UK)

                   University (US)

                    Private Sector

                         Other CB


                                     0           5           10            15       20
                                                         Number of authors


                                         (A) Author Count by Employer


                   Princeton University

                University of Cambridge

                       Ghent University

           European University Institute

                        Yale University

                    University of Oxford

                  University of Chicago

                    Stanford University

                   New York University

                     Harvard University


                                           0         2         4                6        8
                                                          Number of authors


                                     (B) Author Count by PhD Institution


Figure 2: Number of Authors by Employer and PhD Institution. The figure plots
the number of authors by employer type (Panel A) and by PhD institution (Panel B). We
restrict the graphs to employer types and PhD institutions with at least three affiliated
authors. The unit of observation is at the author-paper level in Panel A, and the author
level in Panel B.
                                           35
                    APP (EA)
                   QE 1 (UK)
                 LSAP 1 (US)
                 LSAP 2 (US)
      LTROs < 14 months (EA)
              LSAP 1 - 3 (US)
           3-year LTROs (EA)
                TLTROs (EA)
                   QE 2 (UK)
                QE 1 - 2 (UK)
        Operation Twist 1 (US)
              LSAP 1 - 2 (US)
    LTROs + SMP + CBPP (EA)

                                 0              5                  10              15
                                                    Number of studies

                                                     CB          Not CB


Figure 3: Number of Studies by QE Program. The figure plots the number of studies
by QE program studied, separately for papers with and without CB-affiliated authors. Here
we pool central bankers and BIS authors.




                                           36
Figure 4: Visualization of the Peak and Cumulative Effects. The figure illustrates
how we compute the peak and cumulative effects of QE on the level of the outcome variable
for the most common case, in which the authors plot the effect of QE on the level of the
outcome variable.




                                           37
                                      CB                                                                                    CB
   .4                                                                                   .75



                                                                                         .5

   .2

                                                                                        .25



   0                                                                                     0
        -1.00   0.00    1.00        2.00         3.00       4.00     5.00   6.00              -2.00   -1.00   0.00   1.00    2.00   3.00   4.00   5.00   6.00


                                Not CB                                                                                Not CB
   .4                                                                                   .75



                                                                                         .5

   .2

                                                                                        .25



   0                                                                                     0
        -1.00   0.00    1.00        2.00         3.00       4.00     5.00   6.00              -2.00   -1.00   0.00   1.00    2.00   3.00   4.00   5.00   6.00



                       (A) Total Peak Effect                                                           (B) Total Cumulative Effect

                                      CB                                                                                    CB
   .6                                                                                   .75



   .4                                                                                    .5



   .2                                                                                   .25



   0                                                                                     0
        -.25    0      .25     .5          .75          1     1.25    1.5   1.75              -.25     0      .25     .5     .75     1     1.25   1.5    1.75


                                Not CB                                                                                Not CB
   .6                                                                                   .75



   .4                                                                                    .5



   .2                                                                                   .25



   0                                                                                     0
        -.25    0      .25     .5          .75          1     1.25    1.5   1.75              -.25     0      .25     .5     .75     1     1.25   1.5    1.75



                (C) Standardized Peak Effect                                                     (D) Standardized Cumulative Effect


Figure 5: The Effect on Output by Central Bank Affiliation. The figure plots his-
tograms for the estimated effect on output, separately for papers with and without CB-
affiliated authors. Panels A and B show the total estimated peak and cumulative effects of
the QE program studied on the level of output. Panels C and D show the estimated peak
and cumulative effects of the QE program studied on the level of output, after standardizing
the QE shock size to 1% of GDP.


                                                                                   38
                                          CB                                                                                              CB
   .75                                                                                          .6



    .5                                                                                          .4



   .25                                                                                          .2



        0                                                                                       0
            -1.00   0.00   1.00   2.00    3.00     4.00       5.00    6.00   7.00   8.00             -9.00      -7.00   -5.00   -3.00    -1.00     1.00    3.00    5.00    7.00


                                         Not CB                                                                                         Not CB
   .75                                                                                          .6



    .5                                                                                          .4



   .25                                                                                          .2



        0                                                                                       0
            -1.00   0.00   1.00   2.00    3.00     4.00       5.00    6.00   7.00   8.00             -9.00      -7.00   -5.00   -3.00     -1.00     1.00    3.00    5.00    7.00



                           (A) Total Peak Effect                                                                   (B) Total Cumulative Effect

                                          CB                                                                                              CB
   .9                                                                                           .75



   .6                                                                                            .5



   .3                                                                                           .25



   0                                                                                                 0
        -.25         0      .25     .5       .75          1          1.25    1.5    1.75                 -.75    -.5    -.25    0       .25   .5     .75     1     1.25    1.5    1.75


                                         Not CB                                                                                         Not CB
   .9                                                                                           .75



   .6                                                                                            .5



   .3                                                                                           .25



   0                                                                                                 0
        -.25         0      .25     .5       .75          1          1.25    1.5    1.75                 -.75    -.5    -.25    0       .25   .5     .75     1     1.25    1.5    1.75



                     (C) Standardized Peak Effect                                                           (D) Standardized Cumulative Effect


Figure 6: The Effect on Inflation by Central Bank Affiliation. The figure plots
histograms for the estimated effect on inflation, separately for papers with and without CB-
affiliated authors. Panels A and B show the total estimated peak and cumulative effects of
the QE program studied on the price level. Panels C and D show the estimated peak and
cumulative effects of the QE program studied on the price level, after standardizing the QE
shock size to 1% of GDP.


                                                                                           39
                               CB                                                     CB
    1                                                            1


   .75                                                          .75


    .5                                                           .5


   .25                                                          .25


    0                                                            0
         0                    .5                1                       0                  .5                1


                             Not CB                                                 Not CB
    1                                                            1


   .75                                                          .75


    .5                                                           .5


   .25                                                          .25


    0                                                            0
                0                   .5                 1                0                  .5                1



             (A) Statistical Significance: Output                     (B) Economic Significance: Output

                               CB                                                     CB
    1                                                            1


   .75                                                          .75


    .5                                                           .5


   .25                                                          .25


    0                                                            0
                0                   .5                 1                0                  .5                1


                             Not CB                                                 Not CB
    1                                                            1


   .75                                                          .75


    .5                                                           .5


   .25                                                          .25


    0                                                            0
                0                   .5                 1                0                  .5                1



             (C) Statistical Significance: Inflation                  (D) Economic Significance: Inflation

Figure 7: Significance by Central Bank Affiliation. The figure plots histograms for the
significance of the estimated effect on output and inflation, separately for papers with and
without CB-affiliated authors. The panels show the statistical and economic significance of
the QE program's estimated effect on output and inflation, respectively. Statistical signifi-
cance is equal to one if the authors conclude that the effect of QE is positive and statistically
significant, and zero otherwise. Economic significance is equal to one (zero) if the authors
assess the effect of QE to be economically significant (insignificant); it is equal to 0.5 if the
authors conclude the economic effect is moderate.

                                                           40
                                Promotion                                                                  Promotion
   .2                                                                            .5




   .1                                                                           .25




   0                                                                                 0
        0.00        1.00        2.00        3.00        4.00        5.00                 0.00      1.00     2.00       3.00    4.00   5.00


                      Lateral move or demotion                                                      Lateral move or demotion
   .2                                                                            .5




   .1                                                                           .25




   0                                                                                 0
        0.00        1.00        2.00        3.00        4.00        5.00                 0.00      1.00     2.00       3.00    4.00   5.00



                      (A) Total Peak Effect                                                     (B) Total Cumulative Effect

                                Promotion                                                                  Promotion
                                                                                .6
    .3



                                                                                .3
   .15




        0                                                                       0
               0           .2          .4          .6          .8                        0         .1       .2         .3      .4      .5


                      Lateral move or demotion                                                      Lateral move or demotion
                                                                                .6

    .3



                                                                                .3
   .15




        0                                                                       0
               0           .2          .4          .6          .8                        0         .1       .2         .3      .4      .5



                   (C) Standardized Peak Effect                                              (D) Standardized Cumulative Effect

Figure 8: Career Outcomes and the Effect on Output. The figure plots histograms
for the estimated effect on output by the author's subsequent career path. We restrict the
sample to authors who remain affiliated with a central bank and experience at least one
career update. Panels A and B show the total estimated peak and cumulative effects of the
QE program studied on the output level, respectively. Panels C and D show the estimated
peak and cumulative effects on the output level, after standardizing the QE shock size to
1% of GDP. The unit of observation is at the author-paper-country level.


                                                                           41
                                                                                                                                                       By management                      9                                  5                                 7                         3
  Selected by individual researcher(s)       2                         12                              7                1       2



                                                                                                                                                  By dedicated comittee                         11                           1         2                                10




   Mutually agreed on by researchers                                                                                                                By individual peers
                   and management                 4                         11                         5                3           1                                                            12                                                7                         2           3
                                                                                                                                                    within the institution




                                                                                                                                                   By outside reviewers              5                              10                                 2                4                3



           Assigned by management                     5                          12                         4               3

                                                                                                                                                           Not reviewed          4                                                          20



                                                  Always            Often             Sometimes            Rarely                   Never                                                     Always             Often                Sometimes                Rarely            Never




(A) How are research topics selected in your central bank?                                                                                       (B) How are draft research papers reviewed / commented
                                                                                                                                                 on in your institution, prior to their public distribution?



      By management: Bank board          2       1             5                 6                         10
                                                                                                                                                                     Lack of policy relevance        2       3                6                                         13


 By management: Head of research                                    16                             2       2        2           2

                                                                                                                                                              Topic not interesting from the
                                                                                                                                                            perspective of your central bank 1           3               4              4                                12
   By comittee of internal members               5             1   3                              15



        By comittee of external and
                  internal members       2           2                                    20
                                                                                                                                                 Substandard methodology, unreliable data,
                                                                                                                                                              deficient modeling approach                        10                               5                     5                4


              By outside reviewers           3           1 1                               19



                                                                                                                                                        Results not robust or not significant                7                    3                        8                     4           2
            Automatically approved       2       1        2                                19



                                                 Always            Often              Sometimes            Rarely                   Never                                                                Always              Often                Sometimes                   Rarely             Never




 (C) How are your institution's draft research papers ap-                                                                                        (D) What criteria can lead to the paper being rejected (i.e.,
proved for public distribution?                                                                                                                  not approved for public distribution)?


    Figure 9: Survey of Central Banks. The figure reports survey responses of 24 central banks.




                                                                                                                                            42
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics

This table reports summary statistics for our sample of 54 research papers (Panel A) and 137
authors (Panel B).



 Variable                                N          Mean         Median            SD
 Panel A: Paper-Level Variables
 Number of authors                      54          2.537         2.000           0.985
 Number of countries studied            54          1.259         1.000           0.589
 DSGE                                   54          0.352         0.000           0.482
 Sentiment score in abstract            54          0.044         0.047           0.066
 Published                              54          0.574         1.000           0.499
 Impact factor                          29          1.423         1.268           0.873

 Panel B: Author-Level Variables
 CB affiliation                         137          0.602        1.000           0.478
 Female                                 137          0.168        0.000           0.375
 Author experience                      127         10.992        9.000           9.861
 PhD degree                             137         0.891         1.000           0.313
 Seniority                              114          3.193        3.000           1.708
 Years since last career update         125          3.896        3.000           4.097




                                               43
                     Table 2: The Effect of QE on Output and Inflation

This table reports the mean, median (in square brackets), and standard deviation (in parentheses)
for the estimated effects of QE on output and inflation, as well as for indicators of statistical
significance. We always report the effect on the output level or price level, in percent. Standardized
effects refer to the effect of a QE shock size equivalent to 1% of GDP. The statistics are reported
for the full sample (All ) and for studies of QE in the U.S., UK, and EA. The unit of observation
is the paper-country.



                                                    All           US            UK            EA

  Panel A: Effect on Output
  Peak effect on output                            1.57          1.25          1.67          1.77
                                                  [1.25]        [1.01]        [1.30]        [1.41]
                                                  (1.21)        (0.92)        (1.22)        (1.41)
  Standardized peak effect on output               0.24          0.36          0.12          0.22
                                                  [0.16]        [0.23]        [0.10]        [0.15]
                                                  (0.28)        (0.35)        (0.09)        (0.27)
  Cumulative effect on output                      0.87          0.59          0.68          1.24
                                                  [0.40]        [0.35]        [0.49]        [0.37]
                                                  (1.23)        (0.93)        (0.77)        (1.62)
  Standardized cumulative effect on output         0.14          0.17          0.05          0.16
                                                  [0.04]        [0.06]        [0.03]        [0.04]
                                                  (0.26)        (0.33)        (0.06)        (0.29)
  Panel B: Effect on Inflation
  Peak effect on inflation                         1.42          1.07          2.14          1.25
                                                  [0.93]        [0.77]        [1.03]        [0.96]
                                                  (1.52)        (0.99)        (2.36)        (1.02)
  Standardized peak effect on inflation            0.19          0.30          0.15          0.12
                                                  [0.11]        [0.18]        [0.08]        [0.10]
                                                  (0.24)        (0.36)        (0.14)        (0.10)
  Cumulative effect on inflation                   0.89          0.78          0.77          1.07
                                                  [0.75]        [0.58]        [0.74]        [0.85]
                                                  (1.94)        (1.03)        (3.44)        (1.08)
  Standardized cumulative effect on inflation      0.12          0.21          0.04          0.11
                                                  [0.08]        [0.13]        [0.06]        [0.08]
                                                  (0.26)        (0.37)        (0.23)        (0.11)
  Panel C: Significance
  Statistical significance: output                 0.88          0.92          0.73          0.94
                                                  [1.00]        [1.00]        [1.00]        [1.00]
                                                  (0.33)        (0.28)        (0.47)        (0.24)
  Statistical significance: inflation              0.84          0.92          0.67          0.88
                                                  [1.00]        [1.00]        [1.00]        [1.00]
                                                  (0.37)        (0.28)        (0.50)        (0.34)


                                                 44
 Table 3: The Effect of QE on Output and Inflation by Central Bank Affiliation

This table reports the means and medians (in parentheses) for the estimated effects of QE on
output and inflation, as well as for indicators of statistical significance, separately for papers with
and without CB-affiliated authors. We always report the effect on the output level or price level,
in percent. Standardized effects refer to the effect of a QE shock size equivalent to 1% of GDP.
The All column is identical to the means and medians reported in the first column of Table 2. The
unit of observation is the paper-country.




                                                        All              CB               Not CB

  Panel A: Effect on Output
  Peak effect on output                                 1.57             1.75               1.00
                                                       (1.25)           (1.53)             (1.00)
  Standardized peak effect on output                    0.24             0.28               0.11
                                                       (0.16)           (0.18)             (0.10)
  Cumulative effect on output                           0.87             1.06               0.48
                                                       (0.40)           (0.42)             (0.05)
  Standardized cumulative effect on output              0.14             0.18               0.04
                                                       (0.04)           (0.06)             (0.01)
  Panel B: Effect on Inflation
  Peak effect on inflation                              1.42             1.79               0.54
                                                       (0.93)           (1.17)             (0.40)
  Standardized peak effect on inflation                 0.19             0.24                0.05
                                                       (0.11)           (0.15)             (0.04)
  Cumulative effect on inflation                        0.89             1.35               -0.21
                                                       (0.75)           (0.82)             (0.14)
  Standardized cumulative effect on inflation           0.12             0.18               -0.01
                                                       (0.08)           (0.11)             (0.01)
  Panel C: Significance
  Statistical significance: output                      0.88             1.00               0.50
                                                       (1.00)           (1.00)             (0.50)
  Statistical significance: inflation                   0.84             0.89               0.75
                                                       (1.00)           (1.00)             (1.00)




                                                  45
                           Table 4: The Effect of QE on Output

This table regresses the estimated effect of QE on output on the share of authors with central bank
affiliation. In Panel A, we use the total estimated effect of the QE program studied on the level
of output. Panel B uses the estimated effect on the level of output, after standardizing the QE
shock size to 1% of GDP. Controls include the number of authors and the logarithm of three plus
the average author experience. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors
clustered at the paper level. p-values obtained using the wild cluster bootstrap procedure (10,000
repetitions) are reported in square brackets. The unit of observation is the paper-country.


 Panel A: Total Program Effect

                                             Peak Effect                     Cumulative Effect

                                    (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)           (5)           (6)

 CB Affiliation                     0.789       0.770       0.723     0.620        0.526      0.512
                                    (2.16)      (2.17)     (1.83)     (1.60)      (1.51)      (1.36)
                                   [0.041]     [0.038]     [0.085]   [0.115]      [0.134]    [0.167]

 Country FE                                      X           X                      X              X
 Controls                                                    X                                     X
 Observations                        58          58         58         57            57            57
 R2                                0.072       0.103       0.112     0.043         0.091         0.096


 Panel B: Standardized Effect

                                             Peak Effect                  Cumulative Effect
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)

 CB Affiliation                     0.164       0.163       0.152     0.140        0.127      0.122
                                    (2.38)      (2.48)     (2.11)     (2.17)      (2.17)      (1.90)
                                   [0.021]     [0.018]     [0.052]   [0.021]      [0.020]    [0.049]

 Country FE                                      X           X                      X              X
 Controls                                                    X                                     X
 Observations                        58          58         58         57            57            57
 R2                                0.060       0.170       0.206     0.048         0.078         0.106




                                                 46
                           Table 5: The Effect of QE on Inflation

This table regresses the estimated effect of QE on inflation on the share of authors with central bank
affiliation. In Panel A, we use the total estimated effect of the QE program studied on the price
level. Panel B uses the estimated effect on the price level, after standardizing the QE shock size to
1% of GDP. Controls include the number of authors and the logarithm of three plus the average
author experience. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors clustered at
the paper level. p-values obtained using the wild cluster bootstrap procedure (10,000 repetitions)
are reported in square brackets. The unit of observation is at the paper-country level.


 Panel A: Total Program Effect

                                              Peak Effect                     Cumulative Effect

                                     (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)

 CB Affiliation                      1.409       1.493       1.279     1.700        1.687      1.394
                                     (3.42)      (3.33)     (2.79)     (2.24)      (2.20)      (2.04)
                                    [0.002]     [0.002]     [0.011]   [0.011]      [0.013]    [0.044]

 Country FE                                       X           X                      X              X
 Controls                                                     X                                     X
 Observations                         53          53         53         53            53            53
 R2                                 0.142       0.239       0.298     0.126         0.126         0.195


 Panel B: Standardized Effect

                                              Peak Effect                     Cumulative Effect

                                     (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)

 CB Affiliation                      0.197       0.227       0.201     0.205        0.220      0.190
                                     (2.61)      (2.73)     (2.73)     (2.31)      (2.31)      (2.41)
                                    [0.007]     [0.005]     [0.004]   [0.004]      [0.004]    [0.007]

 Country FE                                       X           X                      X              X
 Controls                                                     X                                     X
 Observations                         53          53         53         53            53            53
 R2                                 0.110       0.248       0.296     0.106         0.186         0.226




                                                  47
                                      Table 6: Significance

This table regresses the statistical and economic significance of the estimated effect of QE on output
and inflation on the share of central bank affiliated authors. In Panel A (B), the dependent variable
is the reported statistical and economic significance of the effect on output (inflation). Controls
include the number of authors and the logarithm of three plus the average author experience.
t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors clustered at the paper level.
p-values obtained using the wild cluster bootstrap procedure (10,000 repetitions) are reported in
square brackets. The unit of observation is the paper-country.

 Panel A: Effect on Output

                                        Statistical Significance           Economic Significance

                                     (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)

 CB Affiliation                      0.412       0.388        0.366     0.335      0.344      0.399
                                     (2.42)      (2.41)      (2.20)     (2.78)    (2.78)      (3.42)
                                    [0.041]     [0.035]      [0.043]   [0.019]    [0.019]    [0.005]

 Country FE                                        X            X                   X           X
 Controls                                                       X                               X
 Observations                         41           41          41        66          66         66
 R2                                 0.233        0.280        0.298    0.139       0.145      0.250


 Panel B: Effect on Inflation

                                        Statistical Significance           Economic Significance

                                     (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)

 CB Affiliation                      0.202       0.202        0.164     0.196      0.207      0.248
                                     (1.18)      (1.25)      (1.11)     (1.29)    (1.36)      (1.86)
                                    [0.339]     [0.283]      [0.372]   [0.222]    [0.197]    [0.093]

 Country FE                                        X            X                   X           X
 Controls                                                       X                               X
 Observations                         38           38          38        60          60         60
 R2                                 0.044        0.118        0.208    0.041       0.043      0.137




                                                  48
                                    Table 7: Tone in Abstract

This table regresses measures of the tone of the paper's abstract on the share of central bank
affiliated authors. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the sentiment score, computed as the
difference in the percentage of positive and negative adjectives in the abstract. In Panel B (C),
the dependent variable is the percentage of positive (negative) adjectives in the abstract. Controls
include the number of authors and the logarithm of three plus the average author experience. t-
statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on robust standard errors. p-values obtained using
the wild cluster bootstrap procedure (10,000 repetitions) are reported in square brackets. The unit
of observation is the paper.

 Panel A: Sentiment Score
                                               (1)               (2)                   (3)

 CB Affiliation                                0.046            0.053                 0.056
                                               (2.05)           (2.59)                (2.60)
                                              [0.049]          [0.014]               [0.013]

 Country Dummies                                                 X                      X
 Controls                                                                               X
 Observations                                   54               54                     54
 R2                                           0.081            0.129                  0.133


 Panel B: Percentage of Positive Adjectives
                                               (1)               (2)                   (3)

 CB Affiliation                                0.033            0.040                 0.043
                                               (1.61)           (2.15)                (2.22)
                                              [0.125]          [0.043]               [0.030]

 Country Dummies                                                 X                      X
 Controls                                                                               X
 Observations                                   54               54                     54
 R2                                           0.052            0.128                  0.136


 Panel C: Percentage of Negative Adjectives
                                               (1)               (2)                   (3)

 CB Affiliation                               -0.013           -0.013                -0.013
                                              (-1.35)          (-1.22)               (-1.16)
                                              [0.197]          [0.252]               [0.272]

 Country Dummies                                                 X                      X
 Controls                                                                               X
 Observations                                   54               54                     54
 R2                                           0.040            0.048                  0.052



                                                        49
                Table 8: Career Outcomes and the Effect of QE on Output

This table regresses career outcomes on the author's estimated effect of QE on output. The de-
pendent variable is the difference between the author's rank after her first career update following
the paper's first circulation, and her rank at the time of first circulation. In Panel A, we use the
total estimated effect of the QE program studied on the level of output. In Panel B, the QE shock
size is standardized to 1% of GDP. Controls include the number of authors, the logarithm of three
plus the researcher's experience, the number of years since the author's last career update, as well
as dummy variables indicating the author's rank at the time of the paper's first circulation. We
restrict the sample to authors who remain affiliated with a central bank and experience at least
one career update after the paper's first circulation. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based
on standard errors clustered at the author level. p-values obtained using the wild cluster boot-
strap procedure (10,000 repetitions) are reported in square brackets. The unit of observation is the
author-paper-country.

 Panel A: Total Program Effect

                                              Peak Effect                      Cumulative Effect

                                      (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)

 Effect on output                    0.264       0.219       0.485      0.204        0.204      0.460
                                     (2.32)      (1.85)     (2.65)      (1.78)      (1.25)      (2.12)
                                    [0.027]     [0.037]     [0.018]    [0.079]      [0.234]    [0.019]

 Country FE                                       X           X                       X              X
 Controls                                                     X                                      X
 Observations                          34         34         31          32            32            30
 R2                                  0.030      0.066       0.553      0.027         0.076         0.550


 Panel B: Standardized Effect

                                              Peak Effect                      Cumulative Effect

                                      (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)

 Effect on output                    1.407       1.009       2.661      2.311        1.838      4.095
                                     (1.41)      (1.15)     (1.86)      (2.00)      (1.45)      (2.15)
                                    [0.231]     [0.356]     [0.082]    [0.041]      [0.134]    [0.022]

 Country FE                                       X           X                       X              X
 Controls                                                     X                                      X
 Observations                          34         34         31          32            32            30
 R2                                  0.044      0.062       0.553      0.051         0.081         0.569




                                                  50
        Table 9: Career Outcomes, the Effects of QE, and Author Seniority

This table repeats the analysis in Table 8, after adding an interaction between the estimated effects
on output and inflation and author seniority, which is standardized to have a mean of zero and
a standard deviation of one. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors
clustered at the author level. p-values obtained using the wild cluster bootstrap procedure (10,000
repetitions) are reported in square brackets. The unit of observation is the author-paper-country.


 Panel A: Effect on Output

                                        Total Program Effect              Standardized Effect

                                       Peak           Cumulative         Peak          Cumulative
                                        (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)

 Effect on output                      0.802             0.808           3.686            7.380
                                      (2.78)             (3.22)          (6.42)           (4.48)
                                      [0.050]           [0.005]         [0.003]          [0.002]
 Effect on output × Seniority          0.364             0.375           2.079            4.108
                                      (2.02)             (2.75)          (4.43)           (3.15)
                                      [0.062]           [0.005]         [0.044]          [0.005]
 Seniority                            -1.831            -1.559          -2.365           -1.999
                                      (-2.78)           (-2.68)         (-5.12)          (-4.79)
                                      [0.062]           [0.058]         [0.052]          [0.010]

 Country FE + Controls                   X                X                X                X
 Observations                            31              30               31               30
 R2                                    0.594            0.612            0.648            0.676

 Panel B: Effect on Inflation

                                        Total Program Effect              Standardized Effect

                                       Peak           Cumulative         Peak          Cumulative
                                        (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)

 Effect on inflation                  -0.414            -0.235           1.887            1.912
                                      (-1.01)           (-0.72)          (4.84)           (5.29)
                                      [0.454]           [0.579]         [0.109]          [0.068]
 Effect on inflation × Seniority      -0.360            -0.158           1.720            1.720
                                      (-0.84)           (-0.46)          (6.89)           (7.53)
                                      [0.564]           [0.745]         [0.095]          [0.057]
 Seniority                            -0.298            -0.909          -3.000           -2.997
                                      (-0.20)           (-0.69)         (-6.40)          (-6.72)
                                      [0.881]           [0.597]         [0.055]          [0.045]

 Country FE + Controls                   X                X                X                X
 Observations                            29              29               29               29
 R2                                    0.515            0.486            0.633            0.639


                                                 51
                     Table 10: Author Seniority and the Effects of QE

This table repeats the analysis in Tables 4 to 6, after adding an interaction between central bank
affiliation and the rank of the most senior author on the team, which is standardized to have a mean
of zero and a standard deviation of one. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard
errors clustered at the paper level. p-values obtained using the wild cluster bootstrap procedure
(10,000 repetitions) are reported in square brackets. The unit of observation is the paper.


 Panel A: Effect on Output

                                        Total Program Effect              Standardized Effect

                                       Peak           Cumulative         Peak          Cumulative
                                        (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)

 CB Affiliation                        0.673             0.599           0.105            0.117
                                      (1.62)             (1.65)          (1.34)           (1.74)
                                      [0.144]           [0.094]         [0.222]          [0.076]
 CB Affiliation × Max Seniority        1.054             1.036           0.152            0.145
                                      (2.01)             (1.67)          (1.32)           (1.23)
                                      [0.087]           [0.185]         [0.224]          [0.281]
 Max Seniority                        -0.615            -0.707          -0.053           -0.087
                                      (-1.64)           (-1.69)         (-0.69)          (-1.14)
                                      [0.165]           [0.259]         [0.516]          [0.315]

 Country FE + Controls                   X                X                X                X
 Observations                            56              55               56               55
 R2                                    0.171            0.145            0.258            0.133

 Panel B: Effect on Inflation

                                        Total Program Effect              Standardized Effect

                                       Peak           Cumulative         Peak          Cumulative
                                        (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)

 CB Affiliation                        1.747             2.061           0.215            0.231
                                      (2.97)             (2.21)          (2.56)           (2.30)
                                      [0.005]           [0.038]         [0.012]          [0.014]
 CB Affiliation × Max Seniority        1.140             0.499           0.197            0.131
                                      (2.36)             (0.85)          (1.89)           (1.16)
                                      [0.027]           [0.324]         [0.090]          [0.267]
 Max Seniority                        -1.033            -0.903          -0.107           -0.103
                                      (-2.48)           (-1.96)         (-1.59)          (-1.46)
                                      [0.030]           [0.049]         [0.140]          [0.122]

 Country FE + Controls                   X                X                X                X
 Observations                            51              51               51               51
 R2                                    0.337            0.243            0.368            0.246


                                                 52
Panel C: Significance

                                       Effect on Output             Effect on Inflation

                                 Statistical        Economic   Statistical       Economic
                                    (1)                (2)        (3)               (4)

CB Affiliation                     0.472              0.483      0.234              0.235
                                  (2.02)              (3.46)     (1.17)             (1.46)
                                  [0.098]            [0.012]    [0.313]            [0.206]
CB Affiliation × Max Seniority     0.335              0.337      0.336              0.173
                                  (2.27)              (2.68)     (2.10)             (1.07)
                                  [0.074]            [0.021]    [0.116]            [0.376]
Max Seniority                     -0.266             -0.246     -0.212             -0.089
                                  (-2.17)            (-2.25)    (-1.58)            (-0.65)
                                  [0.128]            [0.076]    [0.249]            [0.585]

Country FE + Controls                X                 X           X                  X
Observations                         36               61          33                 55
R2                                 0.458             0.337       0.280              0.189




                                               53
                Table 11: Type of Central Bank and the Effects of QE

This table repeats the analysis in Tables 4 to 6, after replacing the share of central bank authors by
three indicators: German CB is an indicator equal to one if at least one of the authors is employed
at the Bundesbank; Other EA CB is equal to one if at least one of the authors is employed at the
ECB or at a euro area national central bank that is not the Bundesbank; Non-EA CB is equal to
one if at least one of the authors is from a central bank outside of the euro area or from the BIS.
The omitted group is academics. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on standard errors
clustered at the paper level. p-values obtained using the wild cluster bootstrap procedure (10,000
repetitions) are reported in square brackets. The unit of observation is the paper-country.


 Panel A: Effect on Output

                                        Total Program Effect               Standardized Effect

                                       Peak           Cumulative          Peak         Cumulative
                                        (1)              (2)               (3)            (4)

 German CB                            -0.884            -1.171           -0.082           -0.116
                                      (-2.17)           (-2.61)          (-1.05)          (-1.52)
                                      [0.166]           [0.139]          [0.368]          [0.222]
 Other EA CB                           0.444             0.648            0.142            0.143
                                      (0.95)             (1.59)           (1.98)           (1.97)
                                      [0.349]           [0.096]          [0.021]          [0.084]
 Non-EA CB                             0.688             0.313            0.143            0.097
                                      (1.90)             (1.11)           (2.38)           (1.90)
                                      [0.140]           [0.259]          [0.048]          [0.052]

 Country FE + Controls                   X                X                X                X
 Observations                            58              57               58               57
 R2                                    0.127            0.140            0.222            0.129




                                                 54
Panel B: Effect on Inflation

                                  Total Program Effect             Standardized Effect

                                 Peak             Cumulative     Peak           Cumulative
                                  (1)                (2)          (3)              (4)

German CB                        0.461               0.640       0.094              0.101
                                (0.96)               (1.34)      (1.82)             (1.88)
                                [0.508]             [0.235]     [0.117]            [0.117]
Other EA CB                      0.279               0.722       0.088              0.133
                                (0.62)               (1.44)      (1.60)             (2.28)
                                [0.603]             [0.144]     [0.108]            [0.037]
Non-EA CB                        0.908               0.926       0.141              0.104
                                (1.64)               (1.18)      (2.10)             (1.51)
                                [0.224]             [0.311]     [0.088]            [0.178]

Country FE + Controls              X                  X            X                  X
Observations                       53                53           53                 53
R2                               0.244              0.161        0.250              0.195


Panel C: Significance

                                     Effect on Output               Effect on Inflation

                               Statistical        Economic     Statistical       Economic
                                  (1)                (2)          (3)               (4)

German CB                        0.187               0.240      -0.339             -0.074
                                (1.04)               (1.53)     (-1.07)            (-0.32)
                                [0.369]             [0.214]     [0.464]            [0.810]
Other EA CB                      0.228               0.419       0.085              0.254
                                (1.39)               (2.80)      (0.81)             (2.16)
                                [0.151]             [0.002]     [0.391]            [0.038]
Non-EA CB                        0.440               0.206       0.167              0.188
                                (2.81)               (1.46)      (0.97)             (1.26)
                                [0.039]             [0.247]     [0.736]            [0.312]

Country FE + Controls              X                  X            X                  X
Observations                       41                66           38                 60
R2                               0.457              0.256        0.298              0.167




                                             55
                               Table 12: Methodological Choices

This table regresses methodological choices on the share of central bank affiliated authors. In Panel
A, columns (1) to (3), the dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the paper does not
specify the width of the confidence interval. In columns (4) to (6), the dependent variable is an
indicator equal to one if the paper uses a 68% confidence interval or does not specify the width
of the confidence interval, and zero if it uses a 90% or 95% confidence interval. We restrict the
sample to papers that assess the statistical significance of the effect on either output or inflation.
In Panel B, we regress model choice on the share of central bank affiliated authors. The dependent
variable is an indicator equal to one if the paper uses a DSGE model, and zero if it uses a VAR
model. Controls include the number of authors and the logarithm of three plus the average author
experience. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are based on robust standard errors. p-values
obtained using the wild cluster bootstrap procedure (10,000 repetitions) are reported in square
brackets. The unit of observation is the paper.


 Panel A: Specification of the Confidence Interval

                                                  Missing CI                           Narrow or Missing CI

                                       (1)               (2)      (3)               (4)        (5)               (6)

 CB Affiliation                       0.397             0.377     0.449             0.295      0.228             0.276
                                      (2.07)            (1.92)   (2.32)             (1.99)    (1.89)             (2.29)
                                     [0.056]           [0.066]   [0.035]           [0.087]    [0.074]           [0.040]

 Country Dummies                                         X         X                            X                 X
 Controls                                                          X                                              X
 Observations                           31                31      31                 31         31                31
 R2                                   0.121             0.213    0.264             0.167      0.320             0.488


 Panel B: Choice of the Model (DSGE vs. VAR)
                                                (1)                         (2)                          (3)

 CB Affiliation                                0.363                      0.296                        0.319
                                               (2.27)                     (1.71)                       (1.80)
                                              [0.032]                    [0.103]                      [0.090]

 Country Dummies                                                            X                             X
 Controls                                                                                                 X
 Observations                                    50                          50                           50
 R2                                            0.087                       0.155                        0.170




                                                         56
Appendix
                         Table A.1: Dictionary for Tone Analysis

The table presents our dictionary of positive and negative adjectives used to classify the tone of
the paper's abstract and conclusion. The positive adjectives are ordered by the number of times
they occur in the abstracts and conclusions of the papers in the sample. The negative adjectives
are paired up with their positive counterparts whenever possible.


 Positive                                           Negative

 significant                                        insignificant
 large                                              small
 effective                                          ineffective
 important                                          unimportant
 considerable                                       limited
 major                                              minor
 strong                                             weak
 robust                                             modest
 useful                                             useless
 powerful                                           powerless
 substantial                                        marginal
 desirable                                          undesirable
 certain                                            uncertain
 successful                                         unsuccessful
 meaningful                                         meaningless
 sizable                                            little
 desired
 extraordinary
 big
 huge                                               tiny
 non-negligible                                     negligible
 high                                               low
 beneficial




                                               57
                                   Table A.2: Variable Descriptions

Variable                      Description
Dependent variables
Peak effect on output         The maximum impact of the QE program shock on the level of output (i.e., real
                              GDP or industrial production). The variable is expressed in percent.
Cumulative effect on out-     The impact of the QE program shock on the level of output (i.e., real GDP or
put                           industrial production) at the end of the time period studied. The variable is
                              expressed in percent.
Standardized peak effect      The maximum impact of the QE shock on the level of output (i.e., real GDP or
on output                     industrial production), using a QE shock size equivalent to 1% of the country's
                              GDP prior to QE. The variable is expressed in percent.
Standardized cumulative       The impact of the QE shock on the level of output (i.e., real GDP or industrial
effect on output              production) at the end of the time period studied, using a QE shock size equivalent
                              to 1% of the country's GDP prior to QE. The variable is expressed in percent.
Peak effect on inflation      The maximum impact of the QE program shock on the level of prices (i.e., CPI).
                              The variable is expressed in percent.
Cumulative effect on infla-   The impact of the QE program shock on the level of prices (i.e., CPI) at the end
tion                          of the time period studied. The variable is expressed in percent.
Standardized peak effect      The maximum impact of the QE shock on the level of prices (i.e., CPI), using a
on inflation                  QE shock size equivalent to 1% of the country's GDP prior to QE. The variable
                              is expressed in percent.
Standardized cumulative       The impact of the QE shock on the level of prices (i.e., CPI) at the end of the
effect on inflation           time period studied, using a QE shock size equivalent to 1% of the country's GDP
                              prior to QE. The variable is expressed in percent.
Statistical significance of   Indicator equal to one if the authors state that the peak effect of the QE shock
output                        on either the level of output or on output growth is positive and statistically
                              significant, and zero otherwise. If the authors do not make explicit statements
                              about statistical significance, we use the confidence intervals reported in the paper.
Economic significance of      Variable equal to one if the authors state that the estimated effect of the QE shock
output                        on either the level of output or on output growth is economically significant; zero
                              if the effect is stated to be economically insignificant or small; and 0.5 if the effect
                              is stated to be somewhat economically significant.
Statistical significance of   Indicator equal to one if the authors state that the peak effect of the QE shock
inflation                     on either the level of prices or on the inflation rate is positive and statistically
                              significant, and zero otherwise. If the authors do not make explicit statements
                              about statistical significance, we use the confidence intervals reported in the paper.
Economic significance of      Variable equal to one if the authors state that the estimated effect of the QE shock
inflation                     on either the level of prices or on the inflation rate is economically significant; zero
                              if the effect is stated to be economically insignificant or small; and 0.5 if the effect
                              is stated to be somewhat economically significant.
Share of positive adjec-      Share of positive adjectives out of all adjectives in the article's abstract, using the
tives in abstract             dictionary of positive adjectives from Table A.1.
                                                                                            Continued on next page


                                                      58
                                           Table A.2 ­ continued


Variable                     Description
Share of negative adjec-     Share of negative adjectives out of all adjectives in the article's abstract, using the
tives in abstract            dictionary of negative adjectives from Table A.1.
Sentiment score in ab-       Share of positive adjectives out of all adjectives in the article's abstract minus the
stract                       share of negative adjectives out of all adjectives in the article's abstract. We use
                             the dictionary of positive and negative adjectives from Table A.1.
Missing CI                   Indicator equal to one if the paper does not report a confidence interval or the
                             statistical threshold used to assess statistical significance, and zero otherwise.
Narrow or Missing CI         Indicator equal to one if (i) the paper does not report a confidence interval or the
                             statistical threshold used to assess statistical significance or (ii) the paper uses a
                             68% confidence interval, and zero otherwise.
Model                        Indicator equal to one if the paper uses a DSGE model, and zero if it uses a VAR
                             model.

Main independent variables
CB affiliation             The share of authors who are affiliated with a central bank at the time of the
                           paper's first public circulation, as determined by our search in the summer of
                           2019. Authors who are affiliated with the BIS are treated as 0.5 central bankers.
Max seniority              The numerical rank of the most senior author. We convert job titles into numerical
                           ranks using the dictionary from Table A.3.
German CB                  Indicator equal to one if at least one of the authors is employed at the Bundesbank,
                           and zero otherwise.
Other EA CB                Indicator equal to one if at least one of the authors is employed at the ECB or at
                           a euro area national central bank that is not the Bundesbank, and zero otherwise.
Non EA CB                  Indicator equal to one if at least one of the authors is employed at a central bank
                           outside of the euro area or at the BIS, and zero otherwise.

Control variables
Author experience            The number of years since the author's highest obtained educational degree, aver-
                             aged across all authors of the paper.
Number of authors            The number of authors of the paper.




                                                    59
                  Table A.3: Dictionary of Job Titles to Numerical Ranks

The table presents the dictionary used to convert job titles into numerical ranks.


 Rank      Job title
 Central   Bankers
 1         Researcher, economist, PhD economist, research associate/economist, expert
 2         Senior researcher, analyst, research economist or economist
 3         Principal/lead researcher or economist
 4         (Senior) Adviser
 5         Deputy Director/Head of Section/Team head/Manager
 6         (Senior) Director, Head, Chief economist, (Vice) President, Senior manager, Deputy Governor

 Academics
 1     Post-doc, lecturer, PhD Student
 2     Assistant professor
 3     Associate professor
 4     Full professor, chair, or anyone in a managerial position




                                                    60
