                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CHOICE IN INSURANCE MARKETS:
              A PIGOUVIAN APPROACH TO SOCIAL INSURANCE DESIGN

                                       Nathaniel Hendren
                                        Camille Landais
                                      Johannes Spinnewijn

                                      Working Paper 27842
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27842


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




This review piece was prepared as a draft for the Annual Review of Economics 2021 edition and
feedback is very welcome. We thank Sebastian Ernst for excellent research assistance and
gratefully acknowledge support from the ERC (grants # 679704 and # 716485). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nathaniel Hendren, Camille Landais, and Johannes Spinnewijn. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Choice in Insurance Markets: A Pigouvian Approach to Social Insurance Design
Nathaniel Hendren, Camille Landais, and Johannes Spinnewijn
NBER Working Paper No. 27842
September 2020
JEL No. H0

                                          ABSTRACT

Should choice be offered in social insurance programs? The paper presents a conceptual
framework that identifies the key forces determining the value of offering choice, reviews some
existing evidence on these forces, and aims to guide further empirical research in different in-
surance domains. The value of offering choice is higher the larger the variation in individual
valuations, but gets reduced by both selection on risk and selection on moral hazard. The imple-
mentation of choice-based policies is further challenged by the presence of adverse selection and
choice frictions or the obligation to offer basic uncompensated care. These inefficiencies can be
seen as externalities, which do not rationalize the absence of providing choice per se, but point to
the need for regulatory policies and the potential value of corrective pricing à la Pigou.


Nathaniel Hendren                                Johannes Spinnewijn
Harvard University                               Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          London School of Economics,
Littauer Center Room 235                         Houghton Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                              London, WC2A 2AE
and NBER                                         J.Spinnewijn@lse.ac.uk
nhendren@gmail.com

Camille Landais
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
and CEPR
c.landais@lse.ac.uk
1    Introduction
A key distinguishing feature between social insurance programs across risk domains and countries
is the extent to which they allow for choice. Predominantly, a single benefit is mandated, without
offering any choice. But sometimes choice is given: individuals are offered a menu of contracts
that differ in terms of coverage and price. When choice is allowed, its provision is sometimes
decentralized to the market, while in other cases coverages and prices remain centrally determined
or strongly regulated.
    To illustrate this large variation in the extent of choice, Table 1 compares the design of social
insurance systems across risk domains for two countries, the US and Sweden. Both are the fo-
cus of recent empirical work reviewed in this article. First, the table demonstrates the important
differences in social insurance design across risks. In the US, unemployment insurance (UI) and
workers compensation are examples of social insurance systems where no choice is provided over
the level of coverage. In contrast, choice of coverage has become central in the design of the US
health insurance (HI) system. This trend is most evident in the Affordable Care Act, which set up
subsidized exchanges for private insurers to offer a range of regulated plans (e.g. "gold", "silver",
and "bronze") in combination with the - now repealed - mandate to take up coverage. Over the
past 30 years, various options for supplemental health insurance coverage have also been added
for the elderly within and around the publicly-provided Medicare program. Second, Table 1 shows
that there is significant variation across these two countries within each risk domain. Unemploy-
ment insurance is a case in point. Sweden is one of the very few countries, along with Denmark,
Finland and Iceland, where choice is available in the UI system. Workers can purchase a generous
public supplemental UI coverage on top of the UI mandate at subsidized prices. To the contrary, in
the US, like in all other developed countries, workers are mandated into a single contract, and no
supplemental coverage is available, neither in the public system, nor in the private market. While
the US offers little choice compared to Sweden in unemployment insurance, the opposite holds
when it comes to health insurance. In Sweden, the public HI system functions as a universal man-
date, providing a unique level of coverage; besides, the private market for supplemental HI is very
small. In the US to the contrary, there is a lot of choice in the HI public system. And there exists a
large private market complementing the public system.
    Why and when should we allow for choice in these social insurance contexts? And if choice is
valuable, how should we design the contract space, i.e. the prices and coverage levels of insurance
contracts? Responses to these questions have, until recently, been quite elusive. In social insurance
contexts where no choice is available, it is by construction hard to identify the value and costs
associated with providing insurance choice. This perhaps explains why the literature did not pay
much attention to questioning whether restricting choice was indeed optimal in these contexts. In
insurance settings where choice is available, the literature has studied extensively, although often in
isolation, the various inefficiencies created by the presence of choice, like the possibility of adverse
selection or the existence of choice frictions. But, while the presence of these inefficiencies does

                                                   1
not exclude the potential value of offering choice, the literature has mostly treated their existence
has a rationale for limiting choice (e.g. imposing mandates) without trying to characterize when
maintaining some degree of choice is actually valuable.
   The present review summarizes recent work that aims to overcome these challenges. Building
on this new body of research, we present a general framework as well as an empirical roadmap to
evaluate the provision of choice in insurance markets.
   We thus begin by laying out a theoretical framework that builds on prior work and outlines
when choice is valuable. Our framework incorporates both moral hazard and adverse selection,
two forces that have been mostly treated separately in the social insurance literature. This divide
is apparent in the handbook chapter on social insurance by Chetty and Finkelstein (2013), show-
ing that moral hazard has been the main focus of the literature on UI or DI, contexts where most
countries have single mandates. In contrast, adverse selection is mostly a topic of interest in the lit-
erature on health insurance, a context where coverage choice is much more widespread, especially
in the US.
    Using our framework, we offer a simple characterization of the welfare effects of offering choice
compared to a single mandated policy. Starting from an optimal level of uniform coverage, the
value of offering the choice to purchase supplemental coverage will depend on the value and cost
of those opting for the supplemental coverage relative to those who do not. Heterogeneity in the
valuations of insurance is, evidently, the main reason why allowing for choice is potentially valu-
able. But this is counteracted by the fact that in insurance contexts there is a potential dependence
between the take-up of coverage and risk. This can lead to adverse selection whereby riskier indi-
viduals take up insurance, but also to moral hazard in which take-up of insurance increases risk.
   We show that the value of choice can be expressed as a function of two key forces. The value is
larger the more individuals who take up extra coverage are willing-to-pay relative to their risk - i.e.
their markup. The key limiter for the value of choice is when the extra coverage induces a strong
moral hazard response for those selecting it and thus increases the net cost to the government.
Despite the large body of empirical work studying adverse selection, our framework shows that
adverse selection by itself is not sufficient to rationalize the absence of choice: adverse selection
could be counterbalanced by substantial heterogeneity in preferences for insurance conditional on
risk. Whether choice increases welfare, however, depends on a single core empirical object: the
selection on moral hazard relative to the selection on the markup.
    After having characterized the potential value of offering choice, we turn to potential inef-
ficiencies when implementing choice-based policies or decentralizing choice to private markets.
These inefficiencies have been well-documented in the literature but are largely studied in isola-
tion. Most prominent is the evidence for adverse selection and its potential effect on prices, for
example in health-related insurance contexts (e.g. Cutler and Reber 1998; Hendren 2013; Cabral
2016). Willingness to pay may also be depressed due to the presence of uncompensated care (e.g.
Garthwaite et al. 2018) or distorted due to behavioral biases that prevent individuals from making
utility-maximizing choices. The resulting choice frictions are documented in a large and growing
literature, also with a focus on health insurance choices (see Ericson and Sydnor 2017, Chandra et
al. 2019). In the context of our framework, each of these inefficiencies can be thought of as impos-


                                                   2
ing a standard externality in the sense of Pigou, which call for regulatory interventions. A single
mandate is an extreme version of quantity regulation, but when there is value to offering choice,
corrective pricing a la Pigou can be a preferable alternative to unlock some value from offering
choice. In case of adverse selection, a Pigouvian subsidy that allows individuals on the margin of
purchasing additional insurance to pay their own costs, as opposed to a price reflecting average
costs, improves welfare over a single mandate. In the presence of uncompensated care, subsidies
for additional coverage can overcome the low WTP displayed by those with those uncompensated
options for insurance. Subsidies could also improve efficiency when individuals under-value insur-
ance due to behavioral frictions. However, allowing for choice may not unlock its potential value
when individuals have inherent difficulties to make choices that maximize their true underlying
(heterogeneous) valuations of insurance.
   Our framework characterizes the value of choice and optimal price subsidies as a function of
moments that can be identified empirically. We illustrate this capability by applying our framework
to the context of UI. This is a setting in which almost all countries have single UI mandates without
choice. Whether this is desirable had, until recently, never been tested. We review an emerging
stream of research that offers estimates of the moments necessary to assess the value of choice in
UI. In particular, we distinguish between research that focuses on the few countries where some
UI choice is available, but also papers that have developed clever techniques to identify risk-based
selection and willingness-to-pay in the absence of choice data. The main takeaway from this body
of research is that UI is characterized by severe adverse selection. But in spite of this, evidence
from Scandinavian countries suggests that providing choice in UI can still be valuable. However,
unlocking the value of choice requires large subsidies for more generous UI that overcome adverse
selection. It also requires a simple choice environment to limit the scope for choice frictions.
   Our framework allows one to evaluate the provision of choice in other social insurance settings
too. Unfortunately, we lack evidence on several key sources of heterogeneity - risk, moral haz-
ard, preferences and/or choice frictions - potentially driving insurance choices in these different
domains. We provide a schematic review of the empirical literature, highlighting some existing
gaps for evaluating choice-based policies, and hope this can serve as a guide for future empirical
work that can address the value of choice in these other domains. A final gap we try to highlight
throughout this review is the importance of equity concerns when evaluating the optimal choice
structure of social insurance systems. When redistribution towards high-risk individuals is valu-
able for instance, larger subsidies for supplemental coverage, or even mandates of generous cover-
ages may become desirable. Similarly, the social value of providing choice may strongly decrease
when choice frictions strongly correlate with dimensions, such as income, along which society may
want to redistribute.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the framework and
characterizes the value of offering choice. Section 3 presents three sets of inefficiencies that can arise
when allowing for choice and characterizes, in the context of our unifying framework, the optimal
Pigouvian subsidies necessary to correct them. Section 4 implements empirically our approach
in the context of UI, reviewing the recent literature estimating the different moments necessary
to assess the value of choice. The final section provides some general takeaways for other social


                                                    3
     Table 1: Summary Structure of Social Insurance Systems by Risk in the US and Sweden

                         Unempl.             Disability            Workers'            Long-Term               Health
                        Insurance            Insurance              Comp.               Care Ins.            Insurance
                        US       Sw.          US      Sw.         US       Sw.         US       Sw.          US      Sw.
Public Mandate         Yesa     Yesb         Yes      Yes        Yesg      Yes         Noi      Yes         Nok       Yes

Provision of Choice:
Supplemental
Public Coverage No               Yesc         No      No          No       No          No       No           No       No

Supplemental
Private Market         Nod       Noe         Yesf     No          No      Noh          Yesj     No          Yesl     Nom
  Notes--
a All US states publicly mandate unemployment insurance (UI). Coverage varies across states, replacing roughly half of
  earnings on average.
b The public UI mandate in Sweden is a flat benefit that replaces only about 22% of the average salary as of 2019 (Statistics

  Sweden 2020 and own calculations).
c Sweden, along with Denmark, Finland and Iceland, are the only countries to provide public supplemental UI. The sup-

  plemental coverage replaces 80% of earnings up to a cap. The premium is heavily subsidized.
d In the US, some private supplemental UI is provided by unions and employers, especially in the manufacturing sector

  (see Oswald 1986). But in 1997, only 2% of the US work force was covered by private supplemental UI (Parsons 2002).
e As of 2017, roughly half the active labor force was estimated to be covered by a union-membership based, private com-

  plementary income insurance (Inkomstförsäkring) scheme, providing compensation above the benefit ceiling for the sup-
  plemental public coverage (Lindellee 2018). A few smaller private insurance companies such as Accept, Jobbgarant and
  Solid also offer such plans to those without labor union membership. Little data exists on the number of individuals
  purchasing these non-union based plans, but it is unlikely to be substantial (Rasmussen 2014; Lindellee 2018).
f As of 2019, 33% of US workers had a private long-term disability insurance plan (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2019).
g Note that Texas is the only US state that does not mandate workers' compensation (Cabral et al. 2019).
h A large part of the Swedish labor force has collectively organized supplemental workers' compensation. Employees are,

  however, not able to individually opt in or out of such agreements.
i While the US does not mandate long-term care insurance, long-term care is provided on a means-tested basis (through

  Medicaid).
j As of 2014, only 11% of the US population aged 65 and older and not living in nursing homes were covered by long-term

  care insurance (Johnson 2016).
k In 2018, 8.5% of the US population had no health insurance, despite the presence of a penalty for those without health

  insurance (with exemptions) (Berchick et al. 2019). As the penalty was removed in 2019, there is currently no public
  mandate to purchase health insurance.
l Medicare recipients can choose to purchase supplemental coverage (Medigap) and prescription drug coverage (Medicare

  Part D). Both are heavily regulated and provided by private companies (Keane and Stavrunova 2016; Polyakova 2016).
m Private supplemental health insurance exists but accounts for less than 1% of Swedish health care expenditures (Glen-

  ngård 2017).




                                                            4
insurance domains and concludes.


2     Value of Choice
This section presents a stylized framework and characterizes the value of choice and the optimal
setting of prices and coverages as a function of empirically estimable moments. The analysis builds
on Landais et al. (2020), which we refer the interested reader to for more detail and further results.
The model features both moral hazard à la Chetty 2006 and adverse selection à la Einav et al. 2010,
combined as in Einav et al. 2013.


2.1 Setup
We consider a population indexed by their type  who face a binary risk that occurs with probability
 . We will often refer to unemployment risk specifically, but this risk could also reflect a disability,
health, or another type of shock. Throughout, we allow the likelihood of this risk to differ across
people,  , and also to respond to incentives, such as insurance.
   We consider an insurance contract that provides $b in the event of unemployment, and we let P
denote the price of this contract. We let v (b) denote a type  's WTP for insurance. For expositional
simplicity, we assume quasi-linear utility so that v (b) - P denotes the net utility to a type  that is
able to obtain coverage b at price P.
   We denote the cost that a type  imposes on the insurer by c (b) =  (b) b. The cost is the
product of the likelihood of the risky event,  (b), multiplied by the insurance payout, b. If the
insurance is sold at price P, the net cost to the insurer is c (b) - P.
   To measure welfare we limit our analysis to traditional social surplus. This means that the social
value of insuring a type  is given by

                                             W (b) = v (b) -  (b) b,                                                   (1)

and all individuals' utilities are weighted equally. One can accommodate more general environ-
ments by defining W =  v (b) -  (b) b where  is a generalized social welfare weight for type
 and conducting the analogous derivations below.1


2.2 No choice: universal coverage
The first question we aim to answer in this environment is: what is the optimal level of universal
coverage, b? This establishes a benchmark to study the value of offering choice between different
   1 Alternatively, one can construct the marginal value of public funds (MVPF) of spending on a specific insurance program

(Hendren and Sprung-Keyser 2020), which is given by the ratio of WTP of the beneficiaries to the net government cost of
the spending,
                                                                E [v (b)]
                                                     MVPF =
                                                                  (b) b
Because the conclusions are highly related to those generated by the concepts of policies that maximize net surplus in
equation (1), we focus on that measure of well-being. But, we note the results readily extend to measuring the MVPF
instead.



                                                            5
coverage levels. The optimal level of universal coverage maximizes social welfare in the popula-
tion,
                                                 b = argmaxb E [W (b)] .                                                    (2)

     We define two key micro-foundations of the marginal value of coverage. Let  (b) denote the
markup a type  is willing to pay for extra coverage:

                                                              v (b) -  (b)
                                                  ( b ) =                  .                                                (3)
                                                                   (b)

Let   (b) denote the percentage increase in the likelihood of the event occurring in response to a
percentage increase in benefits, b:
                                                                    (b)
                                                                   
                                                         (b) =          b.                                                  (4)
                                                                    (b)
The WTP mark-up  (b) captures how much a worker is willing-to-pay for a marginal dollar of
coverage relative to the probability it will get it. For example, with expected utility  u (cu ) +
(1 -  ) u (ce ) in the context of unemployment risk where u is the von Neumann-Morgenstern
(vNM) utility function and ce (cu ) is the consumption level when employed (unemployed), this
markup relates directly to the ratio of marginal utilities between unemployment and employment
u (cu ) 2
u (c )
       . The elasticity   (b) captures the behavioral effect of extra coverage on the cost of providing
     e
the insurance - due to the behavioral response of the individual - relative to its mechanical effect.
This is also known as the "fiscal externality" in the public finance literature as it reflects the exter-
nality that the individual imposes on the insurer or government cost by changing the likelihood of
the event in response to more generous coverage.
   An increase in coverage for a given individual generates extra surplus as long as the markup
the individual is willing to pay exceeds the fiscal externality to the insurer. At the population level,
the welfare impact of an increase in coverage equals:


                               d                       
                                  E [W (b)]       = E W (b)                                                                 (5)
                               db
                                                  = E v              
                                                        (b) -  (b) -  (b) b                                                 (6)
                                                  = E [ (b)  (b)] - E [ (b)   (b)] .                                        (7)
                                                    v 1-          u (cu )
    2 To   be precise, with vNM utility we obtain     1- v    =   u
                                                                          .   To see this, note that we can define v in the vNM
                                                                    (ce )
framework as the WTP to get  units of extra coverage:
                            u ( c u ) + (1 -   ) u  ( c e ) =   u  c u +  -  v                         
                                                                                + (1 -   ) u  c e -  v  .

Taking the derivative with respect to  and evaluating at  = 0 yields
                                                                                   u (cu )   v 1 - 
                              u (cu ) 1 - v
                                           
                                                   =    (1 -   ) u         
                                                                    (ce ) v                =        .
                                                                                   u (ce )   1 - v 




                                                                  6
We can re-scale the welfare impact of the extra coverage using the average likelihood of the event:

               d                              (b)                 (b)
                  E [W (b)] / E [ (b)] = E           ( b ) - E          (b)
               db                          E [ (b)]            E [ (b)] 
                                                 Avg. Markup           Fiscal Externality


Here, the first-term is simply the average markup individuals are willing to pay for insurance,
weighted by their likelihood of experiencing the event, and the second term is the average fiscal
externality, again weighted by the same likelihoods.
   At the optimum, we have a standard Baily-Chetty (Baily 1978; Chetty 2006) formula:


Proposition 1. Assuming social welfare E [W (b)] is concave in b, the optimal universal coverage level b
is given by
                               (b )                       (b )
                        E                ( b  ) = E                  (b ) .
                                    
                            E [ (b )]                  E [ (b )] 


    The optimal universal coverage level equates the average markup that individuals are willing
to pay for insurance to the average percentage increase in cost arising from the behavioral response
to the insurance provision. At the optimal level, additional coverage may well generate positive
insurance value to individuals, but the optimal coverage needs to internalize the externality of
insurance on its cost.


2.3 Value of Offering Choice
Can welfare be improved by offering different values of b instead of a single mandated level of
benefits? In particular, we imagine offering a choice between b0 and b0 +  at prices P0 and P . This
                                                            - P0
means the price per unit of additional coverage is p = P         . For small  and in the absence of
choice frictions, we expect individuals to buy extra coverage  if their marginal WTP for additional
coverage exceeds its price, v  ( b0 )  p.
    To assess the welfare impact of choice, let W (b0 , , p) denote the welfare of type  when given
the option to purchase policy b0 or to obtain b0 +  at unit price p. Starting from the situation where
there is no effective choice  = 0 and providing an infinitesimal amount of choice has an impact
on welfare of:

                   d
                     W (b0 , , p) |=0 = 1 v ( b0 )  p  ( b0 ) [  ( b0 ) -   ( b0 )] ,                (8)
                  d 

which is equal to the event of purchasing the top-up insurance, 1 v ( b0 )  p multiplied by the
difference between the WTP and cost if they purchase. This latter component can be written as
 (b0 ) [ (b0 ) -   (b0 )]. To simplify notation, let E [] = E |v    ( b0 )  p denote the condi-
tional expectation over the set of people taking up top-up insurance when prices are p, E0 [] =
E |v                                                                                      
       ( b0 ) < p for the set of people sticking to baseline coverage and E p [  ] = E | v ( b0 ) = p




                                                   7
for the set of people who are at the margin.3 And, let F (b0 , p) = Pr v ( b0 )  p denote the frac-
tion of the population purchasing additional coverage at prices p when b0 is the baseline level of
coverage. Pooling across all types  , the impact on social welfare of offering choice at prices p is
given by
                   d
                     E [W (b0 , , p)] |=0 = F (b0 , p) E [ (b0 ) [ (b0 ) -   (b0 )]]             (9)
                  d
   Does providing choice increase welfare? To assess this, we start from the optimal universal
coverage point b0 = b , characterized in proposition 1. This means that dbd
                                                                            E [W (b )] = 0 when
averaging over the entire population, but it does not tell us whether db E [W (b )] is positive or
                                                                      d

negative when restricting to the set of people who purchase the additional  units of insurance.
When b0 = b , we can re-write equation (9) as

    d
   d E [W   (b , , p)] |=0
                           = E [ (b )  (b )] - E [ (b )  (b )]
           F (b , p)
                                               Selection on WTP Markup

                                                              - ( E [ (b )   (b )] - E [ (b )   (b )]) (10)
                                                                                  Selection on MH

which is the difference between two "selection effects" governed by the difference in marginal vs
average types (reflected in the different expectation operator, E vs. E). The first term is the extent
to which those who choose more insurance are willing to pay a higher markup relative to the av-
erage population (Selection on WTP Markup). The second term is the differential fiscal externality
they impose on the insurer (Selection on Moral Hazard). If social welfare E [W (b0 , , p)], is strictly
concave in (b0 , ), then one can assess whether additional choice increases welfare by setting b to
satisfy the Baily-Chetty formula in proposition 1.


Proposition 2. Suppose social welfare E [W (b0 , , p)] is strictly concave in b0 and . Then, offering
choice increases welfare if and only if there exists a price p such that

                                   E [ (b )  (b )]  E [ (b )   (b )] ,                                                (11)

evaluated at the optimal universal coverage level b .


   Social welfare is then increased through choice if and only if there exists a price for which those
induced to purchase insurance are willing to pay a markup that covers their marginal cost on the
insurer.


Intuition. The value of choice is higher when there is more heterogeneity in the markups and
these are positively correlated with the WTP, so that those selecting the supplemental coverage
   3 We use the short-hand notation E [  ], E [  ] and E [  ] for simplicity to refer to the expected outcomes of the three
                                                 0          p
groups of individuals who respectively buy the extra coverage, stick to b0 and are marginal between the two coverages, at
price p. It is therefore important to note that these constructs all explicitly depend on p.



                                                            8
 are willing to pay a higher markup than the average population (i.e. E [ (b )  (b )] -
E [ (b )  (b )] is larger). However, this needs to be compared to the heterogeneity in the moral
hazard costs and how it relates to the WTP. If those selecting the supplemental coverage  also im-
pose disproportionately large moral hazard costs on the insurer, this will lower the value of choice.
However, if there is little variation in moral hazard, the selection on moral hazard will be small.
   We can further decompose selection on markup into selection on WTP and selection on cost,

  E [ (b0 )  (b0 )] - E [ (b0 )  (b0 )] = E v             
                                              ( b0 ) - E v ( b0 ) - E [  ( b0 )] - E [  ( b0 )] .
           Selection on WTP Markup                 Selection on WTP              Selection on Risk


Combined with equation 10, this clearly illustrates that while heterogeneity in WTP increases the
value of offering choice, this gets mitigated when either selection on risk or on moral hazard is
strong.
    Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of the drivers of the value of choice. This corre-
sponds to the well-known representation in Einav et al. 2010, comparing demand to cost curves,
but now for the supplemental coverage that is offered and explicitly accounting for selection on
moral hazard as in Einav et al. 2013. For any price p, the grey curve shows the share of indi-
viduals with higher marginal WTP v    ( b0 ), who thus will buy the supplemental coverage. This
can be interpreted as a demand curve that ranks individuals from high to low WTP on the hor-
izontal axis. The graph then also plots the cost of providing the extra coverage for individuals
ranked by their WTP, E  (b0 ) (1 +   (b0 )) |v  ( b0 ) . This cost equals the mechanical cost of pro-
viding the supplemental coverage augmented with the behavioral cost due to the moral hazard
response. The total area under both curves would be the same when evaluated at the optimal level
of universal coverage b , following proposition 1. The difference between the demand and cost
curve determines the surplus of getting the extra coverage. The value of offering choice is cap-
tured by the area between the demand and cost curve for those with WTP higher than the price,
following proposition 2. For comparison, we also plot the mechanical cost of providing coverage
E  (b0 ) |v  ( b0 ) . The difference relative to the demand curve equals the "WTP markup" term,
E  (b0 )  (b0 ) |v    ( b0 ) . The difference relative to the cost curve indicates the moral hazard ("MH
response") term, E  (b0 )   (b0 ) |v ( b0 ) . The value of choice is higher for steeper demand curves
and lower for steeper cost curves, with the former often being a result of the latter. Allowing choice
therefore brings greater value if those with higher WTP for supplemental coverage do not have
significantly higher costs."


2.4 Efficient Choice: Setting Prices and Coverages
So far we have asked whether and when offering choice can increase welfare. But, in practice,
policy makers can also regulate the coverage levels and corresponding prices. We briefly discuss
the key trade-offs, but refer to Landais et al. (2020) for a comprehensive characterization of the
efficient coverage levels and prices.
   We first consider the determination of the price for given coverage levels. To be efficient, the
price should be equal to the cost of providing the additional coverage to the marginal buyers (as


                                                   9
                                        Figure 1: Demand and Cost Curves




one might expect). By definition, the marginal types  choosing to purchase at price p will be
indifferent to that purchase, so that v ( b0 ) = p. In the absence of choice frictions, the envelope
theorem implies that individuals do not value the cost resulting from the increase in  . This
means that the optimal price must internalize this externality, so that the price equals the cost of
providing additional coverage to the marginally indifferent types,

                                    p = E  (b0 ) [1 +   (b0 )] |v           
                                                                  ( b0 ) = p .                                (12)

Graphically, this corresponds to the intersection of the WTP and cost curve in figure 1.4 Alterna-
tively, we can state the efficiency condition as,

                                 E  (b0 ) [ (b0 ) -   (b0 )] |v ( b0 ) = p
                                                                           
                                                                            = 0,                              (13)

setting the average net surplus from additional coverage for the marginal buyer equal to zero,
which clearly illustrates the link with the characterization of the optimal uniform benefit level in
proposition 1.
    When offering choice is desirable, the policy maker needs to decide how much to differentiate
the coverage levels. The same key forces as when evaluating choice at the margin are at work. Con-
sider an increase in the comprehensive coverage level. The markup that individuals selecting it are
willing to pay E [ (b0 + )  (b0 + )] needs to be traded off against the moral hazard cost for
them E [ (b0 + )   (b0 + )]. Similarly, when considering increasing the basic coverage level,
the markup E0 [ (b0 )  (b0 )] and moral hazard E0 [ (b0 )   (b0 )] for individuals selecting ba-
sic coverage becomes relevant. Strong selection on markups makes differentiation more desirable.
Strong selection on moral hazard does the opposite. A natural limit on the value of differentiating
coverage levels comes from risk-aversion, which causes markups in the WTP for extra coverage to
  4 For   non-marginal additional levels of coverage, this becomes p = E p [ (b0 + ) (b0 + ) -  (b0 ) b0 ].


                                                            10
be decreasing in the coverage level itself.
    In addition to evaluating the value and cost of providing extra coverage for individuals already
on that plan, any changes in coverage can cause further re-sorting of individuals. When plans are
no longer marginally different, re-sorting imposes an additional cost externality on the insurer, de-
termined by the difference in prices paid and insurance cost for the respective coverages. Hence,
whether or not this externality is large will crucially depend on how prices are set. The interaction
between price and coverage is thus key. This has been noted before in the literature (see Azevedo
and Gottlieb 2017; Weyl and Veiga 2017; Landais et al. 2020; Geruso et al. 2019), in particular in
relation to the use of minimum mandates. A minimum mandate can provide valuable coverage
for low-risk individuals who are otherwise priced out of the market for comprehensive coverage.
However, a more generous mandate will make the market for comprehensive coverage more ad-
versely selected. This effect can be mitigated by reducing the price for comprehensive coverage.
In what follows, we study insurance choices and the equilibrium determination of prices, taking
coverage levels as given.


2.5 Ex-ante vs. Observed Measures of WTP
The previous sections characterize the optimal amount of insurance using individuals' hypothetical
WTP for insurance. This has the advantage of writing the optimality formulas using estimable
parameters. But an important caveat is that measures of WTP for insurance can be complicated
by the fact that individuals may learn over time about their risk. This tends to lower the average
WTP for insurance in the population (Hirshleifer 1971). Individuals who may have ex-ante value
for insurance may no longer be willing to pay a markup for insurance over their costs after they
learn their costs. More broadly, "willingness to pay" is generally not stable over time.
    The question of when to measure WTP corresponds to imposing a classification for what is "in-
surance" versus "redistribution". In general, the observed choices one might use to measure WTP
occur after some information has been revealed ­ in this sense, it will incorporate an insurance
value only against the risk that remains at the time of observing choices. In contrast, measuring
WTP from behind the veil of ignorance incorporates this additional WTP that individuals might
have from a redistributive value of insurance. The framework can be easily extended to accommo-
date this option value and also allowing for redistributive effects more generally (see Landais et al.
2020 and Hendren 2020). In general, ex-ante perspectives tend to deliver higher values of insurance
because it incorporates an option value that individuals get from being able to purchase insurance
at lower prices.
    While the framework can be extended to incorporate an ex-ante notion of WTP, an important
direction for future work is to explore when individuals should be allowed to purchase insurance
(e.g., Ghili et al. 2020). For example, should the open enrollment period for insurance covering
risk in the year 2022 be in September 2021? How about September 2020? Or earlier? Allowing for
choice at a point that is closer to when individuals use the insurance increases the scope for adverse
selection5 but also can allow for the realization of preference heterogeneity and help increase the
  5 See   Cabral (2016) for evidence of this in the dental insurance context.



                                                               11
value of choice. Exploring this tradeoff is an interesting and policy-relevant direction for future
work.


3    Limits to Choice
While Section 2 showed when offering choice can increase welfare, this section asks whether mar-
kets can provide these choice opportunities and/or individuals can leverage them. An often-cited
advantage of markets is the variety producers can offer to consumers with heterogeneous tastes.
This section, however, outlines sources of externalities documented in existing work that prevent
private markets from reaching efficient outcomes. In particular, we characterize inefficiencies that
arise from adverse selection, uncompensated care, and behavioral frictions. By presenting them as
externalities, we point to Pigouvian pricing as a key policy to complement the offering of choice
through markets.


3.1 Adverse Selection
We begin with the classic case of adverse selection. The simplest case to consider in our framework
is one without baseline insurance, b0 = 0 with private firms attempting to sell a small amount of
insurance, , at some price p. For any price, all those with v (0)  p will choose to purchase the in-
surance and they will impose an expected cost of  E  (0) |v      (0)  p . A competitive insurance
market for a given policy  would expect to generate zero profits, p =  E  (0) |v         (0)  p , or
satisfy the fixed point:
                                     p = E   (0) | v  (0)  p

However, Akerlof (1970) shows that it is possible that no such fixed point exists. As prices rise, the
set of people purchasing insurance (those with v (0)  p ) may have higher risk (i.e. higher values
of  (0)). In the extreme case, it could be that

                                   p < E   (0) | v  (0)  p      p                                 (14)

so that the market "unravels" and no private market can profitably provide insurance. Any time
the insurance company tries to set prices at p, the costs they have to pay (E  (0) |v (0)  p )
exceed p.
    To assess the magnitude of this type of selection in the context of unemployment, Hendren
(2017) makes the simplifying assumption that there is no preference heterogeneity conditional on
the likelihood of employment. In this case, the average probability of those who purchase when
prices are p are simply the average probability of those who are at least as likely to experience
unemployment as the marginal purchaser. Equation (14) can then be written as

                              v~ (0) > E   (0) |   (0)   
                                                         ~ (0)
                                                                     ~
                                                                     

where the expectation E  (0) | (0)  ~ (0) is the average probability (across values of  ) for



                                                  12
which the probability exceeds the probability of the marginal type, ~ (0). Subtracting  (0) and
dividing by  ~ (0) on both sides yields the expression:


                                                E   (0) -  ~ (0) |   (0)   ~ (0)                             ~
                                   ~ (0) >
                                                                                                                                            (15)
                                                               ~ (0)

The LHS is the markup that individuals are willing to pay for insurance. The RHS is the markup
that individuals have to pay in order to cover the pooled cost of worse risks. Unless some type in
the economy is willing to pay the cost imposed by higher risks purchasing insurance, the market
will completely unravel.6 For risks that have probabilities closer to 0 than 1 (like the onset of
unemployment), this ratio (plus 1) is analogous to the "pooled price ratio" in Hendren (2017). This
ratio can be measured if one observes the distribution of  across the population. It can be inferred
from revealed preference choices, or, as we detail in Section 4.2 below, it can potentially be inferred
from data on subjective probability elicitations.
    The analysis above assumes b0 = 0 and considers a market for a single insurance contract. One
can also consider the impact of adverse selection in settings where there are both b0 > 0 and  > 0.
In this case, one might want to have prices equal the average cost of enrolled (e.g. as in Azevedo
and Gottlieb 2017). This would mean they satisfy the equation:

                                               P0    = b0 E0 [ (b0 )]
                                              P      = (b0 + ) E [ (b0 + )]

where E0 [] = E [|v (b0 ) < p] is the conditional expectation with respect to the set of types  that
purchase b0 coverage. Hence, the marginal equilibrium price p satisfies the fixed point,7
   6 Hendren (2017) makes the additional assumption that individuals have a common vNM utility function so that the ratio
                                                                                                                             v 1-          u (cu )
of marginal utilities between insured and uninsured states of the world is common across individuals,                          1- v    =   u (ce )
                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                    
With this additional assumption, Hendren (2017) shows that one can then write the no trade condition in equation (15) as

                           u (cu )    v   1 -   (0)       1 -    ~ (0)   E [   (0) |   (0)        ~ (0)]
                                   =                < min                                                                                    (16)
                            
                           u (ce )     (0) 1 - v       ~      ~ ( 0 )  1 - E [   ( 0 ) |   ( 0 )     ~ (0)]

The RHS of this equation is the "minimum pooled price ratio" in Hendren (2013) and Hendren (2017). It differs from the RHS
                                                                  1-    ~ (0)
of equation (15) by 1 plus a multiplicative factor                                     .   Note that when the distribution of  is concentrated
                                                        1- E [   (0) |   (0)   ~ (0) ]
near 0 (as it is in the unemployment context where average yearly entry into unemployment probabilities are around 5%),
                1-    ~ (0)                                                       E [   (0) |   (0)   ~ (0) ]
then
      1- E [   (0) |   (0)   
                                      1 so that the RHS is approximately equal to                             , which is equivalent to 1 plus
                             ~ (0) ]                                                           ~ (0)
the RHS of equation (15).
   7 Note that the approximation relies on  × E [  ( b +  )] - E [  ( b )]  0.
                                                       {   0                       0 } =




                                                                        13
             p    =    P - P0                                                                          (17)
                  = (b0 + ) E [ (b0 + )] - b0 E0 [ (b0 )]                                              (18)
                  = b0 × [ E [ (b0 )] - E0 [ (b0 )]] +  × E [ (b0 + )]
                       +b0 × [ E [ (b0 + )] - E [ (b0 )]]                                              (19)
                  = b0 × [ E [ (b0 )] - E0 [ (b0 )]] +  × E [ (b0 ) × [1 +   (b0 )]] .                 (20)
                       Adverse Selection on Baseline Coverage    Cost of Extra Coverage for F


Hence, the equilibrium price reflects the difference in costs of providing the baseline coverage plus
the marginal cost of providing the additional  coverage for all who buy the extra coverage (ac-
counting for both the mechanical and behavioral cost). In contrast, the efficient price reflects only
the cost of providing the additional  coverage and this for those at the margin of buying the extra
coverage, p = E p [ (b0 ) × [1 +   (b0 )]].
   In our framework with two coverages, the pricing inefficiency will cause too few people to
get the more generous coverage. Even worse, the adverse selection can lead to no differentiated
coverage being provided, even when offering choice is valuable. To see why this is the case, it is
perhaps most useful to consider the empirical example in Cutler and Reber (1998). They study
the impact of Harvard HR moving to a health insurance pricing regime that requires their more
and less generous health insurance policies to break even. This quickly led to an unraveling of the
market for the more generous insurance because those with higher expected costs chose the more
generous plan, corresponding to the first term in equation (20).
   In some settings, prices are not required to break even. One example of this is the market
for Medigap, which provides top-up insurance beyond the Medicare's basic coverage of 80% of
costs for individuals over age 65. Cabral and Mahoney (2019) show that the provision of Medigap
coverage - which insures the remaining 20% of risk - leads individuals to use additional healthcare.
This in turn increases the cost to Medicare of insuring the base 80% of costs, corresponding to the
moral hazard response in the second term of equation (20). While the private Medigap insurers
must cover their costs in order to make a profit, they do not need to compensate Medicare for
this externality. In this sense, Medicare implicitly subsidizes Medigap coverage. An interesting
direction for future work is whether this implicit subsidy is too large or small relative to the optimal
subsidy.


3.2 Uncompensated Coverage
Individuals can often rely on some basic level of implicit insurance coverage. The most natural ex-
ample comes from uncompensated care, like emergency care, in the context of health insurance (e.g.
Garthwaite et al. 2018; Finkelstein et al. 2018; Finkelstein et al. 2019). But this issue generalizes to so-
cial insurance programs where individuals who did not contribute (or are not eligible) for standard
social insurance can fall back on some social assistance or basic protection from the government,
friends, hospitals, or other private charitable organizations. The issue of non-contributory coverage


                                                       14
has also been particularly relevant during the Covid crisis as many governments have scaled up
existing programs or offered ad hoc support against the unforeseen health and employment risks.
    In our framework the non-contributory protection can be interpreted as some baseline coverage
b0 that is always available for free ( P0 = 0). This naturally gives rise to pricing inefficiencies.
Consider again the case where competition requires each (standard) plan to break even, then

                         p     =    P - P
                               = (b0 + ) E [ (b0 + )]
                               = b0 E [ (b0 )] +  E [ (b0 ) × [1 +   (b0 )]] .

As the offered insurance crowds out previously uncompensated care, b0 E [ (b0 )], the insurer
will want to cover this cost. Neither do those purchasing insurance internalize the cost reduc-
tion, b0 E [ (b0 )], on those who otherwise would have provided some degree of informal insur-
ance. This again drives the market price p up relative to its efficient level, which would again be
p = E p [ (b0 ) × [1 +   (b0 )]]. A Pigouvian subsidy could induce more individuals to buy the
supplemental coverage and reduce the wedge between WTP and the marginal cost from providing
the supplemental coverage.


3.3 Behavioral Frictions
The previous two sources of inefficiencies were coming from the supply side preventing the ef-
ficient pricing of plans. The inefficiencies can come from the demand side as well. A growing
empirical literature documents the presence of behavioral frictions distorting individuals' insur-
ance choices (see Ericson and Sydnor 2017, Chandra et al. 2019). This can include inertia, optimistic
beliefs, information frictions, limited attention, cognitive ability, etc. We can introduce choice fric-
tions f  (b) in our framework as driving a wedge between the true value v                         ^
                                                                                ( b ) and the WTP v  ( b ),
following Spinnewijn (2017). The latter is the value individuals reveal through their choices. That
is, an individual buys the extra coverage if v  ( b ) + f  ( b )  p, while her consumer welfare contin-
ues to be maximized by buying the extra coverage if v      ( b )  p. For example, the presence of biased
beliefs - where the perceived risk  ^  (b) differs from the true risk  (b) - would induce a wedge
between the WTP and the expected value from insurance (e.g., Stephens 2004 and Spinnewijn 2015
in the context of unemployment).
    As choice frictions distort the selection into plans, they will crucially affect the value of provid-
ing choice. The condition for choice to be welfare improving remains that the selection on (true)
markups is stronger than the selection on moral hazard. In the presence of choice frictions, the
selection on markups can be decomposed as:


                                            ^
  E [ (b0 )  (b0 )] - E [ (b0 )  (b0 )] = E v             ^
                                               ( b0 ) - E v  ( b0 )
            Selection on Value Mark-up                  Selection on WTP

                                            - E [ (b0 )] - E [ (b0 )] - E [ f  (b0 )] - E [ f  (b0 )] . (21)
                                                    Selection on Risk          Selection on Frictions



                                                      15
As shown by Spinnewijn (2017), the selection into insurance based on frictions tends to reduce the
selection on value v ( b ). For example, when individuals' risk perceptions are noisy measures of
their true underlying risk, overly pessimistic individuals are over-represented among those buying
comprehensive coverage. This also implies that the demand curve will over-state the value the
supplemental coverage generates for those selecting it. However, when considering whether to
introduce corrective pricing a la Pigou, it is the average friction among the marginal buyers that is
relevant. Indeed, the efficient price now equals

                                      p = E p [ (b0 ) [1 +   (b0 )] + f  (b0 )] .                                           (22)

The role of choice frictions goes beyond this, as selection based on frictions tends to reduce the
selection on risk  (b) . In particular, when individuals under-react to their differences in risk, the
choice of supplemental coverage will be clearly less adversely selected. This then will also affect
the equilibrium price (e.g., Handel 2013; Polyakova 2016; Handel et al. 2019). Hence, inefficiencies
from the demand and supply side interact, affecting the efficient and equilibrium price respectively,
and can aggravate or mitigate each other in welfare terms. 8
   Finally, the incidence of choice frictions is likely to be unequally distributed. Exploiting health
insurance choices in the Netherlands, Handel et al. (2020) show how individuals with higher so-
cioeconomic status and income are more likely to realize the value of the offered choice. Equity
considerations are important when considering to offer choice, but especially so when choice fric-
tions are at play.


3.4 A Pigouvian Perspective
While Section 2 showed the potential value of choice, this section outlined three reasons why en-
abling choice may lead to inefficiencies. Broadly, these inefficiencies arise from externalities: indi-
viduals do not face the right prices. Adverse selection occurs when individuals do not internalize
not only the cost they impose on the provider of the plan they buy, but also the costs they reduce
for the provider of coverage they no longer get. Externalities also arise from the existence of un-
compensated care that can depress WTP. More problematic, individuals may impose externalities
on themselves (better referred to as "internalities") in the presence of choice frictions. Importantly,
these externalities may be orthogonal to the potential of offering choice. A single mandate can be
too blunt as a policy response. Instead one can try to overcome these externalities through appro-
priate Pigouvian taxes/subsidies so that prices reflect the optimal incentives outlined in Section 2.
As with any effort of policy to correct externalities, implementation may be complicated in prac-
tice. Nonetheless, the conceptual tools for combatting these inefficiencies are rooted in the ideas of
Pigou: internalize the externality.9
   8 Note  that the presence of frictions can also affect the moral hazard response (e.g., Baicker et al. 2015; Spinnewijn 2015).
This can affect the selection on moral hazard determining the value of choice, but also introduces extra corrective externali-
ties when individuals change behavior in response to coverage changes.
    9 Externalities are often individual-specific and lead not only to over- or underinsurance, but also to inefficient sorting

across plans. Rather than using a uniform subsidy or taxes, the highest welfare potential may be realized by price or
quantity corrections that are individual-specific. This may call for individual-risk rather than community rating in the



                                                               16
4     Empirical Application: Evaluating Choice in UI
We illustrate the implementation of our framework using two empirical pathways. First, in Section
4.1 we leverage the unique Scandinavian context where the UI system allows for choice. We show
there how we can identify all the relevant moments necessary to determine the value of giving
choice. And we also discuss how different policy parameters (prices and coverage levels) should
be set in order to regulate UI choices optimally. Second, in Section 4.2 we focus on contexts where
no choice is actually observed. We present the innovative approaches that have been recently de-
veloped in these settings to identify the sources of heterogeneity that are relevant to determine the
costs and benefits of offering insurance choice.


4.1 Using Choice Data: Evidence from Scandinavia
The ideal context to identify all the moments to evaluate the value of choice (see equation (10)) is
of course one in which it is possible to observe insurance choices. While UI in almost all countries
is organized along a single mandate, four countries - Iceland, Denmark, Finland and Sweden - do
offer choice. These UI systems have recently been studied in a series of papers (e.g. Parsons et al.
2015; Khomenko 2018; Landais et al. 2020; Landais and Spinnewijn forthcoming) and constitute a
fruitful setting to evaluate the value of providing choice in UI.
   The Scandinavian UI systems share a similar, two-tier feature. The first part of the UI system is
mandated and provides basic coverage funded by a payroll tax. The benefit level that the unem-
ployed receive with this basic coverage is non-contributory (i.e., do not depend on the unemployed
earnings prior to displacement) and generally low (e.g., a median replacement rate of about 20%
in Sweden). The second part of the UI system is voluntary. By paying an insurance premium to
UI funds (on top of the payroll tax), workers can opt for more comprehensive coverage. Upon
displacement, workers who have been paying the premium get, in lieu of the basic coverage, more
generous benefits, replacing their pre-unemployment earnings proportionally up to a cap (e.g., a
replacement rate of 80% in Sweden).
   Historically, this two-tier organization can be traced back to the "Ghent system", in which labor
and trade unions played an important role in providing UI.10 Today, the comprehensive UI cov-
erage is often administered by UI funds that originated from funds set up by unions. However,
central governments overtook the responsibility of supervising the entire UI system long ago, and
the links between UI funds and unions have loosened progressively (see Carroll 2005). This, in
practice, means that there is no competition between UI funds: the coverage, premia, and eligibil-
ity conditions for supplemental UI are all set by the central government, without variation across
fund.11
context of adverse selection and for choice aids (e.g., smart defaults) in the context of choice frictions. See for example
Handel et al. (2015) and Handel et al. (2020).
  10 Union administration offered a variety of advantages. Unions could require that union members join UI funds, limiting

adverse selection. Today, requiring union members to buy supplemental UI is generally no longer possible, but union
members can often benefit from an extra rebate on the premium for the comprehensive UI coverage. Moreover the union
had obvious advantages monitoring its own members, e.g. for slackness in job seeking, thus also limiting moral hazard.
  11 In 2008, Sweden implemented an extra risk adjustment fee, differentiated across UI funds, thus introducing average

cost pricing within funds. However, as membership in riskier funds started to unravel, the government reverted to equal



                                                            17
Separating Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard The presence of choice data allows to test
whether workers who choose more generous UI coverage are also more likely to be unemployed.
This follows the traditional "positive correlation test" (PCT) approach that has been widely applied
in the empirical insurance literature since the seminal work of Chiappori and Salanié (2000) (see
reviews in Chiappori and Salanié 2013 and Cohen and Siegelman 2010). In practice, there is evi-
dence of a strong positive correlation in the Scandinavian UI systems. Landais et al. (2020) find for
instance that workers buying the supplemental UI coverage in Sweden over the period 2002-2006
have an unemployment risk that is at least twice as large as workers who are on basic coverage.
Parsons et al. (2015) obtain similar results in the Danish context.
    But it is well known that the PCT cannot separate moral hazard and adverse selection, let alone
identify selection on moral hazard. So in itself, a PCT is not sufficient to evaluate the optimality
of the UI choice structure. Following our earlier notation, the PCT statistic can be decomposed
between the moral hazard effect of providing more generous coverage to individuals selecting
supplemental UI, and the differential risk of those selecting the supplemental UI evaluated under
basic coverage:


                                 
    E [ (b0 + )] - E0 [ (b0 )] =           E [ (b0 )   (b0 )]         + E [ (b0 )] - E0 [ (b0 )] .
                                 b0
                 PCT Statistic          MH for Comprehensive Buyers     Selection on Risk in Basic Coverage


These effects correspond to the terms in proposition 2 needed to evaluate the value of offering
choice at the margin (starting from the optimal uniform benefit level). An alternative way of de-
composing the PCT statistic is between the moral hazard effect for individuals sticking to basic
coverage, and their differential risk when on comprehensive coverage:


                                
   E [ (b0 + )] - E0 [ (b0 )] =    E0 [ (b0 )   (b0 )] + E [ (b0 + )] - E0 [ (b0 + )] .
                                b0
               PCT Statistic            MH for Basic Buyers   Selection on Risk in Comprehensive Coverage


Interestingly, the two decompositions combined correspond to the terms needed to evaluate the
value of more differentiation in offered choice, and in particular the difference in moral hazard
between workers who select the supplemental coverage and those who do not, as briefly discussed
in Section 2.3, but fully developed in Landais et al. (2020).
    Now to separate the respective moral hazard and selection effects, one can rely on exogenous
price variation that allows identifying individuals with different WTP and studying their unem-
ployment risk under the same coverage. Alternatively, one can rely on exogenous benefit variation
and study how the unemployment risk changes for a given group of workers. In practice, this
variation can be combined with some structural assumptions on how demand and risk depend on
coverage, prices and observables. Landais et al. (2020) exploit a sharp and unexpected increase in
the premium charged for the supplemental coverage in Sweden in 2007. The surge in premium,
which more than quadrupled, did generate a significant (although somewhat modest) demand re-
premia across funds in January 2014.


                                                 18
sponse, with around 10% of Swedish workers switching out of the comprehensive plan as a result,
and allows to rank workers in three groups based on their WTP. They combine this price variation
with a model predicting individuals' unemployment risk based on a rich set of observables under
the comprehensive and basic coverage respectively.12
    Figure 2 reports their estimated demand curve using the 2007 premium variation, but expressed
as the WTP per krona of supplemental coverage for each day spent unemployed in the next year.
In the absence of any demand frictions, this scaled WTP for the supplemental coverage can be seen
as an approximation of the marginal value of coverage v    ( b0 ). Following Figure 1, figure 2 then
compares the WTP to the marginal cost of providing the extra krona of coverage, showing both
its cost in the absence of any moral hazard response, E  (b0 ) |v   ( b0 ) , and its cost accounting
                                                        
for the moral hazard response, E  (b0 ) (1 +   (b0 )) |v (b0 ) . The risk term  (b0 ) corresponds
to the expected days spent unemployed under basic coverage in the next year. The moral haz-
ard elasticity   (b0 ) is approximated using the increase in expected days spent unemployed under
comprehensive coverage relative to basic coverage. All estimates are shown for three groups: those
who continued to buy the supplemental coverage after the price increase, those who stopped buy-
ing it after the price increase, and those who did not buy it even before the price increase. Several
insights emerge from the figure.
    First, as evidenced by the somewhat modest demand response, the WTP curve for supplemen-
tal UI is quite vertical, i.e. demand is quite rigid. In other words, individuals opting for basic
coverage are characterised by a very low WTP for the supplemental coverage, while individuals
under comprehensive coverage are willing-to-pay a very high price for the supplemental coverage.
Significant heterogeneity in valuation is a priori a strong argument in favor of offering coverage
choice. However, this also assumes the absence of choice frictions, while the modest demand re-
sponse could be driven by inertia.
    As shown in formula 10, the demand curve (and its steepness) must be evaluated against two
forces, the importance of risk-based selection, and the magnitude of selection on moral hazard. In-
tuitively, strong adverse selection counters the presence of strong heterogeneity in WTP. If people
with large WTP also have high risk  (b0 ), then, this will make the cost curve - not accounting for
moral hazard - very steep, thus significantly reducing the selection on the WTP markup. Graphi-
cally, the markup is represented by the distance between the WTP and cost under basic coverage).
Similary strong selection on moral hazard will also reduce the value of choice: if individuals who
value UI more are also much more responsive in their risk to an increase in UI coverage, this will
increase the cost of providing additional coverage to individuals with high WTP. Schematically,
this will make the cost curve even steeper once we account for moral hazard, potentially resulting
in a cost curve that exceeds WTP for individuals with high WTP.
  12 In theory, one could just identify the average cost curve under the basic (resp. comprehensive) plan, by regressing
average risk in the basic (resp. comprehensive) plan on the fraction of workers buying comprehensive coverage, using
the price variation as instrument. A problem in practice comes from the fact that most price variation in Scandinavian UI
systems is time-series. There is almost no variation across similar individuals over time, that would allow for a Difference-in-
Difference type of identification. Time-series estimation runs the risk of being confounded by aggregate unemployment risk,
i.e. business-cycle variation in labor market conditions. To alleviate this issue, Landais et al. (2020) combine price variation
-to identify WTP, with a model of predicted risk under both coverages: the correlation between WTP and predicted risk
under basic and comprehensive coverage is thus immune to the presence of aggregate risk.



                                                              19
    Interestingly, figure 2 shows that the choices into supplemental coverage are indeed adversely
selected, but the magnitude of adverse selection is relatively modest in the Swedish context. This
in turn implies that the WTP mark up is significantly larger for individuals who buy the compre-
hensive coverage than for individuals who do not.
    Finally, there is also substantial moral hazard, shifting up the cost of providing coverage uni-
formly. In fact, expressed as elasticities, there is some "advantageous "selection on moral hazard.
That is, the relative cost increase of providing extra coverage is larger among individuals with low
WTP than among workers with high WTP for more UI. This "advantageous" selection on moral
hazard is therefore also a force pushing for coverage differentiation.

                                           Figure 2: Estimated Demand and Cost Curves in Swedish Two-Tier UI policy
                                                       20
        Annual WTP/Cost per Extra SEK of Daily Coverage




                                                                                       Marginal Willingness-to-Pay
                             10           15




                                                                         Marginal Cost (with MH response)
                 5




                                                                       Marginal Cost (without MH response)


                                                                      Buying supplemental coverage                   Marginals Not buying supp.
                                  0




                                                            .3   .4         .5        .6        .7        .8                      .9              1
                                                                           Share Buying Supplemental Coverage

Notes: The figure corresponds to the empirical implementation of figure 1 in the context of the Swedish unemployment
insurance (UI) system, using estimates from Landais et al. (2020). The grey-line plots the WTP per additional krona of UI,
identified using a large variation in the premium charged for supplemental UI in 2007. The dark curves correspond to the
marginal cost per krona of additional coverage without moral hazard response (dashed curve), and when accounting for
moral hazard responses (plain curve). The steepness of the willingness-to-pay curve is evidence of significant heterogeneity
in the value of additional UI. The decreasing marginal cost curves indicate the presence of significant adverse selection,
but this adverse selection is small relative to moral hazard. Furthermore, there is slight advantageous selection on moral
hazard. These estimates imply that there is value of providing choice in UI in the Swedish context. See text for details.



Evaluating Choice in the Scandinavian Context What can we conclude from these estimates
regarding the value of offering choice, and the optimal structure of the Scandinavian two-tier UI
system?
    The first immediate implication is that mandating all workers to buy the generous comprehen-


                                                                                             20
sive coverage would not be optimal: a significant fraction of workers (about 15%) have a WTP for
supplemental coverage that is below the cost of providing this extra coverage to them. As shown in
figure 2, this discrepancy is partly driven by the large moral hazard cost of providing extra cover-
age for these workers. At the same time, the largest share of workers (about 85%) seem to value the
supplemental coverage above the cost of providing the extra coverage. Hence, offering the option
to buy comprehensive coverage seems to generate substantial value for them.
    Of course, we are evaluating an option between coverage levels that are significantly different.
Proposition 2 makes clear though, that to identify the value of giving choice, we should consider
a marginal option evaluated at the optimal uniform benefit level b . In other words, even if a
mandate of the comprehensive coverage would not be optimal, can we rule out that some single
mandate, with coverage level between the basic and the comprehensive plan, does better than a
design with choice?
    To shed light on this, one should evaluate the desirability of further coverage differentiation
at current levels of the basic coverage, b0 , and of the supplemental coverage, b0 + . If further
differentiation is desirable, then, under standard concavity assumptions, a universal mandate, at
some intermediate level between b0 and b0 + , cannot do better than giving choice. As discussed
in Section 2.4, the cost of further differentiation depends on the relative fiscal externalities created
when decreasing b0 and when increasing . These fiscal externalities are direct functions of the
relative moral hazard effects for workers with high vs low WTP, but also the selection responses
the changes in coverages would entail. On the other hand, the welfare benefit is captured by the
relative value of marginal coverage for individuals under basic vs comprehensive coverage. Im-
portantly, this relative value of marginal coverage depends on the amount of heterogeneity in WTP,
but must now also account for diminishing marginal utility, as this value is evaluated at b0 for in-
dividuals under basic coverage, and at b0 +  for individuals under supplemental coverage. The
empirical implementation of the formula in Landais et al. (2020) suggests that the level of coverage
differentiation is probably close to optimal at current prices. This result is driven by the significant
heterogeneity in WTP for insurance and the presence of some advantageous selection on moral
hazard in the Swedish context. An important implication is that the presence of significant adverse
selection is not enough to justify mandating UI in the Scandinavian context: giving the option
between strongly differentiated coverages seems to be optimal.
    Of course, it is important to remember that these welfare statements on coverage differentiation
are conditional on price levels. In Scandinavia, it turns out that the price of the supplemental
coverage tends to be heavily subsidized, so that the premia that workers have to pay represent
a relatively small fraction of the average cost of the comprehensive coverage. Is this subsidy too
large? As shown in formula 13, the efficient price can easily be determined as the intersection
between the markup and fiscal externality curves. In figure 2, the efficient price would therefore
be somewhere in between the pre- and post-2007 prices. This suggests that, in order to mitigate
the adverse selection externality created by significant coverage differentiation, it is necessary to
subsidize premia quite heavily.
   The Scandinavian experience therefore suggests that offering choice in UI can dominate a uni-
versal mandate. It is of course important that this conclusion ignores equity considerations and


                                                  21
relies on the absence of important choice frictions. It is important to highlight some specificities of
Scandinavian labor markets. First, a rich set of institutions regulate layoffs and the search effort
of unemployed workers is closely monitored by public employment services, thus reducing the
scope for risk-based selection in this particular context. Second, the choice environment is tightly
controlled by the central government: its simple structure may limit the scope for choice frictions,
but cannot rule them out. Landais and Spinnewijn (forthcoming) for example find that workers'
UI choices are correlated with scores on IQ tests, but also more responsive to salient differences in
risk.


4.2 Evaluating Choice Without Choice Data
Looking only at contexts where choice data is available bears the risk of running into a "lamppost
problem". It is precisely in situations where UI is mandated and where no choice is available
that policymakers would benefit from assessing the welfare consequences of providing choice. So
how can we still assess the value of providing choice in situations where markets do not exist and
revealed preference cannot shed light on WTP? A recent literature has been trying to push the
frontier, and offers important insights on the potential selection on the the relevant dimensions in
contexts with a single UI mandate.


Identifying Selection on Risk There is significant and well-documented heterogeneity in unem-
ployment risk, by income, education levels, occupations, across space and time, etc. To what extent
would this heterogeneity in risk translate into adverse selection if one were to offer individuals
choice over their amount of UI? This depends on whether this information is private information
to workers, and also whether they would be able to act on this knowledge.
    Following Stephens (2004) and Manski (2004), a recent literature illustrates how subjective prob-
ability elicitations from surveys can be used to answer these questions. Most related to this context,
Hendren (2017) shows that elicited beliefs are strongly predictive of future unemployment status,
even after controlling for a rich set of observable characteristics that could be priced by insurers
in the market. Figure 3a displays the correlation between subjective probability elicitations in the
Health and Retirement Study (HRS) in the US and realized unemployment, controlling for job
industry categories, job occupation categories, log wage, log wage squared, job tenure, and job
tenure squared, along with a set of demographic characteristics: census division dummies, gender
dummies, age, age squared, and year dummies. The graph suggests that the predictive content of
private beliefs, conditional on public information, is very strong. Most strikingly, Hendren (2017)
shows that individuals do actually act on the basis of such private information and self insure
against their perceived risk of job loss: spousal labor supply and consumption dynamics both sig-
nificantly correlate with elicited unemployment risk. These results provide solid evidence of the
presence of significant adverse selection in UI.
    Would a market be able to exist? To explore this, Hendren (2017) uses subjective probability
elicitations to estimate the markup individuals would have to be willing to pay for a market to
exist, as shown in equation (15). The estimate suggests individuals would have to be willing to pay


                                                  22
at least a 300% markup (i.e. 4-1 ratio of marginal utilities between unemployed and employed) in
order for a private market to be able provide additional UI beyond what the government currently
provides (plotted with confidence intervals in the rightmost column in figure 3b). In contrast, esti-
mates of individuals' willingnesses to pay for UI suggest individuals are willing to pay a markup
of at most 60%. This means that left to the invisible hand, private markets would not provide the
ability of individuals to choose their desired level of UI: decentralized private markets for supple-
mental UI coverage would unravel. But, this does not imply that a market would not exist if it were
subsidized, as in the Scandinavian example above. Nor does it rule out that there could be value of
providing choice. The core empirical result, however, is that these markets will unravel unless the
choices are subsidized.
    Hendren (2017)'s implementation assumes that individuals have rational beliefs about their
likelihood of unemployment. This contrasts with a growing literature suggesting that individuals
exhibit biased beliefs about their unemployment and job prospects (e.g. Stephens 2004; Spinnewijn
2015), which may be important to be factored in. Mueller et al. (2020) recently proposed an exten-
sion of the method in Hendren (2013; 2017) to account for biases in beliefs, but studying hetero-
geneity in re-employment prospects of unemployed workers rather than in the unemployment risk
of employed workers.
    The main limitation though is at the core of the challenge when choice data is absent. Ultimately,
one needs an assumption on how the heterogeneity in risks translates into insurance choices. While
higher risk increases the demand for insurance and the risk heterogeneity estimated in Hendren
(2017) is very substantial, this mapping depends on the heterogeneity in other drivers of insurance
choice and how they are correlated with the risk heterogeneity. In particular, the empirical calcu-
lation of the pooled price ratio in Hendren (2017) requires an absence of preference heterogeneity
conditional on risk ­ it assumes that if an individual with a likelihood  of experiencing unemploy-
ment purchases insurance, then all types  >  purchase insurance. Future work could expand
the derivation of the no trade condition in the presence of other sources of demand heterogeneity.


Identifying Selection on Moral Hazard Estimating the moral hazard response to UI coverage
has been the subject of a long, still ongoing literature (see Krueger and Meyer 2002, and Schmieder
and Wachter 2016). Although individuals are not making choices, one can use policy changes to the
mandated coverage to identify the impact of UI expansions on the cost of providing such insurance.
From the perspective of our framework, two key insights emerge from this vast literature. First, the
average behavioral responses are generally very large in all UI settings. Schmieder and Wachter
(2016) summarize estimates from 18 studies from 5 different countries, and find a median estimate
for the elasticity of unemployment duration with respect to mandated benefit coverage of 0.53.
Second, there is some significant heterogeneity in estimates across contexts and individuals. For
instance, responses vary significantly across unemployed workers depending on whether they are
expecting recall from their previous employer (Katz and Meyer 1990), across long term vs short
term unemployed (Kolsrud et al. 2018), or across workers depending on their access to liquidity
(Chetty 2008).
   But, from the perspective of evaluating choice, there is unfortunately little work relating this


                                                 23
heterogeneity in moral hazard to WTP for insurance in the UI context, which would help assess
the extent of selection on moral hazard. The empirical challenge is the same as for gauging the
importance of risk-based selection, and is especially difficult to estimate in the absence of choice
data. Nonetheless, it is a key parameter for understanding the value of choice. If individuals who
attach little value to UI also impose large moral hazard externalities, then mandating them into
generous coverage runs the risk of driving costs above WTP. In such a context, offering choice
could increase welfare.


Quantifying Selection on the Markup Large variation in WTP conditional on an individuals risk
increases the value of allowing for choice. In the presence of adverse selection on risk and moral
hazard, heterogeneity in the markups workers are willing to pay for insurance becomes a crucial
ingredient for offering choice. But WTP markups, let alone the variation therein, are notoriously
complicated to estimate in contexts where no choice is observed.
   As noted before, the WTP markup relates directly to the ratio of marginal utilities when unem-
                      u (cu )
ployed vs. employed u   (c ) . To measure this marginal rate of substitution between consumption
                        e
when unemployed and employed, the literature has mostly focused on the "consumption-based"
approach, pioneered by Gruber (1997) . This approach relies on translating the drop in consump-
tion at unemployment into a welfare value of insurance using an assumption on risk preferences.
While the original literature, constrained by statistical power, was focused on measuring the aver-
age drop in consumption, recent studies, helped by the availability of more granular consumption
data, have been able to document the presence of significant heterogeneity in consumption drops
at unemployment (e.g. Ganong and Noel 2019; Gerard and Naritomi 2019; Landais and Spinnewijn
forthcoming). Translating this heterogeneity in consumption patterns into heterogeneity in WTP
for insurance is potentially problematic however, because consumption dynamics is endogenous
to risk preferences: Individuals who value insurance more may find ways to insure themselves
against the risk of job loss, thus experiencing a smaller drop in consumption at unemployment
(Chetty and Looney 2006; Andrews and Miller 2013).
   To circumvent the issues faced by the "consumption-based" approach, a number of "optimization-
based" approaches have been developed, relying on the logic of revealed preferences arguments.
These approaches have inferred the value of insurance from responses in various observable behav-
iors, from search effort (e.g. Chetty 2008, Landais 2015), to labor supply (Hendren 2017), UI take-up
(e.g. Fontaine and Kettemann 2019, Landais and Spinnewijn forthcoming), or marginal propensi-
ties to consume (Landais and Spinnewijn forthcoming). Although most of these studies also focus
on identifying the average value of insurance, these methods could be fruitfully employed to doc-
ument heterogeneity in valuation. One should note however that these approaches maintain an
assumption of individual optimization, which may fail in the presence of frictions. In other words,
like for standard Revealed Preference methods, it is difficult to disentangle heterogeneity in WTP
from heterogeneous frictions.
    In general, the strands of research described above exemplify that, even without choice data, it
remains possible to identify the relevant dimensions of heterogeneity. However, to evaluate selec-
tion into insurance, also the selection on markups, one needs to deal with a fundamental difficulty,


                                                 24
which is to figure out how it correlates with the WTP itself. Future work could try to use elicitations
to measure the extent of selection on different dimensions, building on the methodologies used to
capture risk-based selection.


5    Takeaways for Other Insurance Contexts
Governments provide a large set of social insurance programs beyond UI. What can we say about
the value of offering choice in disability insurance (DI), workers' compensation, health insurance
or long-term care insurance (LTCI)? Should countries allow for choice in these social insurance
contexts? Our framework identifies the key micro-foundations that are required to evaluate choice,
which includes heterogeneity in preferences, selection on risk and moral hazard, and choice fric-
tions. Our framework can thus be used to provide a roadmap for the empirical work that needs to
be done to fill the gaps in all these contexts.
    Table 2 aims to identify some gaps in the empirical literature. While this is no attempt to provide
a comprehensive review of the rich body of literature evaluating social insurance programs, we
believe that some general lessons can be drawn.
    A first lesson is that, despite the rich body of literature evaluating important features of each of
the social insurance programs, we know relatively little on the key ingredients to evaluating choice.
Indeed, for all the insurance programs, there is abundant work measuring the incentive effects (see
reviews in Krueger and Meyer 2002, Schmieder and Wachter 2016 for UI, Low and Pistaferri 2020
for DI and Einav and Finkelstein 2018 for HI), but in general we know much less about how much
individuals value the social insurance, let alone what dimensions of heterogeneity would drive
selection.
    A second related lesson is that we know more about these key ingredients in insurance con-
texts that embed choice. This explains the large literature on the different dimensions of selection
in HI and LTCI choices, especially in the US. For the other insurance contexts, our knowledge is
limited to a few exceptions leveraging offered choice in a particular setting. We discussed at length
the UI choice offered in Sweden and studied by Landais et al. (2020) and Landais and Spinnewijn
(forthcoming). Other notable exceptions are Cabral and Cullen (2019), studying private long-term
DI, supplementing public DI in the US and Cabral et al. (2019), studying voluntary workers' com-
pensation in Texas. Much more work is needed to improve our understanding of selection and the
importance of preferences in frictions in all these domains. As discussed, survey elicitations can
be a crucial instrument in the absence of private markets or choice data. In particular, Hendren
(2013) uses subjective probability elicitations to find that private information can prevent markets
from selling any insurance at all to some populations, notably those with "pre-existing conditions."
Figure 3b shows the markup individuals would have to be willing to pay for a market to exist, bro-
ken out separately for the sample of people who have pre-existing conditions versus those who do
not (and can therefore purchase insurance in private markets). The pattern shows that the markup
individuals would need to pay to overcome adverse selection is significantly higher for those with
pre-existing conditions; unsubsidized private markets seem to operate only when individuals do
not have significant amounts of private information.

                                                  25
                               Table 2: Summary of Existing Applied Work

                     Unemployment            Disability        Workers'              Long-Term               Health
                       Insurance             Insurance       Compensation           Care Insurance         Insurance


Preference
Heterogeneity
                                 a
                                                  -  b
                                                                      -                         c                  d



                                 e                    f                   g                         h                  i
Risk-Based
Selection


Selection on
Moral Hazard
                                 j
                                                  -                   -                     -                          k




Choice
Frictions
                                 l
                                                  -                   -                         m                      n




  Notes--
a While a large literature analyses the average value of unemployment insurance, evidence on preference heterogene-
  ity in unemployment insurance is scarce. A notable exception is Landais and Spinnewijn (forthcoming), finding
  substantial heterogeneity.
b Note that Einav et al. (2012) and Coppola (2014) relate risk preferences to disability insurance choices.
c Using proxies of risk preferences, Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) find substantive heterogeneity, potentially ex-

  plaining the observed advantageous selection. But this ignores the role of insurer's rejection practices (Hendren
  2013).
d See, for example, Barsky et al. (1997), Einav et al. (2013), Hackmann et al. (2015), Handel and Kolstad (2015), and

  Ottaviani and Vandone (2015) with mixed results. Fang et al. (2008), Cutler et al. (2008), and Keane and Stavrunova
  (2016) study risk preferences related to Medigap coverage.
e Using elicitations, Hendren (2017) finds private unemployment insurance to be too adversely selected to be prof-

  itable, at any price. Landais et al. (2020) find evidence of significant risk-based selection in the public provision of
  supplemental unemployment insurance in Sweden.
f Using elicitations, Hendren (2013) finds substantive private information among applicants with pre-existing condi-

  tions. See also Soika (2018) and Cabral and Cullen (2019).
g One notable exception is Cabral et al. (2019), finding no evidence of adverse selection in the Texan workers' compen-

  sation market.
h Most research points towards the presence of risk-based selection (Sloan and Norton 1997; Finkelstein et al. 2005;

  Finkelstein and McGarry 2006; Hendren 2013; Browne and Zhou-Richter 2014; Boyer et al. 2017). See also Zick et al.
  (2005) and Oster et al. (2010) linking it to genetic testing.
i Risk-based selection in health insurance continues to be the focus of much research. For a selection that is by no

  means exhaustive, see Cutler and Reber (1998), Cardon and Hendel (2001), Einav et al. (2010), Einav et al. (2013),
  Handel (2013), Hackmann et al. (2015), Polyakova (2016), Finkelstein et al. (2019), Ghili et al. (2020), and Powell and
  Goldman (2020).
j One notable exception is Landais et al. (2020).
k A small but growing literature looks at selection on moral hazard in the market for health insurance (Einav et al.

  2013; Shepard 2016; Péron and Dormont 2018; Alessie et al. 2020).
l Some evidence on choice frictions in Landais and Spinnewijn (forthcoming) and on biased beliefs in Spinnewijn

  (2015) and Mueller et al. (2020).
m Some evidence that limited awareness and risk misperceptions are responsible for reduced demand for long-term

  care insurance (Cramer and Jensen 2006; Zhou-Richter et al. 2010; Boyer et al. 2017).
n There exists substantial evidence of choice frictions in the context of health care insurance (see Abaluck and Gruber

  2011; Handel 2013; Heiss et al. 2013; Loewenstein et al. 2013; Marzilli Ericson 2014; Polyakova 2016; Ho et al. 2017;
  Handel and Kolstad 2015; Bhargava et al. 2017; Wright et al. 2017; Handel et al. 2020).




                                                           26
   Finally, even when choice data is available, the traditional focus of the literature has been on ad-
verse selection, both in HI and LTCI. In the context of HI, a rapidly growing literature documents
the importance of choice frictions distorting plan choices (see Ericson and Sydnor 2017; Chandra
et al. 2019) and a recent literature has started analyzing the role of selection on moral hazard (e.g.,
Einav et al. 2013, Shepard 2016). Still relatively little is known about the importance of heterogene-
ity in the preferences underlying choices, even though offering choice only has value when there is
significant heterogeneity in valuations that is uncorrelated with people's risk and choice frictions
(e.g., Handel and Kolstad 2015; Handel et al. 2019).
    Our framework, combined with existing empirical estimates in the context of UI, suggests that
expanding choice must be done carefully and with appropriate subsidies on those choices. While
appropriately subsidized choices can help increase welfare, it is important to also note that it need
not always be the case that choice increases welfare, as outlined in Section 2.3. Choice increases wel-
fare only if the value of supplemental coverage to those selecting it exceeds the costs, but brings
the possibility of inefficient allocations due to behavioral biases and choice frictions. An ongoing
challenge is to separate preference heterogeneity from choice frictions when using Revealed Pref-
erence methods (e.g., Handel and Kolstad 2015). A final dimension on which we know too little
in basically all insurance contexts is how the dimensions of choice relate to income, which will be
crucial to evaluate the equity implications of embedding choice in social insurance design (e.g.,
Handel et al. 2020).




                                                  27
       Figure 3: Private Information and Estimated Pooled Price Ratios (from Hendren 2017)

                                                                             (a) Predictive Content of Elicited Unemployment Beliefs

                                                                         Predictive Content of Elicitations about Future Unemployment
                                                                                              Coefficients on Z categories in Pr{U|Z,X}




                                                               0.1
                       Coeff on Z category cond'l on X, Pr{U|Z,X}                                                                                  55-100
                                            0.06     0.08




                                                                                                                      33-50
                                   0.04




                                                                                               11-30
                                                                               1-10
                          0.02




                                                                         0
                                            0




                                                                     0                   20               40               60                80                 100
                                                                                               Subjective Probability Elicitation (Z)



                                                                                (b) Estimated Pooled Price Ratio Across Markets



                                                                                           Comparison of inf T(p) to Other Markets
                                                                                      Life, Disability, and LTC Estimates from Hendren (2013)
                                                                     4
                                                                     3
                                                 inf(T(p)) - 1




                                                                                      Markets Exclude "Pre-existing Conditions"
                                                       2             1




                                                                                                                                             No Market Exists
                                                                                                                                              Market Exists
                                                                     0




                                                                                  Life                  Disability                LTC        Unemployment
                                                                                                       No Market Exists           Market Exists



Notes: This figure illustrates the methodology of Hendren (2013) and Hendren (2017) to identify adverse selection in the
absence of choice data using elicited risk beliefs. Panel A shows the predictive content of unemployment risk elicitation.
The graph reports the mean rate of job loss in each elicitation category controlling for demographics, job characteristics,
and year controls. it shows a strong positive correlation between beliefs and actual job loss conditional on these controls.
Panel B shows the inferred minimum pooled price ratio (T(p)) minus 1, constructed from these estimates. This corresponds
to the minimum markup that an individual would have to be willing to pay for a market to exist. The graph compares the
estimates of inf T( p) - 1 in the unemployment context to the estimates in Hendren (2013) for three other insurance markets:
Life Insurance, Disability Insurance and Long Term Care. For these markets, the graph reports separately estimates for the
sample of individuals who are unable to purchase insurance due to a preexisting condition (blue dots) and in the sample of
individuals whose observables would allow them to purchase insurance in each market (red dots). In the latter, one cannot
reject the null hypothesis of no private information.

                                                                                                                 28
References
Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber (June 2011). "Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly: Ev-
  idence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program". American Economic Review 101.4,
  pp. 1180­1210.
Akerlof, George A. (1970). "The Market for "Lemons": Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mecha-
   nism". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 84.3, pp. 488­500.
Alessie, Rob J. M., Viola Angelini, Jochen O. Mierau, and Laura Viluma (2020). "Moral hazard and
   selection for voluntary deductibles". Health Economics.
Andrews, Isaiah and Conrad Miller (June 2013). Optimal Social Insurance with Heterogeneity. Working
  Paper.
Azevedo, Eduardo M. and Daniel Gottlieb (2017). "Perfect Competition in Markets With Adverse
   Selection". Econometrica 85.1, pp. 67­105.
Baicker, Katherine, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein (July 2015). "Behavioral Haz-
   ard in Health Insurance". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130.4, pp. 1623­1667.
Baily, Martin Neil (1978). "Some aspects of optimal unemployment insurance". Journal of Public
   Economics 10.3, pp. 379­402.
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro (May 1997). "Prefer-
   ence Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and
   Retirement Study". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112.2, pp. 537­579.
Berchick, Edward R., Jessica C. Barnett, and Rachel D. Upton (2019). Health Insurance Coverage in the
   United States: 2018. Current Population Reports P60-267(RV). Washington, DC: U.S. Government
   Printing Office.
Bhargava, Saurabh, George Loewenstein, and Justin Sydnor (Apr. 2017). "Choose to Lose: Health
   Plan Choices from a Menu with Dominated Option*". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132.3,
   pp. 1319­1372.
Boyer, Martin, Philippe De Donder, Claude Fluet, Marie-Louise Leroux, and Pierre-Carl Michaud
   (Oct. 2017). Long-Term Care Insurance: Knowledge Barriers, Risk Perception and Adverse Selection.
   Working Paper 23918. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Browne, Mark J and Tian Zhou-Richter (2014). "Lemons or Cherries? Asymmetric Information in
   the German Private Long-term Care Insurance Market". The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance
   - Issues and Practice 39.4, pp. 603­624.
Cabral, Marika (June 2016). "Claim Timing and Ex Post Adverse Selection". The Review of Economic
   Studies 84.1, pp. 1­44.
Cabral, Marika, Can Cui, and Michael Dworsky (July 2019). What is the Rationale for an Insurance Cov-
   erage Mandate? Evidence from Workers' Compensation Insurance. Working Paper 26103. National
   Bureau of Economic Research.
Cabral, Marika and Mark R. Cullen (Aug. 2019). "Estimating the Value of Public Insurance Using
   Complementary Private Insurance". American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11.3, pp. 88­129.




                                                 29
Cabral, Marika and Neale Mahoney (Apr. 2019). "Externalities and Taxation of Supplemental In-
   surance: A Study of Medicare and Medigap". American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11.2,
   pp. 37­73.
Cardon, James H. and Igal Hendel (2001). "Asymmetric Information in Health Insurance: Evidence
   from the National Medical Expenditure Survey". The RAND Journal of Economics 32.3, pp. 408­
   427.
Carroll, Eero (2005). "Voluntary State-Subsidized Social Insurance in the Advanced Industrialized
   World since the 1890s: The Nordic Experience in Comparative Perspective". In: Social Policy and
   Economic Development in the Nordic Countries. Ed. by Olli Kangas and Joakim Palme. London:
  Palgrave Macmillan UK. Chap. 3, pp. 60­87.
Chandra, Amitabh, Benjamin Handel, and Joshua Schwartzstein (2019). "Behavioral economics and
  health-care markets". In: Handbook of Behavioral Economics - Foundations and Applications 2. Ed. by
  B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson. Vol. 2. Handbook of Behavioral
  Economics: Applications and Foundations 1. North-Holland, pp. 459­502.
Chetty, Raj (2006). "A general formula for the optimal level of social insurance". Journal of Public
  Economics 90.10, pp. 1879­1901.
-- (2008). "Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance". Journal of Po-
   litical Economy 116.2, pp. 173­234.
Chetty, Raj and Amy Finkelstein (2013). "Chapter 3 - Social Insurance: Connecting Theory to Data".
  In: Handbook of Public Economics. Ed. by Alan J. Auerbach, Raj Chetty, Martin Feldstein, and
  Emmanuel Saez. Vol. 5. Handbook of Public Economics. Elsevier, pp. 111­193.
Chetty, Raj and Adam Looney (2006). "Consumption smoothing and the welfare consequences of
  social insurance in developing economies". Journal of Public Economics 90.12, pp. 2351­2356.
Chiappori, Pierre-André and Bernard Salanié (2000). "Testing for Asymmetric Information in In-
   surance Markets". Journal of Political Economy 108.1, pp. 56­78.
-- (2013). "Asymmetric information in insurance markets: Predictions and tests". In: Handbook of
   Insurance. Ed. by G Dionne. 2nd edition. Springer, pp. 397­422.
Cohen, Alma and Peter Siegelman (2010). "Testing for Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets".
  Journal of Risk and Insurance 77.1, pp. 39­84.
Coppola, Michela (2014). "Eliciting risk-preferences in socio-economic surveys: How do different
   measures perform?" The Journal of Socio-Economics 48, pp. 1­10.
Cramer, Anne Theisen and Gail A. Jensen (July 2006). "Why Don't People Buy Long-Term-Care
   Insurance?" The Journals of Gerontology: Series B 61.4, S185­S193.
Cutler, David M., Amy Finkelstein, and Kathleen McGarry (May 2008). "Preference Heterogene-
   ity and Insurance Markets: Explaining a Puzzle of Insurance". American Economic Review 98.2,
   pp. 157­62.
Cutler, David M. and Sarah J. Reber (May 1998). "Paying for Health Insurance: The Trade-Off be-
   tween Competition and Adverse Selection". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113.2, pp. 433­
   466.
Einav, Liran and Amy Finkelstein (May 2018). "Moral Hazard in Health Insurance: What We Know
   and How We Know It". Journal of the European Economic Association 16.4, pp. 957­982.


                                                 30
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen (Aug. 2010). "Estimating Welfare in Insurance
   Markets Using Variation in Prices*". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125.3, pp. 877­921.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Iuliana Pascu, and Mark R. Cullen (May 2012). "How General Are
   Risk Preferences? Choices under Uncertainty in Different Domains". American Economic Review
   102.6, pp. 2606­38.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen P. Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R. Cullen (Feb. 2013).
   "Selection on Moral Hazard in Health Insurance". American Economic Review 103.1, pp. 178­219.
Ericson, Keith Marzilli and Justin Sydnor (Nov. 2017). "The Questionable Value of Having a Choice
   of Levels of Health Insurance Coverage". Journal of Economic Perspectives 31.4, pp. 51­72.
Fang, Hanming, Michael P. Keane, and Dan Silverman (2008). "Sources of Advantageous Selection:
   Evidence from the Medigap Insurance Market". Journal of Political Economy 116.2, pp. 303­350.
Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Mark Shepard (Apr. 2019). "Subsidizing Health Insur-
   ance for Low-Income Adults: Evidence from Massachusetts". American Economic Review 109.4,
   pp. 1530­67.
Finkelstein, Amy, Neale Mahoney, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (2018). "What Does (Formal)
   Health Insurance Do, and for Whom?" Annual Review of Economics 10.1, pp. 261­286.
Finkelstein, Amy and Kathleen McGarry (Sept. 2006). "Multiple Dimensions of Private Informa-
   tion: Evidence from the Long-Term Care Insurance Market". American Economic Review 96.4,
   pp. 938­958.
Finkelstein, Amy, Kathleen McGarry, and Amir Sufi (May 2005). "Dynamic Inefficiencies in In-
   surance Markets: Evidence from Long-Term Care Insurance". American Economic Review 95.2,
   pp. 224­228.
Fontaine, François and Andreas Kettemann (Nov. 2019). Quasi-experimental Evidence on Take-up and
   the Value of Unemployment Insurance. Working Paper.
Ganong, Peter and Pascal Noel (July 2019). "Consumer Spending during Unemployment: Positive
   and Normative Implications". American Economic Review 109.7, pp. 2383­2424.
Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (Jan. 2018). "Hospitals as Insurers of
   Last Resort". American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10.1, pp. 1­39.
Gerard, François and Joana Naritomi (Apr. 2019). Job Displacement Insurance and (the Lack of) Consumption-
   Smoothing. Working Paper 25749. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Geruso, Michael, Timothy Layton, and Daniel Prinz (May 2019). "Screening in Contract Design: Ev-
   idence from the ACA Health Insurance Exchanges". American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
   11.2, pp. 64­107.
Ghili, Soheil, Ben Handel, Igal Hendel, and Michael D. Whinston (2020). Optimal Long-Term Health
   Insurance Contracts: Characterization, Computation, and Welfare Effects. Discussion Paper 2218R.
   Cowles Foundation.
Glenngård, Anna (2017). "The Swedish Health Care System". In: International health care systems
   profiles. Ed. by Elias Mossialos, Ana Djordjevic, Robin Osborn, and Dana Sarnak. International
   profiles of health care systems. The Commonwealth Fund, pp. 147­154.
Gruber, Jonathan (1997). "The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance". The
   American Economic Review 87.1, pp. 192­205.


                                                 31
Hackmann, Martin B., Jonathan T. Kolstad, and Amanda E. Kowalski (Mar. 2015). "Adverse Se-
  lection and an Individual Mandate: When Theory Meets Practice". American Economic Review
  105.3, pp. 1030­66.
Handel, Benjamin R. (Dec. 2013). "Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets:
  When Nudging Hurts". American Economic Review 103.7, pp. 2643­82.
Handel, Benjamin R., Igal Hendel, and Michael D. Whinston (2015). "Equilibria in Health Ex-
  changes: Adverse Selection versus Reclassification Risk". Econometrica 83.4, pp. 1261­1313.
Handel, Benjamin R. and Jonathan T. Kolstad (Aug. 2015). "Health Insurance for "Humans": In-
  formation Frictions, Plan Choice, and Consumer Welfare". American Economic Review 105.8,
  pp. 2449­2500.
Handel, Benjamin R., Jonathan T. Kolstad, Thomas Minten, and Johannes Spinnewijn (June 2020).
  The Social Determinants of Choice Quality: Evidence from Health Insurance in the Netherlands. Work-
  ing Paper.
Handel, Benjamin R., Jonathan T. Kolstad, and Johannes Spinnewijn (2019). "Information Frictions
  and Adverse Selection: Policy Interventions in Health Insurance Markets". Review of Economics
  and Statistics 101.2, pp. 326­340.
Heiss, Florian, Adam Leive, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter (2013). "Plan selection in Medi-
   care Part D: Evidence from administrative data". Journal of Health Economics 32.6, pp. 1325­1344.
Hendren, Nathaniel (2013). "Private Information and Insurance Rejections". Econometrica 81.5, pp. 1713­
   1762.
-- (July 2017). "Knowledge of Future Job Loss and Implications for Unemployment Insurance".
   American Economic Review 107.7, pp. 1778­1823.
-- (June 2020). "Measuring Ex Ante Welfare in Insurance Markets". The Review of Economic Studies.
   rdaa015.
Hendren, Nathaniel and Ben Sprung-Keyser (Mar. 2020). "A Unified Welfare Analysis of Govern-
   ment Policies". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135.3, pp. 1209­1318.
Hirshleifer, Jack (1971). "The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward to Inventive
  Activity". The American Economic Review 61.4, pp. 561­574.
Ho, Kate, Joseph Hogan, and Fiona Scott Morton (2017). "The impact of consumer inattention on
  insurer pricing in the Medicare Part D program". The RAND Journal of Economics 48.4, pp. 877­
   905.
Johnson, Richard W. (Aug. 2016). Who Is Covered by Private Long-Term Care Insurance? Tech. rep.
   Urban Institute.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Bruce D. Meyer (Nov. 1990). "Unemployment Insurance, Recall Expectations,
   and Unemployment Outcomes*". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 105.4, pp. 973­1002.
Keane, Michael and Olena Stavrunova (2016). "Adverse selection, moral hazard and the demand
   for Medigap insurance". Journal of Econometrics 190.1, pp. 62­78.
Khomenko, Maksym (Oct. 2018). "Private Information and Design of Unemployment Insurance".
   PhD thesis. University of Gothenburg.




                                                 32
Kolsrud, Jonas, Camille Landais, Peter Nilsson, and Johannes Spinnewijn (Apr. 2018). "The Optimal
   Timing of Unemployment Benefits: Theory and Evidence from Sweden". American Economic
   Review 108.4-5, pp. 985­1033.
Krueger, Alan B. and Bruce D. Meyer (2002). "Chapter 33 Labor supply effects of social insurance".
   In: ed. by Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein. Vol. 4. Handbook of Public Economics. Amster-
   dam: Elsevier, pp. 2327­2392.
Landais, Camille (Nov. 2015). "Assessing the Welfare Effects of Unemployment Benefits Using the
   Regression Kink Design". American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7.4, pp. 243­78.
Landais, Camille, A. Nekoei, Peter Nilsson, David Seim, and Johannes Spinnewijn (2020). Risk-based
   Selection in Unemployment Insurance: Evidence and Implications. Working Paper.
Landais, Camille and Johannes Spinnewijn (forthcoming). "The Value of Unemployment Insur-
   ance". The Review of Economic Studies.
Lindellee, Jayeon (2018). "Beyond Retrenchment: Multi-Pillarization of Unemployment Benefit Pro-
   vision in Sweden". PhD thesis. Lund University.
Loewenstein, George et al. (2013). "Consumers' misunderstanding of health insurance". Journal of
   Health Economics 32.5, pp. 850­862.
Low, Hamish and Luigi Pistaferri (2020). "Disability Insurance: Theoretical Trade-Offs and Empir-
  ical Evidence*". Fiscal Studies 41.1, pp. 129­164.
Manski, Charles F. (2004). "Measuring Expectations". Econometrica 72.5, pp. 1329­1376.
Marzilli Ericson, Keith M. (Feb. 2014). "Consumer Inertia and Firm Pricing in the Medicare Part D
  Prescription Drug Insurance Exchange". American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6.1, pp. 38­
  64.
Mueller, Andreas I, Johannes Spinnewijn, and Giorgio Topa (July 2020). Job Seekers' Perceptions and
   Employment Prospects: Heterogeneity, Duration Dependence and Bias. Working Paper.
Oster, Emily, Ira Shoulson, Kimberly Quaid, and E. Ray Dorsey (2010). "Genetic adverse selection:
   Evidence from long-term care insurance and Huntington disease". Journal of Public Economics
   94.11, pp. 1041­1050.
Oswald, Andrew J. (1986). "Unemployment Insurance and Labor Contracts Under Asymmetric
   Information: Theory and Facts". The American Economic Review 76.3, pp. 365­377.
Ottaviani, Cristina and Daniela Vandone (2015). "Decision-Making Under Uncertainty and De-
   mand for Health Insurance: A Multidisciplinary Study". Journal of Psychophysiology 29.2, pp. 80­
   85.
Parsons, Donald O. (Oct. 2002). "Private "Unemployment" Insurance: Asymmetric Information and
   Severance Pay Design". Unpublished.
Parsons, Donald O., Torben Tranaes, and Helene Bie Lilleør (Jan. 2015). Voluntary Public Unemploy-
   ment Insurance. Discussion Paper 8783. IZA.
Péron, Mathilde and Brigitte Dormont (Aug. 2018). Heterogeneous moral hazard in Supplementary
   Health Insurance. Working Paper 18/27. Health, Economics and Data Group (HEDG).
Polyakova, Maria (July 2016). "Regulation of Insurance with Adverse Selection and Switching
   Costs: Evidence from Medicare Part D". American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8.3, pp. 165­
   95.


                                                33
Powell, David and Dana Goldman (2020). "Disentangling moral hazard and adverse selection in
   private health insurance". Journal of Econometrics.
Rasmussen, Peter (2014). Privatizing unemployment protection: The rise of private unemployment insur-
   ance in Denmark and Sweden. Working Paper 2014-83. Centre for Comparative Welfare Studies
   (CCWS).
Schmieder, Johannes F. and Till von Wachter (2016). "The Effects of Unemployment Insurance Ben-
   efits: New Evidence and Interpretation". Annual Review of Economics 8.1, pp. 547­581.
Shepard, Mark (Sept. 2016). Hospital Network Competition and Adverse Selection: Evidence from the
   Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange. Working Paper 22600. National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Sloan, Frank A. and Edward C. Norton (1997). "Adverse Selection, Bequests, Crowding Out, and
   Private Demand for Insurance: Evidence from the Long-term Care Insurance Market". Journal
   of Risk and Uncertainty 15.3, pp. 201­219.
Soika, Sebastian (Jan. 2018). "Moral Hazard and Advantageous Selection in Private Disability Insur-
   ance". English. Geneva Papers on Risk Insurance 43.1. Copyright - Copyright Palgrave Macmillan
   Jan 2018; Last updated - 2018-07-06, pp. 97­125.
Spinnewijn, Johannes (Feb. 2015). "Unemployed but Optimistic: Optimal Insurance Design with
   Biased Beliefs". Journal of the European Economic Association 13.1, pp. 130­167.
-- (Feb. 2017). "Heterogeneity, Demand for Insurance, and Adverse Selection". American Economic
   Journal: Economic Policy 9.1, pp. 308­43.
Statistics Sweden (June 2020). Average monthly salary by sector 1992­2019. http://www.scb.se/am0110-
   en (accessed September 4, 2020).
Stephens, Melvin (2004). "Job Loss Expectations, Realizations, and Household Consumption Be-
   havior". The Review of Economics and Statistics 86.1, pp. 253­269.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (Sept. 2019). "National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in
   the United States, March 2019".
Weyl, E. Glen and André Veiga (May 2017). "Pricing Institutions and the Welfare Cost of Adverse
   Selection". American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 9.2, pp. 139­48.
Wright, Bill J., Ginny Garcia-Alexander, Margarette A. Weller, and Katherine Baicker (2017). "Low-
   Cost Behavioral Nudges Increase Medicaid Take-Up Among Eligible Residents Of Oregon".
  Health Affairs 36.5. PMID: 28461350, pp. 838­845.
Zhou-Richter, Tian, Mark J. Browne, and Helmut Gründl (2010). "Don't They Care? Or, Are They
  Just Unaware? Risk Perception and the Demand for Long-Term Care Insurance". Journal of Risk
  and Insurance 77.4, pp. 715­747.
Zick, Cathleen D, Charles J Mathews, J Scott Roberts, Robert Cook-Deegan, Robert J Pokorski, and
   Robert C Green (Mar. 2005). "Genetic testing for Alzheimer's disease and its impact on insur-
   ance purchasing behavior". Health affairs (Project Hope) 24.2, pp. 483­490.




                                                 34
